
Crestview Hills, KY Code of Ordinances


CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-24 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18; and
State legislation current through 2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CITY OFFICIALS



 



MAYOR
 
Paul W. Meier


CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
Timothy Williams


FINANCE OFFICER/TREASURER
 
T.J. Houtman


CITY CLERK
 
Jaime Mahoney


PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
 
Richard Lunnemann


CITY ATTORNEY
 
Mary Ann Stewart


CHIEF OF POLICE
 
Christopher Schutte


CITY ENGINEER
 
James W. Berling


ZONING INSPECTOR
 
PDS


BUILDING INSPECTOR
 
PDS


 
 
 



COUNCIL



COUNCILMEMBER
 
Sharon Gronotte


COUNCILMEMBER
 
William Dorsey


COUNCILMEMBER
 
David Kramer


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Joseph Roesel


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Frank B. Sommerkamp, Jr.


COUNCILMEMBER
 
Arlene Luebbe




 




Address:
50 Town Center Boulevard
Crestview Hills, KY 41017




 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 1984-9-2



   SUMMARY PUBLICATION



      AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
CRESTVIEW HILLS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky, has
codified and revised its ordinances into a Code of Ordinances, and



   WHEREAS, the City Council desires publication of its Code of Ordinances
pursuant to KRS 83 A.060(9).



   The following Certification is made pursuant to said statute by the
undersigned city attorney.  The Code of Ordinances is available for review
at the City Building during normal working hours of the City Clerk.



   The Contents of the Code of Ordinances are as follows:



      Title I.      General Provisions



      Title III.   Administration



      Title V.   Public Works



      Title VII.   Traffic Code



      Title IX.   General Regulations



      Title XI.   Business Regulations



      Title XIII.   General Offenses



      Title XV.   Land Usage



                     So Certified:



                         R. Barry Wehrman   



                           City Attorney



   SECTION I.



   All Ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, in conflict herewith are to
that extent only hereby repealed.



   SECTION II.



   This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after
its passage, approval and publication according to law.



            CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KENTUCKY,



            A Municipal Corporation of the      Fifth Class



            By     Alan A. Herold   



                Mayor



ADOPTED:  October 11, 1984



ATTEST:



Virginia Hall



CITY CLERK



FIRST READING:  9-13-84      SECOND READING:  10-11-84



AYES:  6      NAYES:  0      AYES:  6      NAYES:  0



ORDINANCE NO. 1989-8-2



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW
HILLS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 1989 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Crestview Hills, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, said American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of
Crestview Hills, State of Kentucky:



   SECTION 1.  That the 1989 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky as submitted by the American Legal
Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same
is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION 2.  That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its date of passage.



Passed this 14th day of September, 1989.



         CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KY, A Municipal Corporation of the
Fifth Class



               By: Harold A. Ries /s/



                      Mayor



ATTEST:



Lynne Moore /s/



City Clerk



FIRST READING 8/10/89         SECOND READING 9/14/89



DATE PUBLISHED 11-1-89      AYES: -5-      NAYES: -0-



ORDINANCE NO. 1990-7-4



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW
HILLS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 1990 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Crestview Hills, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, said American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of
Crestview Hills, State of Kentucky:



   SECTION 1.  That the 1990 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky as submitted by the American Legal
Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same
is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION 2.  That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its date of passage.



Passed this 9th day of August, 1990.



            CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KY, A Municipal Corporation
of the Fifth Class



               By: Harold A. Ries /s/



                      Mayor



ATTEST:



Lynne Moore /s/



City Clerk



FIRST READING 7/12/90         SECOND READING 8/9/90



DATE PUBLISHED             AYES: -6-      NAYES: -0-



ORDINANCE NO. 1991-10-1



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW
HILLS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 1991 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Crestview Hills, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, said American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of
Crestview Hills, State of Kentucky:



   SECTION 1.  That the 1991 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky as submitted by the American Legal
Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same
is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION 2.  That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its date of passage.



Passed this 11th day of November, 1991.



            CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KY, A Municipal Corporation
of the Fifth Class



            By: Harold A. Ries /s/



                   Mayor



ATTEST:



Lynne Moore /s/



City Clerk



FIRST READING 10/10/91         SECOND READING 11/11/91



DATE PUBLISHED 11/21/91       AYES: -5-      NAYES: -0-



ORDINANCE NO. 1992-8-1



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW
HILLS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 1992 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Crestview Hills, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, said American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of
Crestview Hills, State of Kentucky:



   SECTION 1.  That the 1992 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky as submitted by the American Legal
Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same
is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION 2.  That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its date of passage.



Passed this 10th day of September, 1992.



               CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KY, A Municipal
Corporation of the Fifth Class



               By: Harold A. Ries /s/



                      Mayor



ATTEST:



Lynne Moore /s/



City Clerk



FIRST READING 8/13/92         SECOND READING 9/10/92



DATE PUBLISHED            AYES: -6-      NAYES: -0-



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY





         11.   ORDINANCES REPEALED AND SAVED




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Computation of time



   10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent



   10.06   Writings and signatures



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Revivor



   10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance



   10.10   Construction of section references



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Ordinances saved



   10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.15   Conflicting provisions



   10.16   Reference to offices



   10.17   Errors and omissions



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Crestview Hills Code, for which designation "codified ordinances" or "code"
may be substituted.  Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.



(KRS 446.140)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01."  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ACTION.” Includes all proceedings in any court of this state. (KRS
446.010 (1))



   “AND.” May be read “OR,” and “OR” may be read “AND,” if
the sense requires it.



   “ANIMAL.” Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a
human being. (KRS 446.010 (2))



   “AVIS.”  The automated vehicle information system established and
maintained by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration
information on vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle
operator’s licenses and personal identification cards. (KRS 446.010 (55))



   “CITY,” “MUNICIPAL CORPORATION,” or “MUNICIPALITY.” When
used in this code shall denote the City of Crestview Hills irrespective of
its population or legal classification.



   “CODE OF ORDINANCES.” A reenactment of the body of positive
municipal law, read and interpreted as a whole, with the text arranged by
subject matter and properly indexed.



   “COMPANY.”    May extend and be applied to any corporation,
company, person, partnership, joint stock company, or association. (KRS
446.010 (9))



   “COMPOSITE INDEX.” A loose-leaf compilation of all ordinances
listed by date of passage, arranged by subject matter of the contents and
indexed alphabetically.



   “CORPORATION.” May extend and be applied to any corporation,
company, partnership, joint stock company, or association. (KRS 446.010 (10))



   “COUNCIL.” The city legislative body. (KRS 83A.010 (5))



   “COUNTY.” Kenton County, Kentucky.



   “CRUELTY.” As applied to animals, includes every act or omission
whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or
permitted. (KRS 446.010 (12))



   “DIRECTORS.” When applied to corporations, includes managers or
trustees. (KRS 446.010 (14))



   “DOMESTIC.” When applied to a corporation, partnership, business
trust, or limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed
by authority of this state. (KRS 446.010 (15))



   “DOMESTIC ANIMAL.” Any animal converted to domestic habitat. (KRS
445.010 (15))



   “EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY.” The Mayor. (KRS 83A.010 (6))



   “EXECUTIVE ORDER.” An order issued by the mayor which is binding
upon the officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over
which the city has jurisdiction. (KRS 83A.010 (7))



   “FEDERAL.” Refers to the United States. (KRS 446.010 (17))



   “FOREIGN.” When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, business trust, statutory trust, or limited liability company,
includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state. 
(KRS 446.010 (18))



   “KEEPER” or “PROPRIETOR.” Includes all persons, whether acting
by themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   “KRS.” Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   “LAND” or “REAL ESTATE.” Includes lands, tenements, and
hereditaments and all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a
chattel interest. (KRS 446.010 (23))



   “LEGISLATIVE BODY.” The City Council. (KRS 91A.010 (8))



   “LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER.” A City Councilman. (KRS 83A.010 (8))



   “LIVESTOCK.” Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes, or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine,
equine, or camelid species. (KRS 446.010 (25))



   “MAY.” The act referred to is permissive. (KRS 446.010 (26))



   “MISDEMEANOR.” An offense for which the criminal fine can not
exceed the amount set forth in KRS 534.040 (2) (a), or a term of imprisonment
not to exceed the periods set forth in KRS 532.090 (1) or both. (KRS 83A.065)



   “MONTH.” A calendar month. (KRS 446.010 (27))



   “MUNICIPALITY.” The City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



   “MUNICIPAL ORDER.” An official act of the City Council which is
binding upon the offers and employees of the city and any governmental agency
over which the municipality has jurisdiction. (KRS 83A.010 (9))



   “OATH.” Includes “AFFIRMATION” in all cases in which an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath. (KRS 446.010 (28))



   “OFFICER.” Any person elected to a position by the voters or any
person appointed to a position which:



      (a)   Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly, or
a city;



      (b)   Possesses a delegation of a portion of the sovereign
power of Government;



      (c)   Has powers and duties to be discharged which are
conferred directly or by implication by the city;



      (d)   Has duties performed independently and without control
of a superior power other than the law;



      (e)   Has some permanency;



      (f)   Requires an official oath;



      (g)   Is assigned by a commission or other written authority;
and



      (h)   Provides for an official bond if required by proper
authority. (KRS 83A.010 (10))



   “ORDINANCE.” An official act of the City Council, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law
or is an appropriation of money. (KRS 83A010 (11))



   “PARTNERSHIP.”  Includes both general and limited partnerships.
(KRS 446.010(30))



   “PEACE OFFICER.” Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jails,
metropolitan or urban-county government correctional officer, marshals,
policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make arrests. (KRS
446.010 (31))



   “PERSON.”    May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and
corporate, societies, communities, the public generally, individuals,
partnerships, joint stock companies, and limited liability companies. (KRS
446.010 (33))



   “PERSONAL PROPERTY.” Includes all property except real.



   “PREMISES.” As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   “PROPERTY.” Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



   “PUBLIC AUTHORITY.” Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   “PUBLIC PLACE.” Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery,
school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other
place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   “REAL PROPERTY.” Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   “REGULAR ELECTION.”  The election in even numbered years at which
members of Congress are elected and the election in odd numbered years at
which state officers are elected. (KRS 446.010 (37))



   “RESOLUTION.” An expression of the opinion, will or policy of the
City Council on some matter of ministerial business which has come before the
body. A resolution is a less formal mechanism for dealing with matters of a
special or temporary character. While an ordinance, and to a large extent a
municipal order, involves a distinctly legislative act.



   “SHALL.” The act referred to is mandatory. (KRS 446.010 (39))



   “SIDEWALK.” That portion of the street between the curb line and
the adjacent property fine intended for the use of pedestrians.



   “STATE.” The Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   “STREET.” Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



   “SUBCHAPTER.” A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.



   “SUMMARY.” A brief narrative prepared under the supervision of an
attorney succinctly covering the main points of an official statement,
ordinance, or rule in a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a
clear and understandable manner as to its meaning. (KRS 83A.010)



   “SWORN.” Includes “AFFIRMED” in all cases in which an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath. (KRS 446.010 (43))



   “TENANT” or “OCCUPANT.” As applied to premises, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or
any part of such premises, alone or with others.



   “VACANCY IN OFFICE.” Such as exists when there is an unexpired part
of a term of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person
elected or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when
there has been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law;
it applies whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal
from the state, county, city, or district, or otherwise. (KRS 446.010 (46))



   “VIOLATE.” Includes failure to comply with. (KRS 446.010 (47))



   “VIOLATION.” An offense for which the criminal fine can not exceed
the amount set forth in KRS 535.040 (2) (c). (KRS 83A.065)



   “YEAR.” Calendar year. (KRS 446.010 (49))



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Singular includes plural.  A word importing the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well
as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may
extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or
things.



(KRS 446.020 (1))



   (B)   Masculine includes feminine.  A word importing the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.



(KRS 446.020 (2))



   (C)   Liberal construction.  All sections of this code shall be
liberally construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the
intent of Council.



(KRS 446.080 (1))



   (D)   Retroactivity.  No ordinance shall be construed to be
retroactive, unless expressly so declared.



(KRS 446.080 (3))



   (E)   Technical terms.  All words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such meaning.



(KRS 446.080 (4))



§ 10.04  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order
of court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act,
event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on
which the public office in which a document is required to be filed is
actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of
the next day which is not one of the days just mentioned.  When the period
of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.



   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an
act to be done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before
the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in
computing the time.  If the day thereby computed on which or by which the
act is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a
day on which the public office in which the act if required to be completed
is actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is
none of the days just mentioned.



   (C)    If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any
act is directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is
Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the
next day that is not a legal holiday. 



(KRS 446.030)



   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



§ 10.05  MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL;  AUTHORIZED AGENT.



   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or
other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such officers or other persons.



(KRS 446.050)



   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.



§ 10.06  WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.



   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party
thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is
subscribed at the end or close of the writing.



   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the
English language.



(KRS 446.060)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is
apparent that Council would not have enacted the remaining parts without the
unconstitutional part, or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
Council.



(KRS 446.090)



§ 10.08  REVIVOR.



   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is
revived when the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance
enacted at the same meeting of Council.



   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived
by the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same
or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the
effective date of the original repealer.



   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting
of Council which enacted the amendment.



   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the
amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as
long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original amendment.



   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment as the case may be.



(KRS 446.100)



§ 10.09  RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.



   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to
any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall
conform, so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of such
proceedings.  If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any
provision of the new ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the
party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



(KRS 446.110)



§ 10.10  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from an after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose effected prior to the codification and not
inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.



§ 10.14  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this
code by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code an printed for inclusion
herein.  Any chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances
may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.  Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.



   (B)   The following language should be used by the city to amend,
add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division:



      (1)   Section amended:



         "Section ________ of the Crestview Hills Code of Ordinances
is amended to read as follows: . . ."



      (2)   Section added:



         "Section _______, which reads as follows, is added to and
amends the Crestview Hills Code of Ordinances: . . ."



      (3)   Section repealed:



         "Section ________ of the Crestview Hills Code of
Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: . . ."



_________________



Cross-reference:



   Form of amendment, see § 32.04



§ 10.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.16  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.17  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall
be deemed a violation and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for
each offense.



_____________________



Statutory reference:



   Fine amount for ordinance violations authorized by state law, see KRS
83A.065 and 534.040



CHAPTER 11:  ORDINANCES REPEALED AND SAVED



Section



   11.01   Ordinances specifically repealed



   11.02   Ordinances specifically saved



§ 11.01  ORDINANCES SPECIFICALLY REPEALED.



   The following ordinances heretofore adopted are repealed:



   NUMBER               SUBJECT



§ 11.02  ORDINANCES SPECIFICALLY SAVED.



   None of the provisions of this code of ordinances shall be deemed in
any manner to constitute a repeal of the following ordinances heretofore
adopted, or to affect their enforceability:



   NUMBER               SUBJECT



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES





         31.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN





         32.   PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES





         33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE





         34.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         35.   CODE OF ETHICS





         36.   PUBLIC RECORDS





         37.   PUBLIC MEETINGS





         38.   PERSONNEL POLICIES




CHAPTER 30:  CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES




General Provisions




Section



   30.01   Oath of office



   30.02   Bond



Elected Officers



   30.10   Election procedure



   30.11   Removal for misconduct, inability, or neglect



   30.12   Abolition of office



   30.13   Creation of elected offices prohibited



   30.14   Mayor



   30.15   Vice-Mayor



   30.16   Council Members



Nonelected Officers



   30.20   Creation of offices



   30.21   Appointment and removal



   30.22   City Administrative Officer



   30.23   City Clerk



   30.24   Duties of the City Clerk



   30.25   Code Enforcement Officer



   30.26   Zoning Administrator



   30.27   Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator



Compensation of Officers and Employees



   30.30   Elected officers



   30.31   (Reserved)



   30.32   City employees and nonelected officers



   30.33   Fees and commissions



   30.34   Equating of compensation rate of Mayor and Council Members
with purchasing power of the dollar



_______________



Cross-reference:



   Personnel Policies adopted by reference, see § 38.01



§ 30.01  OATH OF OFFICE



   (A)   Oath.  Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon
the discharge of duties of his office, take the following oath:  "I do
solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this Commonwealth,
and be faithful and true to the Commonwealth of Kentucky so long as I
continue a citizen thereof, and that I will faithfully execute, to the best
of my ability, the office of ______________ according to law; and I do
further solemnly swear (or affirm) that, since the adoption of the present
Constitution, I, being a citizen of this State, have not fought a duel with
deadly weapons within this state, nor out of it, nor have I sent or accepted
a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons, nor have I acted as a second
in carrying a challenge, nor aided or assisted any person thus offending, so
help me God", as established by Section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.



   (B)   Certification of oath.  Certification of the person
administering the oath of office to an elected official shall certify in
writing that the oath was administered and the date of its administration. 
Said certification shall be filed in accordance with KRS 62.020.



§ 30.02  BOND.



   (A)   All officers, officials and employees of cities, counties,
urban-county governments, charter county governments and special districts
who handle public funds in the execution of their duties shall give a good
and sufficient bond to the local governing body for the faithful and honest
performance of his or her duties and as security for all money coming into
that person's hands or under that person's control.  The bond amount shall
be based upon the maximum amount of public funds the officer, official or
employee handles at any given time during a fiscal year cycle.  The local
governing body shall pay the cost of the bond.



   (B)   Elected officials who post bond as required by statute, and
employees of their offices covered by a blanket or umbrella bond, shall be
deemed to have complied with subsection (A) of this section.



ELECTED OFFICERS



§ 30.10  ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by KRS
83A.050(1), the City Council does hereby prescribe that the election of city
officers shall be under nonpartisan city election laws as provided in KRS
83A.045, 83A.170, 83A.175 and 83A.047, or as otherwise hereinafter required
by law. The city reconfirms, reiterates, and re-adopts the nonpartisan method
authorized by KRS Chapter 83A for the election of city officers.



   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by KRS
83A.045(2)(b), the city forgoes conducting a nonpartisan primary election for
the nomination of candidates to city office, regardless of the number of
candidates running for each office. All candidates shall file their
nomination papers with the Kenton County Clerk not later than the second
Tuesday in August before the day fixed by KRS Chapter 118 for holding a
regular election for the office, or as otherwise hereinafter required by law.



   (C)   The city shall pay the costs of city elections only if city
elections are held at a time other than prescribed by KRS Chapters 116 to 121.



(KRS 83A.050)  (Am. Ord. 2017-10-1, passed 11-9-17)



§ 30.11  REMOVAL FOR MISCONDUCT, INABILITY, OR NEGLECT.



   (A)   Any elected officer, in case of misconduct, inability, or
willful neglect in the performance of the duties of his office, may be
removed from office by a unanimous vote of the members of Council exclusive
of any member to be removed, who shall not vote in the deliberation of his
removal.



   (B)   No elected officer shall be removed without having been given
the right to a full public hearing.  The officer, if removed, shall have the
right to appeal to the circuit court of the county and the appeal shall be on
the record.  No officer so removed shall be eligible to fill the office
vacated before the expiration of the term to which originally elected.



(KRS 83A.040 (6))



§ 30.12  ABOLITION OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Each appointed and elected city office existing on July 15,
1980, shall continue until abolished by ordinance, except that the office of
Mayor and Councilmen may not be abolished.



   (B)   No abolition of any elected office shall take effect until
expiration of the term of the current holder of the office.



   (C)   No ordinance abolishing any elected office shall be enacted
later than two hundred forty (240) days preceding the regular election for
that office, except in the event of a vacancy in the office.



(KRS 83A.080 (4))



§ 30.13  CREATION OF ELECTED OFFICES PROHIBITED.



   The city may not create any elected office.  Existing elected offices
may be continued under provision of § 30.12, but not existing elected office
may be changed.



(KRS 83A.080 (5))



§ 30.14  MAYOR.



   (A)   Election; term of office.  The Mayor shall be elected by the
voters of the city at a regular election.  His term of office shall begin on
the first day of January following his election and shall be for four (4)
years and until his successor qualifies.



   (B)   Qualification.  The Mayor shall be at least twenty-five (25)
years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the
city throughout his term of office.



   (C)   Vacancy.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council
shall fill the vacancy within 30 days.  If for any reason, any vacancy in
the office of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the
Governor shall promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person
who shall serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.



      (1)   When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a
member of the City Council shall not vote for himself.



(KRS 83A.040 (2) (c))



      (2)   When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation
of the Mayor, the resigning Mayor shall not vote on his successor.



(KRS 83A.040 (3))



      (3)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the
office of Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the
resignation date is tendered to the City Council.  The resignation shall be
effective at the next regular or special meeting of the City Council
occurring after the date specified in the written letter of resignation.



(KRS 83A.040 (7))



      (4)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is
required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council
shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary
of State of the vacancy.



(KRS 83A.040 (8))



      (5)   The City Council shall elect from among its members an
individual to preside over meetings of the City Council during any vacancy in
the office of the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of KRS 83A.130.



(KRS 83A.040 (2) (d))



§ 30.15  VICE-MAYOR.



   (A)   Creation; term. 



      (1)   The position of Vice-Mayor of the City of Crestview
Hills, Kentucky is created.



      (2)   The term of office of the Vice-Mayor shall be two (2)
years and shall correspond to the terms of office of the members of Council
elected at the time of selection of the Vice-Mayor.



   (B)   Qualifications.  The Vice-Mayor shall be the member of City
Council who received the largest number of votes in the last general election
at which all or a majority of members of Council were elected.  If two (2)
or more members received the same plurality of votes the position shall be
filled by lot.



   (C)   Duty.  The duty of the Vice-Mayor shall be to preside at
meetings of Council in place of the Mayor.



   (D)   Vacancy.  If a vacancy should occur in the position of
Vice-Mayor, the member of Council who received the second largest number of
votes in such election shall fill the position for the remainder of the term
of office.



(Ord. 1997-9-1, passed 9-11-97)



§ 30.16  COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Election; term of office.  Each Council member shall be
elected at-large by the voters of the city at a regular election.  His term
of office shall begin on the first day of January following his election and
shall be for two (2) years except as provided by § 30.10.



   (B)   Qualifications.  A member shall be at least twenty-one (21)
years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the
city throughout his term of office.



   (C)   Vacancies.  If one (1) or more vacancies on Council occur in
a way that one (1) or more members remain seated, the remaining members shall
within thirty (30) days fill the vacancies one at a time, giving each new
appointee reasonable notice of his selection as will enable him to meet and
act with the remaining members in making further appointments until all
vacancies are filled.  If vacancies occur in a way that all seats become
vacant, the Governor shall appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies
sufficient to constitute a quorum.  Remaining vacancies shall be filled as
provided in this section. 



(KRS 83A.040 (5))



      (1)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a
member of the City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which
specifies a resignation date is tendered to the City Council.  The
resignation shall be effective at the next regular or special meeting of the
city legislative body occurring after the date specified in the written
letter of resignation. 



(KRS 83A.040 (7))



      (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the City Council which is
required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council
shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary
of State of the vacancy. 



(KRS 83A.040 (8))



   (D)   Failure to fill vacancies. If for any reason, any vacancy on
Council is not filled within thirty (30) days after it occurs, the Governor
shall promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who
shall serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.



(KRS 83A.040 (6))



NONELECTED OFFICERS



§ 30.20  CREATION OF OFFICES.



   All nonelected city offices shall be created by ordinance which shall
specify:



   (A)   Title of office;



   (B)   Powers and duties of office;



   (C)   Oath of office;



   (D)   Bond, if required; and



(KRS 83A.080 (1))



§ 30.21  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL



   (A)   All nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor
and all such appointments shall be with approval of Council.



   (B)   The officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless
otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.



   (C)   Upon removal of a nonelected officer at will, the Mayor shall
give the officer a written statement setting forth the reason or reasons for
the removal. However, this requirement shall not be construed as limiting in
any way the at-will dismissal power of the executive authority.



(KRS 83A.080 (3))



_________________



Cross-reference:



   Abolition of appointed office, see § 30.12



§ 30.22  CITY ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 83A.090 the office of City Administrative
Officer is hereby created.



   (B)   The City Administrative Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of City Council.  The Officer shall not enter upon
the duties of the office until he has been administered the oath of office,
and executed bond in the amount of $5,000 with surety.  The Officer shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.



   (C)   The minimum requirements for the position of City
Administrative Officer shall be a Bachelor's Degree with a major in public
administration, business administration, or a related field (Masters Degree
preferred), and must have considerable, progressively responsible experience
in municipal affairs.



   (D)   The duties of the Administrative Officer shall include:



      (1)   Advising and counseling the Mayor in policy matters in
the overall operation of the city;



      (2)   Having major responsibility for preparation and
administration of the operating and capital improvement budgets under the
direction of the Mayor;



      (3)   Advising and counseling the Mayor in the appointment of
the subordinate administrative personnel;



      (4)   Having continuing direct relationships with the
operating department heads on implementation and administration of municipal
programs.



      (5)   Such additional duties lawfully delegated by the mayor
from time to time in the course of the business of the city.



   (E)   The compensation of the City Administrative Officer shall be
reasonable and commensurate with his qualifications and experience at the
time of appointment, and shall be negotiated with the consent of Council.



(Ord. 86-2-1, passed 3-13-86)



§ 30.23  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   There is created the office of City Clerk.  The City Clerk
shall execute bond in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000) with
corporate surety and shall be compensated at a rate established by Council.



   (B)   The function of the office of City Clerk is to perform all of
those duties usually incumbent upon an officer appointed to such office as
imposed by law, and to assist the City Treasurer in the performance of the
duties of that office as fixed by law or ordinance.



(Ord. 1980-81, passed 9-11-80)



§ 30.24  DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The duties and responsibilities of the Clerk shall include,
but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of
the city as set forth in Chapter 32;



      (2)   Performance of the duties required of the “official
custodian” or “custodian” pursuant to KRS 61.870 through 61.882 and as
set forth in Chapter 32;



      (3)   Possession of the seal of the city if used; and



      (4)   Act as tax collector.



      (5)   No later than January 31 of each year, mail or
electronically submit to the Department for Local Government, a list
containing current city information including but not limited to the
following:



         (a)   The correct name, telephone number, and electronic
mail address of the mayor, legislative body members, and the correct name,
telephone number, and electronic mail address for the city’s appointed
officials or employees who are serving in the following roles or
substantially similar roles as of January 1 of each year:



            1.   City Clerk;



            2.   City Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer;



            3.   City Manager or Administrator;



            4.   City Attorney;



            5.   Human Resources Director;



            6.   Risk Manager;



            7.   Information Technology Manager;



            8.   Public Relations or Communications Officer;
and



            9.   Planning and Zoning Administrator.



         (b)   The correct name of the city, mailing address for
City Hall, and telephone number of City Hall; and



         (c)   The name and telephone number of either an elected
official to serve as a contact person that may be reached during normal
business hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.



         (d)   The name and telephone number of either an elected
or appointed official to serve as a contact person that may be reached during
normal business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.;



      (6)   Performance of all other duties and responsibilities
required of the City Clerk by statute or ordinance. 



      (7)   Once the information required to be reported under
division (5) of this section is compiled by the Department for Local
Government, the Department shall forward one (1) electronic copy of the
compiled information to the Legislative Research Commission.



(KRS 83A.085(3)(d) - (f))



   (B)   Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City
Council from time to time as set forth in § 30.32.



   (C)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City Clerk unless
such person has taken the oath required by Section 228 of the Constitution of
the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond in the amount of one
thousand dollars ($1,000) with corporate surety authorized to transact
business in Kentucky and conditioned upon the performance of the duties
specified herein.



§ 30.25  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall exercise the office of Code
Enforcement Officer and shall perform all duties and responsibilities
attendant with that office consistent with the requirements of state law and
Chapter 92 of the Crestview Hills Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   Oath and Bond. No person shall be appointed or act as the Code
Enforcement Officer unless such person has taken the oath required by Section
228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided a
bond in the sum established by City Council with corporate surety authorized
to transact business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and condition upon the
performance of the duties specified herein.  The oath given by the City
Administrator as part of his office as City Administrator and the bond
provided by the City Administrator as part of that office shall be sufficient
to satisfy the oath and bond requirements of this section.



   (C)   Compensation.  The compensation of the City Code Enforcement
Officer shall be paid as part of the City Administrator's total compensation
and in accordance with the Code of Ordinances for the City of Crestview
Hills, Kentucky.



   (D)   The City Administrator is hereby appointed Code Enforcement
Officer through the appointment by the Mayor with approval of City Council.
All non-elected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless otherwise
provided by the Kentucky Revised Statutes or the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Crestview Hills.



(Ord. 2007-8-4, passed 9-13-07)



§ 30.26  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall exercise the office and functions
of Zoning Administrator and shall perform all duties and responsibilities
attendant with that office consistent with the requirements of Section 16 of
the Zoning Code of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



   (B)   Oath and Bond.  No person shall be appointed or act as the
Zoning Administrator unless such person has taken the oath required by
Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has
provided a bond in the sum established by City Council with corporate surety
authorized to transact business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and condition
upon the performance of the duties specified herein.  The oath given by the
City Administrator as part of his office as City Administrator and the bond
provided by the City Administrator as part of that office shall be sufficient
to satisfy the oath and bond requirements of this section.



   (C)   Compensation.  The compensation of the Zoning Administrator
shall be paid as part of the City Administrator's total compensation and in
accordance with the Code of Ordinances for the City of Crestview Hills,
Kentucky.



   (D)   The City Administrator is hereby appointed Zoning
Administrator through the appointment by the Mayor with approval of City
Council. All non-elected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless
otherwise provided by the Kentucky Revised Statutes or the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Crestview Hills.



(Ord. 2008-11-1, passed 12-11-08)



§ 30.27  DISTILLED SPIRITS AND MALT BEVERAGE ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall exercise the office of Distilled
Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator and shall perform all duties and
responsibilities attendant with that office consistent with the requirements
of the Kentucky Revised Statutes and § 113.03 of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



   (B)   Oath and Bond.  No person shall be appointed or act as the
Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator unless such person has
taken the oath required by Section 228 of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided a bond in the sum established by
City Council with corporate surety authorized to transact business in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and condition upon the performance of the duties
specified herein.  The oath given by the City Administrator as part of his
office as City Administrator and the bond provided by the City Administrator
as part of that office shall be sufficient to satisfy the oath and bond
requirements of this section.



   (C)   Compensation. The compensation of the City Distilled Spirits
and Malt Beverage Administrator shall be paid as part of the City
Administrator's total compensation and in accordance with the Code of
Ordinances for the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky. The City Administrator
is hereby appointed Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator through
the appointment by the Mayor with approval of City Council. All non-elected
officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless otherwise provided by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes or the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crestview
Hills.



(Ord. 2007-8-3, passed 9-13-07)



COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



§ 30.30  ELECTED OFFICERS.



   (A)   Council shall by ordinance fix the compensation of every
elected city officer not later than the first Monday in May in the year in
which the officer is elected.  As elected officer's compensation shall not
be changed after his election or during his term of office.



(KRS 83A.070 (1))



   (B)   Council may, by ordinance, establish the compensation for any
elective office on a salaried or per diem basis.



(KRS 83A.070 (4))



§ 30.31  (RESERVED).



§ 30.32  CITY EMPLOYEES AND NONELECTED OFFICERS.



   Council shall fix the compensation of city employees and nonelected
officers in accordance with a personnel and pay classification plan which
shall be adopted by ordinance.



(KRS 83A.070 (2))



§ 30.33  FEES AND COMMISSIONS.



   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the city
treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by any officer
or employee.



(KRS 83A.070 (3))



§ 30.34  EQUATING OF COMPENSATION RATE OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS WITH
PURCHASING POWER OF DOLLAR.



   (A)   In order to equate the compensation of the Mayor and Council
Members with the purchasing power of the dollar, the Department for Local
Government shall compute by the second Friday in February of every year the
annual increase or decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding year
by using 1949 as the base year in accordance with section 246 of the
Constitution of Kentucky which provides that the Mayor in cities other than
the first class and Council members shall be paid at a rate no greater than
seven thousand two hundred dollars ($7,200) per annum.



   (B)   The City Council shall set the compensation of the officer in
accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the
Department for Local Government.



(KRS 83A.075)



CHAPTER 31:  MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN



Section



   31.01   Form of government



   31.02   Governing officers



Mayor



   31.10   Powers and duties



   31.11   Promulgation of administrative procedures



   31.12   Participation in Council proceedings



   31.13   Approval or disapproval of ordinances



   31.14   Delegation of duties by executive order



   31.15   Execution of bonds, notes, and contracts



   31.16   Appointment of city employees



   31.17   Procedure upon disability; vacancy



   31.18   Compensation



Council



   31.30   Powers and duties



   31.31   Meetings



   31.32   Establishment of appointive offices



   31.33   Management of city resources



   31.34   Investigation of city government activities



   31.35   Compensation



§ 31.01  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The form of government provided in this chapter shall be known as the
"Mayor-Council Plan."



(KRS 83A.130 (1))



§ 31.02  GOVERNING OFFICERS.



   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall
be called Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the
City Council, and by such other officers and employees as may be provided for
by statute or city ordinance.



(KRS 83A.130 (2))



   (B)   The city shall have a Mayor and a City Council composed of six
members.



(KRS 83A.030 (1))



MAYOR



§ 31.10  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and
exercised by the Mayor.  The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan,
city ordinances and orders, and all applicable statutes.    He shall
supervise all departments of city government and the conduct of all city
officers and employees under his jurisdiction and shall require each
department to make reports to him required by ordinance or as he deems
desirable.



   (B)   The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local
government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.



   (C)   The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the
condition and needs of city government as he finds appropriate or as required
by ordinance, but not less than annually.  He shall make any recommendations
for actions by the Council he finds in the public interest.



(KRS 83A.130 (3))



_________________



Cross-reference:



   Right to review statements submitted to Council pursuant to
investigations, see § 31.34



§ 31.11  PROMULGATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.



   Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate
procedures to insure orderly administration of the functions of city
government and compliance with statute or ordinance.  Upon promulgation or
upon revision or recession of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the
person responsible for maintaining city records as provided under § 32.07.



(KRS 83A.130 (4))



§ 31.12  PARTICIPATION IN COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council.  The
Council may set by ordinance the manner in which one of its number may be
selected to preside at meetings of the Council in place of the Mayor.



   (B)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall
not have a vote, except that he may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.



(KRS 83A.130 (5))



_________________



Cross-reference:



   Council Meetings, see § 31.31



§ 31.13  APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to
the Mayor who shall within ten (10) days after submission either approve the
ordinance by affixing his signature or disapprove it by returning it to the
Council together with a statement of his objections.



   (B)   No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's approval
unless he fails to return it to the legislative body within ten days after
receiving it or unless the Council votes to override the Mayor's veto, upon
reconsideration of the ordinance not later than the second regular meeting
following its return, by the affirmative vote of one more than a majority of
the membership.



(KRS 83A.130 (6))



_________________



Cross-reference:



   Passage of ordinances, see Chapter 32



§ 31.14  DELEGATION OF DUTIES BY EXECUTIVE ORDER.



   Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties, or responsibilities to
subordinate officers and employees and any expression of his official
authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by executive order. 
Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years and shall be kept in
a permanent file.



(KRS 83A.130 (7))



§ 31.15  EXECUTION OF BONDS, NOTES, AND CONTRACTS.



   All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the city shall
be made and executed by the Mayor or his agent designated by the executive
order.



(KRS 83A.130 (8))



§ 31.16  APPOINTMENT OF CITY EMPLOYEES.



   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint and
remove all city employees, including police officers, except as tenure and
terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance, or contract and
except for employees of the Council.



(KRS 83A.130 (9))



§ 31.17  PROCEDURE UPON DISABILITY; VACANCY.



   (A)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the
functions of city government at any time he is unable to attend to the duties
of his office by delegating responsibility for any function to be performed
in accordance with § 31.14, provided that, the Mayor shall not delegate the
responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council and that approving
ordinances or promulgating administrative procedures may only be delegated to
any elected officer.  With approval of the Council, the Mayor may rescind
any action taken in his absence under this section within thirty (30) days of
such action.



   (B)   If for any reason the disability of the Mayor to attend to his
duties persists for sixty (60) consecutive days, the office of Mayor may be
declared vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the provisions of §
30.14 shall apply.



(KRS 83A.130 (10))



§ 31.18  COMPENSATION.



   The annual salary of the Mayor is hereby established at the sum of six
thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year, payable in twelve (12) equal monthly
installments effective January 1, 2003. The annual salary of the Mayor shall
be increased to six thousand four hundred dollars ($6,400) effective January
1, 2007.



(Ord. 1999-12-2, passed 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-11-1, passed 12-11-03)



COUNCIL



§ 31.30  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The legislative authority of the city shall be vested in and exercised
by the elected Council of the city.  The Council shall not perform any
executive functions except those functions assigned to it by statute.



(KRS 83A.130 (11))



§ 31.31  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second
Thursday of each month at 7:30 p.m.  All regular and special meetings will
be held at the Crestview Hills City Building, 50 Town Center Boulevard,
Crestview Hills, Kentucky 41017.



(Ord. 1980-2-2, passed 2-14-80; Am. Ord. 2008-2-2, passed 4-10-08)



   (B)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
upon written request of a majority of the Council.  In the call, the Mayor
or Council shall designate the purpose, time, and place of the special
meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for
compliance with KRS Chapter 61.



   (C)   At a special meeting no business may be considered other than
that set forth in the designation of purpose.



   (D)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person
responsible for maintaining city records provided under § 32.07 and by the
officer presiding at the meeting.



(KRS 83A.130 (11))



__________________



Cross-reference:



   Mayor's participation in Meetings, see § 31.12



   Quorum of Council, see § 32.01



§ 31.32  ESTABLISHMENT OF APPOINTIVE OFFICES.



   The Council shall by ordinance establish all appointive offices and the
duties and responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules, and
regulations for the public health, safety, and welfare.



(KRS 83A.130 (12))



§ 31.33  MANAGEMENT OF CITY RESOURCES.



   The Council shall by ordinance provide for sufficient revenue to
operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a
budget which shall provide for the orderly management of city resources.



(KRS 83A.130 (12))



§ 31.34  INVESTIGATION OF CITY GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   The Council shall have the right to investigate all activities
of city government.  The Council may require any city officer or employee to
prepare and submit to it sworn statements regarding his performance of his
official duties.



   (B)   Any statement required by the Council to be submitted or any
investigation undertaken by the Council, if any office, department, or agency
under the jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or
undertaken unless and until written notice of the Council's action is given
to the Mayor.  The Mayor shall have the right to review any statement before
submission to the Council and to appear personally or through his designee on
behalf of any department, office, or agency in the course of any
investigation.



(KRS 83A.130 (13))



§ 31.35  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of each member of the City Council is hereby
established at the sum of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per
year, payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments effective January 1,
2001.  The annual salary of each member of City Council shall be increased
to two thousand eight hundred dollars ($2,800) effective January 1, 2005.



(Ord. 1999-12-2, passed 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-11-1, passed 12-11-03)



CHAPTER 32:  PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES



Section



   32.01   Quorum of Council



   32.02   One subject; title



   32.03   Introduction; enacting clause



   32.04   Form of amendment



   32.05   Reading requirement; exception for emergency



   32.06   Adoption of standard codes by reference



   32.07   Official city records



   32.08   Indexing and maintenance requirements



   32.09   Publication requirements



   32.10   Additional requirements for adoption



   32.11   Periodic review required



   32.12   Municipal orders



   32.13   Proved by Clerk; received in evidence



   32.14   Legislative immunity



§ 32.01  QUORUM OF COUNCIL.



   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council shall
constitute a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum shall be sufficient
to take action.



(KRS 83A.060 (6))



§ 32.02  ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.



   Each ordinance shall embrace only one subject and shall have a title
that clearly states the subject.



(KRS 83A.060 (1))



§ 32.03  INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.



   Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall have an
enacting clause styled "Be it ordained by the City of ______________."



(KRS 83A.060 (3))



§ 32.04  FORM OF AMENDMENT.



   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and
ordinances to amend shall set out in full the amended ordinance or section
indicating any text being added by a single solid line drawn underneath it.
Text that is intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning with an
opening bracket and at the end with a closing bracket. The text between the
brackets shall be stricken through with a single solid line.



(KRS 83A.060(3))



_________________



Cross-reference:



   Amendatory language, see § 10.14



§ 32.05  READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no
ordinance shall be enacted until it has been read on two (2) separate days. 
The reading of an ordinance may be satisfied by stating the title and reading
a summary rather than the full text.



   (B)   In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of
the membership, the Council may suspend the requirements of second reading
and publication in order for an ordinance to become effective by naming and
describing the emergency in the ordinance.  Publication requirements of §
32.09 shall be complied within ten (10) days of the enactment of the
emergency ordinance.



(KRS 83A.060 (4), (7))



________________



Cross-reference:



   Approval of ordinances by Mayor, see § 31.13



§ 32.06  ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.



   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or
nationally recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of
local legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by
title, source, and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference
without setting them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting
ordinance and is made a part of the permanent records of the city.



(KRS 83A.060 (5))



§ 32.07  OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.



   (A)   Every action of the Council shall be made a part of the
permanent records of the city and on passage of an ordinance the vote of each
member of the Council shall be entered on the official record of the meeting.



   (B)   The Council shall provide by ordinance for the maintenance and
safekeeping of the permanent records of the city.  The person assigned this
responsibility and the presiding officer shall sign the official record of
each meeting.



(KRS 83A.060 (8))



(Ord. 1977-12-1, passed 12-14-77; Am. Ord. 1988-4-3, passed 5-12-88)



____________________



Statutory reference:



   Open records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.



§ 32.08  INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   All ordinances adopted in the city shall, at the end of each month, be
indexed and maintained in the following manner:



   (A)   The city budget, appropriations of money, and tax levies shall
be maintained and indexed so that each fiscal year is kept separate from
other years.



   (B)   All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or
an ordinance book in the order adopted and indexed in a composite index or
maintained in a code of ordinances.



(KRS 83A.060 (8))



§ 32.09  PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 32.05 (B), no ordinance shall be
effective until published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424.



   (B)   Ordinances may be published in full or in summary as
designated by City Council. If the City Council elects to publish an
ordinance in summary, the summary shall be prepared or certified by an
attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and shall
include the following:



      (1)   The title of the ordinance;



      (2)   A brief narrative setting forth the main points of the
ordinance in a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a clear and
understandable manner of the meaning of the ordinance;



      (3)   The full text of each section that imposes taxes or fees.



   (C) Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may include a
sketch, drawing, or map, including common landmarks, such as streets or roads
in lieu of metes and bounds descriptions.



(KRS 83A.060 (9))



§ 32.10  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION.



   The city may by ordinance specify additional requirements for adoption
of ordinances in greater detail than contained herein, but a city shall not
lessen or reduce the substantial requirements of this chapter or any other
statute relating to adoption of ordinances.



(KRS 83A.060 (10))



§ 32.11  PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.



   Not less than once every five (5) years the city shall cause all
ordinances in the composite index or code of ordinances to be examined for
consistency with state law and with one another and to be revised to
eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent, and invalid provisions.



(KRS 83A.060 (11))



§ 32.12  MUNICIPAL ORDERS.



   (A)   Council may adopt municipal orders.  Any order shall be in
writing and may be adopted only at an official meeting.  Any order may be
amended by a subsequent municipal order or ordinance.  All orders adopted
shall be maintained in an official order book.



   (B)   In lieu of an ordinance, a municipal order may be used for
matters relating to the internal operation and functions of the city and to
appoint or remove or approve appointment or removal of members of boards,
commissions, and other agencies over which the city has control.



(KRS 83A.060 (12), (13))



§ 32.13  PROVED BY CLERK; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.



   All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of
the City Clerk; and when the ordinances are placed in a printed composite
index or code of ordinances by authority of the city, the printed copy shall
be received in evidence by any state court without further proof of such
ordinances.



(KRS 83A.060 (14))



§ 32.14  LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.



   For anything said in debate, Councilmen shall be entitled to the same
immunities and protections allowed to members of the general assembly.



(KRS 83A.060 (15))



____________________



Statutory reference:



   Privileges of members of general assembly, see KRS 6.050 and Ky. Const.
§ 43



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



Financial Administration



   33.01   Definitions



   33.02   Accounting records and financial reports



   33.03   Annual budget ordinance



   33.04   Annual audit of city funds



   33.05   Official depositories; disbursement of city funds



Improvements



   33.10   Definitions



   33.11   Financing of improvements



   33.12   Apportionment of cost



   33.13   Comprehensive report required



   33.14   Public hearing required



   33.15   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners



   33.16   Affected owner may contest



   33.17   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes hen



   33.18   Effect of additional property or change in financing



________________



Cross-reference:



   Establishment of downtown business district, see § 153.01



   Taxation, see Ch. 95



FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION



§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:



   "BUDGET."  A proposed plan for raising and spending money for
specified programs, functions, activities, or objectives during a fiscal year.



   "DEBT SERVICE."  The sum of money required to pay installments of
principal and interest on bonds, notes, and other evidences of debt accruing
within a fiscal year and to maintain sinking funds.



   "ENCUMBRANCES."  Obligations in the form of purchase orders or
contracts that are chargeable to an appropriation.  An obligation ceases to
be an encumbrance when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.



   "FISCAL YEAR."  The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.



   "GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS."  Those standards
for audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and functions
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.



(KRS 91A.010(6))



   "GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING."  Those
standards and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board.



(KRS 91A.010(7))



§ 33.02  ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.



   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render
financial reports in such a way as to:



      (1)   Determine compliance with statutory provisions;



      (2)   Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial
operations of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity
with generally accepted governmental accounting principles; and



      (3)   Readily provide such financial data as may be required
by the federal revenue sharing program.



   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and
operated on a fund basis.



(KRS 91A.020)



§ 33.03  ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.



   (A)   The city shall operate under an annual budget ordinance
adopted and administered in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, after July 15, 1980, the city
shall not expend any moneys from any governmental or proprietary fund, except
in accordance with a budget ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Monies held by the city as a trustee or agent for individuals,
private organizations, or other governmental units need not be included in
the budget ordinance.



   (C)   If in any fiscal year subsequent to a fiscal year in which the
city has adopted a budget ordinance in accordance with this section, no
budget ordinance is adopted, the budget ordinance of the previous fiscal year
shall have full force and effect as if readopted.



   (D)   The budget ordinance of the city shall cover one fiscal
year.  However, if the city is required to adjust its fiscal year to conform
to the fiscal year set out in Section 169 of the Kentucky Constitution it may
utilize for transition purposes a fiscal year of any length not to exceed
eighteen (18) months.  Any such adjustment shall be completed not later than
two (2) years from July 15, 1980.



   (E)   Preparation of the budget proposal shall be the responsibility
of the Mayor.



   (F)   The budget proposal shall be prepared in such form and detail
as is prescribed by ordinance.



   (G)   The budget proposal together with a budget message shall be
submitted to Council not later than thirty (30) days prior to the beginning
of the fiscal year it covers.  The budget message shall contain an
explanation of the governmental goals fixed by the budget for the coming
fiscal year; explain important features of the activities anticipated in the
budget; set forth the reasons for stated changes from the previous year in
program goals, programs, and appropriation levels; and explain any major
changes in fiscal policy.



   (H)   (1)   Council shall adopt a budget ordinance making
appropriations for the fiscal year in such sums as it finds sufficient and
proper, whether greater or less than the sums recommended in the budget
proposal.  The budget ordinance may be in any form that Council finds most
efficient in enabling it to make the necessary fiscal policy decisions.



      (2)   No budget ordinance shall be adopted which provides for
appropriations to exceed revenues in any one fiscal year in violation of
Section 157 of the Kentucky Constitution.



   (I)   The full amount estimated to be required for debt service
during the budget year shall be appropriated, for all governmental fund types.



   (J)   Council may amend the budget ordinance at any time after the
ordinance's adoption, so long as the amended ordinance continues to satisfy
the requirements of this section.



   (K)   Administration and implementation of an adopted budget
ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Mayor.  Such responsibility
shall include the preparation and submission to Council of operating
statements which shall include budgetary comparisons of each governmental
fund for which an annual budget has been adopted.  Such reports shall be
submitted not less than once every three (3) months in each fiscal year.



   (L)   To the extent practical, the system utilized in the
administration and implementation of the adopted budget ordinance shall be
consistent in form with the accounting system called for in § 33.02.



   (M)   No city agency, or member, director, officer, or employee of
any city agency, may bind the city in any way to any extent beyond the amount
of money at that time appropriated for the purpose of the agency.  All
contracts, agreements, and obligations, express or implied beyond such
existing appropriations are void; nor shall any city officer issue any bond,
certificate, or warrant for the payment of money by the city in any way to
any extent, beyond the unexpected balance of any appropriation made for the
purpose.



(KRS 91A.030)



§ 33.04  ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.



   (A)   Each city shall after the close of each fiscal year, cause
each fund of the city to be audited by the Auditor of Public Accounts or a
certified public accountant. The audits shall be completed by February 1
immediately following the fiscal year being audited. Within ten (10) days of
the completion of the audit and its presentation to the City Council,
pursuant to division (D) (5) of this section, each city shall forward an
electronic copy of the audit report to the Department for Local Government
for information purposes. The Department for Local Development shall make
available upon request either an electronic or paper copy of the audit report
to the Legislative Research Commission to be used for the purposes of KRS
6.955 to 6.975 or to the Auditor of Public Accounts.



   (B)   If a city is required by another provision of law to audit its
funds more frequently or more stringently than is required by this section,
the city shall also comply with the provisions of that law.



   (C)   The Department for Local Government shall, upon request, make
available electronic copies of the audit reports and financial statements
received by it under division (A) of this section to the Legislative Research
Commission to be used for the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975 or to the
Auditor of Public Accounts.



   (D)   Each city required by this section to conduct an annual or
biennial audit shall enter into a written contract with the selected auditor.
The contract shall set forth all terms and conditions of the agreement which
shall include but not be limited to requirements that:



      (1)   The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial
statements, which shall include the government-wide and fund financial
statements;



      (2)   The Auditor shall include in the annual or biennial city
audit report an examination of local government economic assistance funds
granted to the city under KRS 42.450 to 42.495. The auditor shall include a 
certification with the annual or biennial audit report that the funds were
expended for the purpose intended;



      (3)   All audit information be prepared in accordance with
generally accepted governmental auditing standards which include tests of the
accounting records and auditing procedures considered necessary in the
circumstances. Where the audit is to cover the use of state or federal funds,
appropriate state or Federal guidelines shall be utilized;



      (4)   The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed
report embodying:



         (a)   The basic financial statements and accompanying
supplemental and required supplemental information;



         (b)   The auditor's opinion on the basic financial
statements or reasons why an opinion cannot be expressed; and



         (c)   Findings required to be reported as a result of
the audit;



      (5)   The completed audit and all accompanying documentation
shall be presented to the city legislative body at a regular or special
meeting; and



      (6)   Any contract with a certified public accountant for an
audit shall require the accountant to forward a copy of the audit report and
management letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon request of the city
or the Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall
have the right to review the certified public accountant's work papers upon
request.



   (E)   A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this
section shall be considered satisfactory and final in meeting any official
request to a city for financial data, except for statutory or judicial
requirements, or requirements of the Legislative Research Commission
necessary to carry out the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.



   (F)   Each city shall, within thirty (30) days after the
presentation of an audit to the city legislative body, publish an
advertisement in accordance with KRS Chapter 424 containing:



      (1)   The auditor's opinion letter;



      (2)   The “Budgetary Comparison Schedules-Major Funds,”
which shall include the general fund and all major funds;



      (3)   A statement that a copy of the complete audit report,
including financial statements and supplemental information, is on file at
city hall and is available for public inspection during normal business hours;



      (4)   A statement that any citizen may obtain from city hall a
copy of the complete audit report, including financial statements and
supplemental information, for his personal use;



      (5)   A statement which notifies citizens requesting a
personal copy of the city audit report that they will be charged for
duplication costs at a rate that shall not exceed twenty-five cents ($0.25)
per page; and



      (6)   A statement that copies of the financial statement
prepared in accordance with KRS 424.220, when a financial statement is
required by KRS 424.220, are available to the public at no cost at the
business address of the officer responsible for preparation of the statement.



   (G)   Any resident of the city or owner of real property within the
city may bring an action in the Circuit Court to enforce the provisions of
this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500). In addition, any officer who fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall, for each failure, be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500), in the discretion of the court, which may be recovered only
once in a civil action brought by any resident of the city or owner of real
property within the city. The costs of all proceedings, including a
reasonable fee for the attorney of the resident or property owner bringing
the action, shall be assessed against the unsuccessful party.



   (H)   In the event of extenuating circumstances that prevent a city
from completing and submitting a required audit or financial statement in
compliance with the applicable deadlines in division (A) of this section, the
city may submit a written request for an extension of time to the Department
for Local Government on a form prescribed by the Department for Local
Government. The Department for Local Government shall approve the request if
it is submitted on or before the applicable deadline, and in the judgment of
the Department for Local Government the request is warranted by extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the city. Extensions granted under this
subsection shall not exceed nine (9) months from the original due date of the
audit or financial statement. If the Department for Local Government approves
an extension for a city and the city fails to complete and submit the
required audit or financial statement in compliance with that extended
deadline, then the provisions of division (I) of this section shall apply.



   (I)   If a city fails to complete an audit or financial statement
and submit it to the Department for Local Government as required in division
(A) and division (H) of this section, the Department for Local Government
shall notify the Finance and Administration Cabinet that the city has failed
to comply with the audit requirements of this section, and that any funds in
the possession of any agency, entity, or branch of state government shall be
withheld from the city until further notice. The Department for Local
Government shall immediately notify the Finance and Administration Cabinet
when the city complies with the requirements of division (A) and subsection
(H) of this section for all prior fiscal years it has failed to comply with
the audit requirements of this section, and the Finance and Administration
Cabinet shall direct the reinstatement of payments to the city, including any
funds that were withheld due to the noncompliance.



   (J)   Within a reasonable time after the completion of a special
audit or examination conducted pursuant to KRS 43.050, the Auditor shall bill
the city for the actual expense of the audit or examination conducted. The
actual expense shall include the hours of work performed on the audit or
examination as well as reasonable associated costs, including but not limited
to travel costs. The bill submitted to the city shall include a statement of
the hourly rate, total hours, and total costs for the entire audit or
examination.



(KRS 91A.040)



§ 33.05  OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall designate as the city's official depositories
one or more banks, federally insured savings and loan companies, or trust
companies within the Commonwealth.  The amount of funds on deposit in an
official depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or surety
bonds.



   (B)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which
the city is responsible, which has not been otherwise invested or deposited
in a manner authorized by law, shall be deposited in official depositories. 
All city funds shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the
Mayor which shall state the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the
purpose of the payment and the fund out of which the funds are payable. 
Each authorization shall be numbered and recorded.



(KRS 91A.060)



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 33.10  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:



   "ASSESSED VALUE BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property
bears to the total assessed value of all such properties.



   "BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an
improvement according to equitable determination by Council of the special
benefit received by property from the improvement, including assessed value
basis, front foot basis, and square foot basis, or any combination thereof,
and may include consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for
different classes of property based on nature and extent of special benefits
received, and other factors affecting benefits received.



   "COST."  All costs related to an improvement, including planning,
design, property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and
legal fees, financing costs, and publication expenses.



   "FAIR BASIS."  Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot
basis, or benefits received basis.



   "FRONT FOOT BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual
parcels of property bears to such front footage of all such properties.



   "IMPROVEMENT."  Construction of any facility for public use or
services or any addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific
properties in the area served by such facility.



   "PROPERTY."  Any real property benefitted by an improvement.



   "SPECIAL ASSESSMENT" or "ASSESSMENT."  A special charge fixed on
property to finance an improvement in whole or in part.



   "SQUARE  FOOT  BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property
bears to the square footage of all such property.



(KRS 91A.210)



§ 33.11  FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The city may not finance any improvement through special
assessments except pursuant to this subchapter, or other statutory
authority. 



(KRS 91A.200)



   (B)   The city may finance the cost of an improvement in whole or in
part by special assessments made as provided in this subchapter.



   (C)   Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a
fair basis.



   (D)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing, and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing. 



(KRS 91A.220)



§ 33.12  APPORTIONMENT OF COST.



   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government, or any educational, religious, or charitable organization. 
Council may assess such property in the same manner as for privately owned
property or it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.



(KRS 91A.230)



§ 33.13  COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.



   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the
city shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:



   (A)   The nature of the improvement;



   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the
boundaries or other description of the area to be assessed;



   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;



   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;



   (E)   If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and



   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects
of the improvement, assessments, or financing.



(KRS 91A.240)



§ 33.14  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   After preparation of the report required by § 33.13, the city shall
hold at least one public hearing on the proposed improvement at which all
interested persons shall be heard.  Notice of the hearing shall be published
pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each affected property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall include:



   (A)   The nature of the improvement;



   (B)   Description of area of the improvement;



   (C)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in
whole or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;



   (D)   Time and place the report may be examined; and



   (E)   Time and place of the hearing.



(KRS 91A.250)



§ 33.15  ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.



   Within ninety (90) days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall
determine whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and
if it determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and
containing all necessary terms, including the items referred to in § 33.13
and description of all properties.  Promptly upon passage the city shall
publish such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by
certified mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to
proceed with the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the
estimated cost to the property owner, and the ratio the cost to each property
owner bears to the total cost of the entire project.



(KRS 91A.260)



§ 33.16  AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.



   (A)   Within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice provided
for in § 33.15, any affected property owner may file an action in the
circuit court of the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by
special assessment, the inclusion of his property in the improvement, or the
amount of his assessment.  If the action contests the undertaking of the
improvement by the special assessment method of the inclusion of the property
of that property owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it
relates to any property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the
final judgment has been entered.



   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution shall be final and binding with respect to
such property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments.  After
the lapse of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties
shall be forever barred.



(KRS 91A.270)



§ 33.17  WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.



   (A)   After the passage of time for the action provided for in §
33.16, or after favorable final judgment in any such action, whichever comes
later, the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof as was
stayed by the action, including notice requiring payment of special
assessment or installment thereon and bonds or other method proposed to
finance the improvement.  The first installment may be apportioned so that
other payments will coincide with payment of ad valorem taxes.



   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments
thereof on any property, and accrued interest and other charges, shall
constitute a lien on the property to secure payment to the bondholders or any
other source of financing of the improvement.  The lien shall take
precedence over all other liens, whether created prior to or subsequent to
the publication of the ordinance, except a lien for state and county taxes,
general municipal taxes, and prior improvement taxes, and shall not be
defeated or postponed by any private or judicial sale, by any mortgage, or by
any error or mistake in the description of the property or in the names of
the owners.  No error in the proceedings of the Council shall exempt any
benefitted property from the lien for the improvement assessment, or from
payment thereof, or from the penalties or interest thereon, as herein
provided.



(KRS 91A.280)



§ 33.18  EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.



   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the
improvement or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§ 33.13
through 33.17 shall apply if additional property is included in the
improvement or if change is made in the method or improvement with the
consent of the owner thereof without compliance with other sections if it
does not increase the cost apportioned to any other property, or any other
change may be made without such compliance if all property owners of the
improvement consent.



(KRS 91A.290)



CHAPTER 34:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



City Tree Board



   34.001   Definitions



   34.002   Creation; establishment



   34.003   Term of office



   34.004   Compensation



   34.005   Duties and responsibilities



   34.006   Operation



   34.007   Review by City Council



Board of Ethics



   34.010   Establishment



Emergency Management



   34.030   Director’s duties and responsibilities



Architectural Review Board



   34.040   Definitions



   34.041   Architectural Review Board; purpose membership, and
operation



   34.042   Board order procedure



   34.043   Board order standards of review



   34.044   Failure to maintain



   34.045   Ordinary maintenance



   34.046   Appeals



Joint Code Enforcement Board



   34.060   Definitions



   34.061   Creation and membership



   34.062   Enforcement powers



   34.063   Appointment of members; term of office; removal from
office; oath; compensation; organization of board; meetings; quorum; conflict
of interest; minutes and records



   34.064   Conflict of interest



   34.065   Powers of the Code Enforcement Board



   34.066   Enforcement proceedings



   34.067   Hearing; notice and final order



   34.068   Presentation of cases



   34.069   Appeals; final judgment



   34.070   Ordinance fine schedule



   34.071   Lien; fines, charges, and fees



   34.072   Lienholder notification system



   34.073   Liens



   34.074   Immediate action



   34.075   Purpose



CITY TREE BOARD



§ 34.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “PARK TREES.”  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by
the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.



   “STREET TREES.”  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, avenues, or ways within the city.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



§ 34.002  CREATION; ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the city,
which shall consist of five members, citizens, and residents of this city,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Commission.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



§ 34.003  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be
three (3) years except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to
the first Board shall be for only one (1) year, and the term of two (2)
members of the first Board shall be for two (2) years.  In the event that a
vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be
appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



§ 34.004  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



§ 34.005  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public
areas.  Such plan will be presented annually to the City Council and, upon
their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive
tree plan for the city.  The Board, when requested by the City Council shall
consider and investigate, making findings, reports and recommendations upon
any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



§ 34.006  OPERATION.



   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a journal of its findings.  A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



§ 34.007  REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the City Tree Board.  Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the City Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the matter and
make the final decision.



(Ord. 1992-8-2, passed 9-10-92)



BOARD OF ETHICS



§ 34.010  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Board of Ethics, see §§ 35.60-35.68.



EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



§ 34.030  DIRECTOR’S DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Homeland Security and Emergency Management Director of
Kenton County, Kentucky is hereby designated as the Director of Emergency
Management for the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky to perform the duties
and responsibilities of a director of local emergency management agency as
prescribed in KRS 39A through 39F.



   (B)   When acting as the Director of Emergency Management for the
city, the Homeland Security and Emergency Director of Kenton County, Kentucky
shall utilize a Unified Command System (UCS) that is recognized by the U.S.
Fire Administration (USFA) and to include, as needed, the Mayor, the City
Administrator, the Fire/EMS Chief, the Chief of Police, and the Public Works
Director of the City of Crestview Hills.



(Ord. 2015-06-02, passed 7-9-15)



ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD



§ 34.040  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this
subchapter unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   “ALTERATION.” Any change, addition or modification in construction
or any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be
referred to in this subchapter as “altered” or “reconstructed.” Any
actions to change, modify, reconstruct, remove or demolish any exterior
features of an existing accessory structure. Ordinary maintenance to correct
any deterioration, decay or damage to a structure and to restore the
structure as nearly as practicable to an original state prior to its
deterioration, decay, or damage is excluded from the definition of
alteration, provided the work does not involve a change in type and/or color
of buildings materials.



   “APPLICANT.” Any person who applies for an Architectural Review
Board Order in order to undertake construction of an accessory structure in a
residentially zoned area.



   “ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER.” The architectural style, general design
and general arrangement of the exterior of a building including associated
fixtures.



   “ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD or BOARD.” The Architectural Review
Board of the city, as created in § 34.041 .



   “ARCHITECTURAL STYLE.” The predominate architectural styles within
given areas where the structure is built/altered as described § 34.043 (B).



   “BOARD ORDER.” The official document issued by the Architectural
Review Board containing the official record of a final action or
recommendation on an application for a review required by the Board in
accordance with this subchapter,



   “CHANGE.” Any new construction, alteration, demolition or removal
of other construction involving any structure subject to the provisions of
this subchapter. “CHANGE” shall not include ordinary maintenance or
repair of any property if no change in material, design, color or outward
appearance is undertaken.



   “CITY.” The City of Crestview Hills.



   “CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL.” The legislative body of the city.



   “DEMOLITION.” The complete or substantial removal or planned
destruction of any structure subject to Article IX.



   “DETERIORATION.” The impairment of value or usefulness of a
structure or site through action or lack of maintenance or upkeep.



   “EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE.” A prominent or significant part
or element of a building, structure or site. Features include the
architectural style and general arrangement of the exterior of the structure
including building materials, windows, doors, lights, signs, dry-laid stone
fences and other fixtures appurtenant thereto.



   “FEATURE.” Shall include the style, material, color, height, area
and lighting,



   “LANDSCAPING.” Site modifications subject to Board or Zoning
Administrator review of plant cover or materials.



   “OWNER.” The legal person(s) of record having ownership of a
property.



   “ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.” Exterior work which does not involve any
change in material, texture or color, design or, arrangement. Examples
include repainting with the same colon residing a wood building with
wood-siding and painting the same color.



   “PDS.” Planning and Development Services of Kenton County.



   “PERSON.” Includes any association, firm, partnership, trust,
governmental body, corporation, organization, as well as an individual.



   “SITE.” Any space or ground within the application area, including
ground adjacent to structures.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



§ 34.041  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD; PURPOSE MEMBERSHIP, AND OPERATION.



   (A)   There is hereby created an architectural review board for the
city, which shall review accessory structures in all single-family
residential zones as proscribed in Article IX, Section 9.18(C) of the city's
Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of the Board shall be to review all
applications for the installation of outdoor entertainment buildings and
ensure the preservation of the architectural character of the neighborhood
and economic vitality of the city's residential zones.



      (2)   The duties of the Board shall be accomplished through
the review of construction, alteration, and maintenance of outdoor
entertainment buildings; to preserve the architectural features and
characteristics of the neighborhood; and to recommend legislation designed to
promote these purposes.



   (C)   Establishment; members.



      (1)   The Board shall consist of five voting members appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business.



      (2)   Membership of the Board may consist of one or a
combination of the following:



         (a)   A person knowledgeable in residential real estate.



         (b)   A person who maintains his or her personal
residence within an area in which outdoor entertainment buildings are
permitted.



         (c)   A person knowledgeable in residential design,
landscape, architecture or other related fields.



         (d)   A person who has architectural training or who has
had extensive building or building inspection experience.



         (e)   A person who works in the construction industry.



      (3)   At least two members should be from professions of
architecture, landscape architecture, planning, or related disciplines.



      (4)   Members shall serve without compensation, unless
otherwise provided by Council.



   (D)   Terms of office. Each member shall hold office from the date
of his or her appointment for a term of four (4) years. Any member may
continue in office after his or her term expires until an appointed successor
takes office, or until sixty (60) days have elapsed, whichever occurs first.
No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms.



   (E)   Vacancies. All vacancies created by the expiration of the
terms, resignations, or other means shall be filled in accordance with the
requirements of division (D) above. In the event the requirements of division
(D) cannot be met the Mayor may fill vacancies as he deems appropriate.
Vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days. A member appointed to fill
a vacancy shall serve out the term of the previous member.



   (F)   Rules of procedure and guidelines. The Board shall establish
its rules of procedure and guidelines with approval from City Council.



   (G)   Election of officers. By a simple majority of the voting
members present, the Board shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair at the first
meeting of each year. If either officer position becomes vacant for any
reason, the Board shall, at its next meeting, elect a member to serve as
Chair or Vice-Chair for the remainder of the year.



   (H)   Meetings. The Board shall hold meetings as needed to review
and render decisions on applications coming before it. The Board shall hold a
public hearing on each application. All meetings of the Board shall comply
with all requirements of the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.



   (I)   Duties. The Board shall have the following duties:



      (1)   Review and act upon all applications as required by this
subchapter.



      (2)   Provide a written annual report to the City Council that
will address the activities of the previous calendar year. The annual report
shall include the number of cases reviewed, the number of cases approved in
one meeting, the number of cases approved after one or more deferrals, and
the number of cases denied. The report shall also include a summary of any
notable cases or other issues addressed by the Board during the previous
calendar year. The annual report shall be kept on file and available for
inspection.



   (J)   Duties of officers. The Board officers shall have the
following duties:



      (1)   Chair. The Chair shall preside over all meetings at
which he/she is present and shall sign all official correspondence, including
minutes, of the Board unless otherwise designating the responsibilities to
the Vice-Chair. The Chair shall serve as the primary liaison to city staff
and, as necessary, shall represent or appoint another Board member to
represent the Board before the City Council or other boards and commissions.



      (2)   Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair shall discharge the duties of
the Chair during the absence or disability of the Chairman.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



§ 34.042  BOARD ORDER PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Scope and applicability. No building permit shall be issued by
PDS for any proposal which is subject to Board review unless a Board order
has been issued in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Board order requirements. A Board order shall be required for
the following:



      (1)   A property owner application for construction of a new
outdoor entertainment building.



      (2)   A property owner application to alter an existing
outdoor entertainment building.



      (3)   A property owner application to expand an existing
outdoor entertainment building.



   (C)   Application, Applications for review by the Board shall be
filed on forms provided by the city. In conducting its inquiry and review,
the city and/or Board may request from the applicant any additional
information, sketches and data, as it shall reasonably require in making a
determination.



   (D)   Application for Board order.



      (1)   Upon application for a Board order, the Board shall
schedule a public hearing on the application.



      (2)   The Board shall mail or cause to have notices mailed
setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing to the owner(s) or any
person having a legal or equitable interest in the property, adjoining
property owners, and to all other owners within 300 feet of the subject
property not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing.



      (3)   The Board shall consider the application, plans, and
specifications and render its determination in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter within sixty (60) days after receiving a
complete application.



   (E)   Decisions.



      (1)   A Board order shall require approval by a majority vote
of a quorum of members. The Board shall provide written notice to the
applicant stating the grounds for its decision.



      (2)   The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings,
including copies of information, sketches, and data needed to clarify the
record or any amendment to it. The Board in its consideration may require any
additional materials it deems necessary to evaluate the application's
conformance with § 34.043.



      (3)   The Board may consider the advice of those consultants
whose opinion is sought by the Board with respect to any application for a
Board order.



   (F)   Period of validity.



      (1)   A Board order shall be valid for a one (1) year from the
date of final approval by the Board. The Board order shall become null and
void unless the construction or other action authorized by the decision has
been started within one (1) year after the final approval is granted and is
being carried forward to completion or occupancy of land, site, or buildings.



      (2)   The Board may approve one six (6) month extension of the
final approval upon written application prior to the expiration date of the
approval. The extension may be granted provided the Board finds that the
reasons for the extension were beyond the immediate control of the applicant.



      (3)   If a Board order expires, a new application shall be
required.



   (G)   Conditions. In making any decision provided for in this
section, the Board may attach any conditions regarding the location,
character, and other features of the application, as it may deem reasonable
to ensure that applicable standards of review for the decision are met.
Conditions attached shall be stated in the motion for approval, including the
reasons for each condition imposed.



   (H)   Administrative modifications.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator, in administering the Board
order, may authorize minor plan modifications to building layouts, lighting,
and other building and site-related improvements that are required to correct
any undetected errors or to address changes to the site made necessary during
construction, provided the modifications remain consistent with the purpose
of the Board order.



      (2)   No modifications shall be made that increases the
permitted size of the building or make any change to a permitted conditional
use.



      (3)   Modifications deemed minor may include such changes as:



         (a)   Minor adjustments in the location of the building
provided the perimeter setbacks, yards and buffers are maintained;



         (b)   Substitution of landscaping materials specified in
the landscape plan with comparable materials of an equal or greater size;



         (c)   Redesigning and/or relocating stormwater
management facilities provided that general character and stormwater
capacities are maintained;



         (d)   Redesigning and/or relocated landscaping, provided
that the same level and quality of screening is maintained;



         (e)   Minor changes in building material or colors that
are similar to and have the same general appearance comparable to or of a
higher quality as the material approved by the Board order.



         (f)   Other minor modifications deemed by the
Administrator that do not alter the basic design or any specific conditions
imposed as part of the original approval, or are a minimal structural
modification necessary to protect the structure due to acts of God prior to a
Board review.



         (g)   The Zoning Administrator shall report approved
modifications to the Board. The Administrator may submit any modification to
the Board that might otherwise be considered minor if the administrator finds
that the overall extent and effect of the proposed modification should be
reviewed by the Board.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



§ 34.043  BOARD ORDER STANDARDS OF REVIEW.



   (A)   A Board order as required in § 34.042. shall be approved only
after a finding by the Board that the review standards of this section have
been satisfied. All applications that comply with the review standards shall
be approved by the Board.



   (B)   General review standards. The following general review
standards shall be met by every application prior to approval of a Board
order.



      (1)   The Board shall determine whether the request will be
appropriate to the architectural character of the home and neighborhood.



      (2)   Decisions of the Board shall:



         (a)   Improve the quality of life in the city and
achieve the spirit and purpose of this subchapter as described in § 34.041.



         (b)   Consider the protection of property values in
order to further the city's goals of sound economic and community
development; and



         (c)   Consider the standards and recommendations set
forth by the Board.



      (3)   General character.



         (a)   The design of new structures and of additions to
existing structures, including new site improvements, should compliment the
home, and design review may take into account the architectural style,
general design, arrangement, texture, materials, and color of the home and
other structures in the neighborhood.



         (b)   Where changes have taken place in the course of
time as evidence of the history and development of adjacent or nearby
buildings, structures or sites, and if these changes are deemed to have
acquired significance and would be compromised by the proposed new building,
then this significance may be recognized and respected in the design of the
new building.



      (4)   Architectural style. There are a number of intermixes of
architectural styles, as well as a larger number of buildings of such modest
nature or so extensively remodeled to effectively lose all architectural
importance. It is with reference to the basic architectural character of the
key buildings noted above that the need for compatibility in the construction
of the outdoor entertainment building. Compatibility does not infer
imitation, but rather an appropriate design in terms of scale, building
materials, and detail. The architectural character of the home and
neighborhood consists mainly of the following themes:



         (a)   Residential buildings with exterior construction
of brick, stone, and stucco. Predominate styles are split level, tudor,
colonial and mid-century modern.



         (b)   Residential buildings of brick facades with siding
trim, one (1) to two (2) stories, mainly of the era 1950 through 1970.



      (5)   Massing and building form. Massing of outdoor
entertainment buildings shall be generally similar to the main structure and
adjacent nearby homes. Building forms should generally reflect those of the
architectural style of primary structure. Window to wall ratios should be
appropriate to the type and use of building constructed.



      (6)   Color. Traditional colors and combinations of those
colors that compliment the home or other adjacent structures should be used
for exteriors for all new buildings, and reconstruction, remodeling, and
exterior maintenance of existing outdoor entertainment buildings. Fluorescent
or luminescent colors are prohibited.



      (7)   Landscaping. The landscape design of the site should be
consistent with the overall architectural character of the structures on the
site. Plant material and methods for installation shall be selected
respecting the nature of the urban environment and the survivability and
diversity of the plan species. Non-plant material shall be of a type
associated with the origin or era in which the structure was originally built.



   (C)   Alterations to buildings, structure, and site. In addition to
the general review standards, the following standards shall be met by
applicants for alterations to existing buildings prior to approval of Board
order or building permit:



      (1)   The alteration shall conform to the distinguishing,
original exterior qualities or character of the building, its site, and its
environment.



      (2)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of
the outdoor entertainment building shall not be destroyed.



      (3)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship, which characterize a building, structure, or site, shall be
considered in the outdoor entertainment building.



      (4)   The surface cleaning of structures, if provided as part
of the application, shall be undertaken with methods designed to minimize
damage.



   (D)   Additions to existing outdoor entertainment buildings. In
addition to the general review standards, the following shall be met by
applicants for additions to existing outdoor entertainment buildings prior to
approval of a Board order.



      (1)   Materials for additions should be in keeping with the
exiting outdoor entertainment building, and should match, or be compatible
with those of the main home.



      (2)   Contemporary design for additions to existing outdoor
entertainment buildings shall be discouraged. Roofline additions are
discouraged or should be placed and designed to have the least amount of
visual impact.



      (3)   Additions should be indistinguishable from the original
structure. The intent of an addition should be that if the additions or
alterations were removed the essential form and integrity of the original
structure would be unimpaired.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



§ 34.044  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



   The owner of an outdoor entertainment building shall provide sufficient
and reasonable care, maintenance and upkeep appropriate to ensure any
building's upkeep and to prevent its destruction by deterioration. Any
landscaping or other site element shall also be properly maintained in a safe
and functional condition, and be maintained to ensure its value. This
provision shall be in addition to all other applicable code provisions. By
resolution the Architectural Review Board may present evidence of a violation
to the city for appropriate action.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



§ 34.045  ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.



   Nothing in the subchapter shall be construed to prevent any ordinary
maintenance or repair of an exterior architectural feature now or hereafter
which involves no change in material, design, arrangement, texture or color:
nor shall anything in this subchapter be construed to prevent the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, modification, or demolition of any
feature which the Zoning Administrator shall certify, pursuant to appropriate
provisions of city ordinance or state law regarding public safety, as being
an unsafe or dangerous condition.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



§ 34.046  APPEALS.



   Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Board may appeal the
decision to the Board of Adjustment in the same manner as an appeal of a
decision of the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of
Article XVIII, Section 18.2 of the Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance. The
Board of Adjustment shall forward a copy of its minutes regarding the appeal
decision to the Board.



(Ord. 2018-04-01, passed 5-10-18)



JOINT CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD



§ 34.060  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   “ABATEMENT COSTS.” A city's necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing
ail or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other action with
regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to
maintain and preserve the public health, safety and welfare in accordance
with any city ordinance.



   “CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.” A city police officer, safety officer,
citation officer, or other public law enforcement officer with the authority
to issue a citation.



   “FINAL ORDER.” Any order:



      (1)   Issued by the code enforcement board following a hearing
in accordance with § 34.066(E) of this subchapter;



      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested
the citation within seven days as provided in § 34.065(F) of this
subchapter; or



      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing
the violator requested to contest the citation as provided in § 34.066(C) of
this subchapter.



   “IMMINENT DANGER.” A condition which is likely to cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



   “JOINT CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.” An administrative body created and
acting under the authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board
Act, KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.



   “ORDINANCE.” An official action of the local government body, which
is a regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local
law and shall include any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the
city legislative body which embodies all or part of an subchapter.



   “OWNER.” A person, association, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable title in real property.



   “PREMISES.” A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures
upon it.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.061  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8811(1)(b), the City of Crestview Hills
participates in a Joint Code Enforcement Board through an interlocal
agreement executed with other participating city and county members. This
Joint Code Enforcement Board shall operate in lieu of a City Code Enforcement
Board, and have jurisdiction and authority throughout the City of Crestview
Hills in the same manner as a City Code Enforcement Board created under KRS
65.8811(1)(a).



   (B)   The city's representation on the Joint Code Enforcement Board
is established through the interlocal agreement with the participating cities
and/or Kenton County, and any and all amendments to the interlocal agreement.
The city shall appoint one member, and two (2) alternate members to the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board. All appointments shall be made by
the Mayor, with approval of the City Council. Members of the Kenton County
Joint Code Enforcement Board shall serve consistent with the provisions of
the interlocal agreement.



   (C)   All appointments to the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement
Board shall be for a term of three (3) years. Upon expiration of a term, a
member or alternate member may be re-appointed by the Mayor, with approval by
the City Council.



   (D)   Each member and alternate member appointed by the City of
Crestview Hills to the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall have
resided within the boundaries of the City of Crestview Hills for a period of
at least one (1) year prior to the date of the member's appointment, and
shall reside there throughout the term in office.



   (E)   In the event that the appointed member of the City of
Crestview Hills vacates his/her membership on the Kenton County Joint Code
Enforcement Board, the city shall, following the procedures in KRS 65.8811,
fill the vacancy within sixty (60) days. If the Mayor has not filled the
vacancy within sixty (60) days, then the remaining member of the Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall fill the vacancy with another
person who meets the qualifications in KRS 65.8811. All vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (F)   Any member or alternate member appointed by the Mayor to the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board, pursuant to KRS 65.8811, may be
removed by the Mayor for misconduct, inefficiency, or willful neglect of
duty. In the event of removal, the Mayor shall submit a written statement to
the member subject to removal, and to the City Council, setting forth the
reasons for removal. The member so removed shall have the right to appeal the
removal to the Kenton County Circuit Court.



   (G)   Any member or alternate member shall, prior to entering their
duties, take the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky
Constitution.



   (H)   The members of the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board
may be compensated or reimbursed per the terms of the interlocal agreement,
and its amendments.



   (I)   No member or alternate member appointed by the City to the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall hold any elected or
appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with
the City of Crestview Hills.



   (J)   A copy of the governing interlocal agreement shall be
maintained in the Office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.062  ENFORCEMENT POWERS.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue
remedial orders and impose civil fines as a method of enforcing city
ordinances when a violation of the ordinance has been classified as a civil
offense.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to
enforce any ordinance regulating conduct which would also, under any
provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, constitute a criminal offense or
a moving motor vehicle offense.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.063  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE;
OATH; COMPENSATION; ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM; CONFLICT OF
INTEREST; MINUTES AND RECORDS.



   Membership, oath and terms of office, quorum, vacancies, removal of
members, and other statutory requirements related to the Board's activities
shall be as stated in the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act and as
set forth by the interlocal agreement for the Kenton County Joint Code
Enforcement Board (hereinafter “interlocal agreement”) filed of record
with the Kenton County Clerk in Book C5439, Page 321 as incorporated by
reference as set forth herein.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.064  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect
financial or personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the
nature of the interest, shall disqualify himself from voting on the matter in
which he has an interest, and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.065  POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.



   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall have the powers
and duties as set forth by the interlocal agreement for the Kenton County
Joint Code Enforcement Board filed of record with the Kenton County Clerk in
Book C5439, Page 321 as incorporated by reference as set forth herein.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.066   ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings
before the Code Enforcement Board:



   (A)   Enforcement proceedings shall only be initiated by the
issuance of a citation by a code enforcement officer.



   (B)   Except when immediate action is necessary pursuant to §
34.074 of this subchapter, if a code enforcement officer believes, based on
his personal observation or investigation, that a person has violated a city
ordinance, he shall issue a notice of violation allowing the alleged violator
a specified period of time to remedy the violation without incurring a fine.
If the alleged violator fails or refuses to remedy the violation within the
time specified, the code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a
citation.



   (C)   The code enforcement officer shall issue a citation by one of
the following methods:



      (1)   Personal service to the alleged violator;



      (2)   Leaving a copy of the citation with any person eighteen
(18) years of age or older who is on the premises, if the alleged violator is
not on the premises at the time the citation is issued; or



      (3)   Mailing a copy of the citation by regular first-class
mail to the last known recorded mailing address of the alleged violator; or



      (4)   If, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
issuance of a citation using the methods set out in divisions (C)(1), (2), or
(3) is not possible, then the citation is properly served by posting a copy
of the citation in a conspicuous place on the premises.



   (D)   The citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The date and time of issuance;



      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;



      (3)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;



      (4)   The date and time the offense was committed;



      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;



      (6)   The section of the code or the number of the ordinance
violated;



      (7)   The name of the code enforcement officer;



      (8)   The civil fine that may be imposed for the violation,
including, if applicable;



         (a)   The civil fine that will be imposed if the person
does not contest the citation; and



         (b)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the
person elects to contest the citation;



      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay
the civil fine or to contest the citation; and



      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil
fine set forth in the citation or contest the citation within the time
allowed: the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation; the determination
that the violation was committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall
be deemed a final order determining that the violation was committed and
imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.



   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code
enforcement officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering a
copy of the citation to Board Chairman.



   (F)   (1)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall
respond to the citation within seven (7) days of the date of issuance by
either paying the civil fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing to contest
the citation. If the person fails to respond to the citation within seven (7)
days, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and
the determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final.
In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order
determining that the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine as
set forth in the citation, and the person shall be deemed to have waived the
right to appeal the final order to District Court.



      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual
place of residence with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the order.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.067  HEARING; NOTICE AND FINAL ORDER.



   (A)   When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board
or its administrative staff shall schedule a hearing.



   (B)   Not less than seven (7) days before the date of the hearing,
the Code Enforcement Board shall notify the requester of the date, time, and
place of the hearing. The notice may be given by regular first-class mail;
certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving
the notice at the person's usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and who is
informed of the contents of the notice.



   (C)   (1)   Any person requesting a hearing who fails to appear
at the time and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the
right to a hearing to contest the citation, and the determination that a
violation was committed shall be final. In this event, the citation as issued
shall be deemed a final order determining the violation was committed and
imposing the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the alleged violator
shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to
District Court.



      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual
place of residence with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the order.



   (D)   All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath and
recorded. Testimony shall be taken from the code enforcement officer, the
alleged violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the code
enforcement officer or alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not
apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the
proceedings.



   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence,
determine whether a violation was committed, if it is determined that no
violation was committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be entered.
If it is determined that a violation was committed, an order may be issued
upholding the citation. The Board may impose a fine up to the maximum
authorized by ordinance, or require the offender to remedy a continuing
violation to avoid a fine, or both.



   (F)   (1)   Every final order following a hearing shall be
reduced to writing, which shall include the findings and conclusions reached
and the date the order was issued. A copy shall be furnished to the person
named in the citation.



      (2)   If the person named in the citation is not present when
the final order is issued, the order shall be delivered to the person by
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving a copy of the order at the person's usual place of
residence with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of
age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.068  PRESENTATION OF CASES.



   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board may be presented by an
Attorney selected by the city, a code enforcement officer for the city, or by
a member of the city's administrative staff. The City Attorney may either be
counsel to the Code Enforcement Board or may present cases before the Code
Enforcement Board, but shall in no case serve in both capacities.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.069  APPEALS; FINAL JUDGMENT.



   (A)   An appeal from a final order of a Code Enforcement Board
following a hearing conducted pursuant to § 34.067(E) of this subchapter may
be made to the Kenton County District Court within thirty (30) days of the
date the order is issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a
complaint and a copy of the final order in the same manner as any civil
action under the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.



   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board
is filed within the time period set in division (A) of this section, the Code
Enforcement Board's order shall be deemed final for all purposes.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.070  ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.



   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by the Kenton County Joint
Code Enforcement Board shall be subject to the schedule of civil fines as set
forth by separate ordinance.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.071   LIEN; FINES, CHARGES, AND FEES.



   (A)   The City of Crestview Hills delegates the Kenton County Joint
Code Enforcement Board to prepare and record liens on its behalf.



   (B)   The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person
found by a non-appealable final order as defined by § 34.060(D) of this
subchapter, or by a final judgment of the court, to have committed a
violation of a city ordinance. The lien shall be for all civil fines assessed
for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the city in
connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs.
An affidavit of the code enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the amount of the lien and regularity of the proceedings pursuant
to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.



   (C)   The lien shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk.
The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and
shall bear interest until paid. The lien shall continue for ten (10) years
following the date of the non-appealable final order or final court judgment.



   (D)   Subject to § 34.073 of this chapter, the lien shall take
precedence over all other liens, except state, county, school board, and city
taxes, and may be enforced by judicial proceedings, including a foreclosure
action.



   (E)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) of this
section, the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of all civil fines assessed for the violation and
for all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in connection
with the enforcement of the ordinance. The city may bring a civil action
against the person and shall have the same remedies as provided for the
recovery of a debt.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.072   LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.



   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall establish and
maintain a lienholder notification system on behalf of the City of Crestview
Hills. The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall obtain and
maintain priority over previously filed liens, as provided in § 34.071 of
this subchapter, in accordance with the following provisions:



   (A)   Individuals and entities, including but not limited to
lienholders, may register with the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board
to receive electronic notification of final orders entered pursuant to this
subchapter.



   (B)   In order to receive the notification, the registration shall
submit the following information to the code enforcement staff:



      (2)   Mailing address;



      (3)   Phone number; and



      (4)   Electronic mailing address.



   (C)   A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board's website to submit the
information required by division (B) of this section. It shall be the
responsibility of the registrant to maintain and update the required contact
information with the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board. The Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall inform a registrant of any evidence
received that the electronic mailing address is invalid or not functional so
that the registrant may provide and updated electronic mailing address.



   (D)   Once per week the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board
shall send electronic mail notification of all final orders entered pursuant
to this chapter since the last date of notification to each party registered
pursuant to this section. The notification shall provide an electronic link
to the Kenton County joint code enforcement database located on the Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board website. The database shall include the
following information regarding each final order:



      (1)   The name of the person charged with a violation;



      (2)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;



      (3)   The last known mailing address for the owner of the
premises where the violation occurred if, in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, it is ascertainable;



      (4)   A copy of the full citation;



      (5)   A copy of the full final order; and



      (6)   The status of the final order regarding its ability to
be appealed pursuant to this ordinance.



   (E)   If an appeal is filed on a final order pursuant to this
subchapter, the Kenton County Joint Enforcement Board shall send electronic
mail notification to all registrants.



   (F)   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall update
its code enforcement database to reflect the issued final order, and shall
post this notification required by division (D) of this section containing an
updated link to the code enforcement database in a conspicuous space on the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement website, at the same time that it
provides the electronic notification.



   (G)   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall maintain
the records created under this section for ten (10) years following their
issuance.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.073  LIENS.



   (A)   A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to §
34.072(B) of this subchapter may, within forty-five (45) days from the date
of issuance of notification under § 34.072(D) of this subchapter:



      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already been
abated; or



      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of the
subchapter, including abatement costs.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action if necessary under § 34.074 of this subchapter.



   (C)   The lien provided by § 34.071 of this subchapter shall not
take precedence over previously recorded liens if:



      (1)   The city failed to comply with the requirements of §
34.072 of this ordinance for notification of the final order; or



      (2)   A prior lienholder complied with division (A) of this
section.



   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded
liens under division (C) of this section shall, if the final order remains
partially unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent
liens except liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.



   (E)   The city may record a lien before the forty-five (45) day
period established in division (A) of this section expires. If the lien is
fully satisfied prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period,
the city shall release the lien in the County Clerk's Office where the lien
is recorded within fifteen (15) days of satisfaction.



   (F)   Failure of the city to comply with § 34.072 and this section
of this subchapter, or failure of a lien to take precedence over previously
filed liens as provided in division (C) of this section, shall not limit or
restrict any other remedies the city has against the property of the violator.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.074   IMMEDIATE ACTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason
to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of
the violation will be irreparable or irreversible.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



§ 34.075   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to conform to all provisions of KRS
65.8801 through 65.8839, commonly known as the “Local Government Code
Enforcement Boards Act” and any subsequent amendments thereto.



(Ord. 2017-08-01, passed 9-14-17)



CHAPTER 35:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Title



   35.02   Findings



   35.03   Definitions



Standards of Conduct



   35.20   Conflicts of interest in general



   35.21   Receipt of gifts



   35.22   Use of city property, equipment and personnel



   35.23   Representation of interests before city government



   35.24   Misuse of confidential information



Financial Disclosure



   35.35   Who must file



   35.36   When to file statements; amended statements



   35.37   Form of the statement of financial interests



   35.38   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial
interests



   35.39   Contents of the financial interests statement



   35.40   Noncompliance with filing requirement



Nepotism



   35.50   Nepotism prohibited.



Enforcement



   35.60   Board of Ethics created



   35.61   Facilities and staff



   35.62   Power and duties of the Board of Ethics



   35.63   Filing and investigation of complaints



   35.64   Notice of hearings



   35.65   Hearing procedure



   35.66   Appeals



   35.67   Limitation of actions



   35.68   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited
35.99 Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Crestview
Hills Code of Ethics".



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.02  FINDINGS.



   The City Council finds and declares that KRS 65.003 requires the City
Council of each city in Kentucky to adopt a code of ethics prior to January
1, 1995, and this chapter is in conformity with that legislative mandate.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BOARD OF ETHICS."  The City of Crestview Hills Board of Ethics which
is created and vested by this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing
the requirements of the city's code of ethics.



   "BUSINESS."  Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional
service corporation, or any legal entity through which business is conducted
for profit.



   "CANDIDATE."  Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a
city office.  An individual is a candidate when the individual files a
notification and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk
or Secretary of State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or
files a declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the county
clerk or secretary of state.



   "CITY."  Refers to the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



   "CITY AGENCY."  Any board, commission, authority, nonstock
corporation, or other entity created, either individually or jointly, by this
city.



   "EMPLOYEE."  Any paid person, whether full-time or part-time, who is
employed by the city.  The term "EMPLOYEE" shall not include any contractor
or subcontractor or any of their employees.



   "FAMILY MEMBER."  A spouse, or child.



   "IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER."  A spouse, or an unemancipated child
residing in the officer's or employee's household.



   "OFFICER."  Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether
paid or unpaid, who is one of the following:



      (1)   The Mayor.



      (2)   A City Council member.



      (3)   The City Clerk.



      (4)   The City Administrator.



      (5)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who
has been appointed to the governing body of an agency by the city.



      (6)   City Treasurer.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



STANDARDS OF CONDUCT



§ 35.20  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.



   Every officer and employee of the city and every city agency shall
comply with the following standards of conduct.



   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any
officer or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any
business, transaction, or activity, which is in substantial conflict with the
proper discharge of the officer's or employee's public duties.



   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to
use his or her official position with the city to secure unwarranted
privileges or advantages for himself or herself or others.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or refrain
from taking any discretionary action, or agree to take or refrain from taking
any discretionary action, or induce or attempt to induce any other officer or
employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary action, on any
matter before the city in order to obtain a financial benefit for any of the
following:



      (1)   The officer or employee.



      (2)   A family member.



      (3)   An outside employer.



      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or any
family member has a substantial financial interest.



      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any
family member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other
business or professional relationship.



   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any
provision in this section if, by reason of the officer's or employee's
participation, vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit
accrues to the officer or employee, a family member, an outside employer, or
a business as defined in division (C) (4) and (C) (5) of this section, as a
member of any business, occupation, profession, or other group, to any
greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of the business, occupation, profession, or other group.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)     Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.21  RECEIPT OF GIFTS.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
directly, or indirectly through any other person or business, solicit any
gift whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment,
hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under circumstances in
which it could reasonably be inferred that the solicitation was intended to
influence, or could reasonably be expected to influence the officer or
employee in the performance of his or her public duties.



   (B)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
directly, or indirectly through any other person or business, accept any gift
having a fair market value of more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250),
whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment,
hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under circumstances in
which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to
influence, or could reasonably be expected to influence the officer or
employee in the performance of his or her public duties.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)   Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.22  USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use
of any city time, funds, personnel, equipment, or other personal or real
property for the private use of any person, unless the use is specifically
authorized by a stated city policy.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)  Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.23  REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
represent any person or business, other than the city, in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before the city or any
city agency.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from
representing another employee or employees where the representation is within
the context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee
from representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own
interests.



   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from
making any inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no
compensation, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or
accepted by the officer, whether directly or indirectly, in return for the
inquiry.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)  Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.24  MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the course of his or
her official duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to
further his or her personal financial interest or that of another person or
business.  Information shall be deemed confidential if it is not subject to
disclosure pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.872 to 61.884,
at the time of its use or disclosure.



   (B)   No elected official shall accept or be eligible to accept an
appointed administrative position or job with the city until the expiration
of two (2) years from his last date of service as an elected official.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)     Penalty, see § 35.99



FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE



§ 35.35  WHO MUST FILE.



   The following classes of officers the city shall file an annual
statement of financial interests with the Board of Ethics:



   (A)   Elected city officials.



   (B)   Candidates for elected city office.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.36  WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.



   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this
section shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics,
no later than 4:00 p.m. April 15, 1995.  All subsequent statements of
financial interest shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m. on April 15 each
year, provided that:



      (1)   An officer or employee newly-appointed to fill an office
or position of employment with the city or a city agency shall file his or
her initial statement no later than 60 days after the date of the appointment.



      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his or her
initial statement no later than 30 days after the date on which the person
becomes a candidate for elected city office.



   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time
for filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.



   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information
contained in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board, the
officer or employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of the
material change, file an amended statement with the Board.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.37  FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official designated
by the Board of Ethics.  The Board, or the designated administrative
official, shall deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee
required to file the statement, by first class mail or hand delivery, no
later than January 30 of each year.  The failure of the Board, or the
designated administrative official, to deliver a copy of the form to any
officer or employee shall not relieve the officer or employee of the
obligation to file the statement.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.38  CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the "official custodian" of the
statements of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance
of the statements of financial interests.  The statements of financial
interests shall be maintained by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics as the custodian, as public
documents, available for public inspection immediately upon filing.



   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the
Board, or the designated administrative official, for a period of five (5)
years after filing, provided that:



      (1)   Upon the expiration of three (3) years after a person
ceases to be an officer or employee of the city or a city agency, the Board
shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies
of those statements filed by the person.



      (2)   Upon the expiration of three (3) years after any
election at which a candidate for elected city office was not elected or
nominated, the Board shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial
interests or copies of those statements filed by the person.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.39  CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.



   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the
following information for the preceding calendar year:



      (1)   The name and home address of the filer.



      (2)   The title of the filer's office, or office sought.



      (3)   The occupation of the filer.



      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the
exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000) during the preceding calendar year,
and the nature of the income (e.g., salary, commission, dividends, retirement
fund distribution, and the like).



      (5)   The name and address of any business that has engaged in
any business transactions with the city during the past three (3) years, or
which is anticipated to engage in any business transactions with the city, in
which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had at any time
during the preceding calendar year an interest of ten thousand dollars
($10,000) at fair market value or five percent (5%) ownership interest or
more.



      (6)   A designation as commercial, residential, or rural, and
the location of all real property within the city, other than the filer's
primary residence, in which the filer or spouse had during the preceding
calendar year an interest of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
officer or employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of
individual clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.40  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative
official, shall notify by certified mail each person required to file a
statement of financial interests who fails to file the statement by the due
date, files an incomplete statement, or files a statement in a form other
than that prescribed by the Board.  The notice shall specify the type of
failure or delinquency, shall establish a date by which the failure or
delinquency shall be remedied, and shall advise the person of the penalties
for a violation.



   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who
fails or refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the
notice under division (A) within the time period established in the notice
shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine
imposed by the Board in an amount not to exceed five dollars ($5) per day, up
to a maximum total civil fine of fifty dollars ($50).  Any civil fine
imposed by the Board under this section may be recovered by the city in a
civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay
the penalty within a prescribed period of time.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



NEPOTISM



§ 35.50  NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
advocate, recommend or cause the:



      (1)   Employment;



      (2)   Appointment;



      (3)   Promotion;



      (4)   Transfer; or



      (5)   Advancement



of a family member to an office or position of employment with the city or a
city agency.



   (B)   No officer or employee of the city shall directly supervise or
manage the work of a family member.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action
relating to the employment or discipline of a family member, except that this
prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed official from voting on
or participating in the development of a budget which includes compensation
for a family member, provided that the family member is included only as a
member of a class of persons or a group, and the family member benefits to no
greater extent than any other similarly situated member of the class or group.



   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any
relationship or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which
existed prior to January 1, 1995.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 35.60  BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of three (3) members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City
Council.  The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed
within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter.  No member of
the Board of Ethics shall hold any elected or appointed office, whether paid
or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city or any city agency. 
The members shall serve for a term of three (3) years, except that with
respect to the members initially appointed, one (1) member shall be appointed
for a term of (1) one year, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of
two (2) years, and one (1)  member shall be appointed for a term of three
(3)  years.  Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of three (3)
years.  Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a resident of the
city for at least one year prior to the date of the appointment and shall
reside in the city throughout the term in office.  The members of the Board
of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation
for integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs.  The members
may be re-appointed for any number of consecutive terms.



   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council for misconduct, inability, willful
neglect of duties, or no reason.  Before any member of the Board of Ethics
is removed from office under this section, the member shall be afforded the
opportunity for a hearing before the Mayor and the City Council.



   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60
days by the Mayor, suited to the approval of the Council.  If a vacancy is
not filled by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining members
of the Board of Ethics shall fill the vacancy.  All vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall be compensated at the
rate of $100 annually, and at the rate of $25 per meeting after four meetings
in any fiscal year.  Members shall be reimbursed for all necessary and
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties subject to
approval by the legislative body first obtained.



   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter as the first order of business in the first
meeting of each calendar year, elect a chairperson from among the
membership.  The chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full
voting member of the Board.  The vice-chairperson shall preside in the
absence of the chairperson.



   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary,
upon the call of the chairperson or at the written request of a majority of
the members.



   (H)   The presence of two or more members shall constitute a quorum
and the affirmative vote of two or more members shall be necessary for any
official action to be taken.  Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a
conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board
shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or
herself from voting on the matter, and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.



   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of
Ethics and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be
recorded in the minutes.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§  35.61  FACILITIES AND STAFF.



   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the City Council in the
annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics, either directly or
by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials, supplies, and staff
needed for the conduct of its business.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.62  POWER AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.



   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate
complaints, hold hearings, and make findings of fad and determinations with
regard to alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and
hearings requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and
answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order
testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual designated by the
Board who has the power to administer oaths.



   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary
evidence relating to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board.



   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter
to the executive authority of the city or to the city legislative body, the
governing body of any city agency, the county attorney, or other appropriate
person or body, as necessary.



   (E)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all
officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to its
terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this
chapter.



   (F)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests
that are required to be filed by this chapter and to insure that the
statements are available for public inspection in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Kentucky Open Records Act.



   (G)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority of City Council.



   (H)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
rules, regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter or any state or federal law.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.63  FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics.  All complaints shall be in
writing, signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other requirements
established by the Board of Ethics.  The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge
receipt of a complaint to the complainant within ten working days from the
date of receipt.  The Board shall forward within ten (10) working days to
each officer or employee of the city or city agency who is the subject of the
complaint a copy of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a proper complaint,
the Board of Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the
allegations contained in the complaint.  The Board shall afford a person who
is the subject of the complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations
in the complaint.  The person shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, to appear and be heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response
to the allegations.



   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry
being conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board, except:



      (1)   The Board may turn over to the Commonwealth's attorney
or county attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings.



      (2)   If the alleged violator publicly discloses the existence
of a preliminary inquiry, the Board may publicly confirm the existence of the
inquiry.



   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary
inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether
it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this
chapter.  If the Board concludes that the complaint is outside of its
jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Board shall immediately
terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy
of its decision to the complainant and to all officers or employees against
whom the complaint was filed.



   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary
inquiry, that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains
allegations sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a
violation, the Board shall notify the officer or employee who is subject of
the complaint and may:



      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances such as, lack of
significant economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee, lack of
economic loss to the city and its taxpayers, or lack of significant impact on
public confidence in city government issue, in writing, a confidential
reprimand to the officer or employee concerning the alleged violation and
provide a copy of the confidential reprimand to the executive authority and
governing body of the city or city agency.



      (2)   Proceed with a formal hearing.



   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer
or employee of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)     Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.64  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.



   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order
setting the matter for hearing within thirty (30) days of the date the order
is issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the Board consents
to a later date.  The order setting the matter for hearing, along with a
copy of any pertinent regulations of the Board relating to the hearing shall
be sent to the alleged violator within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the
order setting a hearing is issued.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.65  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this
section and in accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted
by the Board so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights
required by the nature of the proceedings.



   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged
violator, or his or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity
to examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board in
connection with the matter to be heard.



   (C)   All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer.  All parties shall have the right to
call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine
witnesses, to submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel.  All
witnesses shall have the right to be represented by counsel.



   (D)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless
the members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.



   (E)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics
shall, as soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for
the purpose of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination
whether a violation of this chapter has been proved.  Within thirty (30)
days after the completion of the hearing, the Board shall issue a written
report of its findings and conclusions, and serve the same upon the parties
and other necessary entities.



   (F)   If the Board concludes in its reports that in consideration of
the evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of a
violation of this chapter, the Board may:



      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and
desist the violation.



      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the
violations and provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and
governing body of the city or city agency with which the violator serves.



      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority that
the violator, being an appointed officer or employee, be sanctioned as
recommended by the Board, which may include a recommendation for discipline
or dismissal, or removal from office.  In writing, recommend to the
legislative body that the violator, being an elected official, be sanctioned
as recommended by the Board, which may include a recommendation for
discipline or dismissal, or removal from office.



      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000.



      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or
state laws to the county attorney or commonwealth's attorney of the
jurisdiction for prosecution.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.66  APPEALS.



   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court of
the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board.  The Board
shall transmit to the clerk of the court all evidence considered by the Board
at the public hearing.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.67  LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.



   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state
law, an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within 180
days after the violation is discovered.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.68  REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or city agency shall
subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any
official authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to
discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate
against any person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges, or
otherwise brings to the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency
or official of the city or Commonwealth any facts or information relative to
an actual or suspected violation of this chapter.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed as:



      (1)   Prohibiting disciplinary or punitive action if an
officer or employee of the city or any city agency discloses information
which he or she knows:



         (a)   To be false or which he or she discloses with
reckless disregard for its truth or falsity.



         (b)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the
provisions of the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.



         (c)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found
by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine
imposed by the Board of Ethics not to exceed $1,000, which may be recovered
by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails to
pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.



   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is
found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter
shall forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the economic
benefit or gain which the officer or employee is determined by the Board to
have realized as a result of the violation.  The amount of any forfeiture
may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, if the
offender fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed period
of time.



   (C)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer or employee of
the city or any city agency is guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion, or other disciplinary
action by the executive authority of the city or city agency, or by any other
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline.  Any action to
remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of this chapter
shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations
of the city and all applicable laws of the Commonwealth.



(Ord. 1994-12-1, passed 12-8-94)



CHAPTER 36:  PUBLIC RECORDS



Section



General



   36.01   Definitions



Procedures for Requesting Public Records



   36.05   Initial request with immediate inspection



   36.06   Referral to proper custodian



   36.07   Public records not immediately available



   36.08   Refusal of unreasonable requests



   36.09   Time limitation; denial of inspection



   36.10   Concealing or destroying records prohibited



   36.11   Access to records relating to particular individual



   36.12   Public records protected from disclosure



GENERAL



§ 36.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   “BOOKING PHOTOGRAPH AND PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD OF INMATE.” A
photograph or image of an individual generated by law enforcement for
identification purposes when the individual is booked into a detention
facility as defined in KRS 520.010 or photograph and image of an inmate taken
pursuant to KRS 196.099.



   "CITY."  The city government of this city.



   "COMMERCIAL PURPOSE."  The direct or indirect use of any public record
or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease of a
service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary, or fee.  "COMMERCIAL PURPOSE" shall not include
publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or periodical;
use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news or other
informational programs; or use of a public record in the preparation for
prosecution or defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to
such action, or the attorneys representing the parties.



   "CUSTODIAN."  The official custodian or any authorized person having
personal custody and control of public records.  The "CUSTODIAN" having
personal custody of most of the public records of this city is the City
Clerk/Treasurer.



   "OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN."  The chief administrative officer or any other
officer or employee of a public agency who is responsible for the
maintenance, care, and keeping of public records, regardless of whether the
records are in his actual personal custody and control.  The "OFFICIAL
CUSTODIAN" of this city shall be the Mayor.



   "MECHANICAL PROCESSING."  Any operation or other procedure which is
transacted on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a
copier, computer, recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.



   "MEDIA."  The physical material in or on which records may be stored
or represented, and which may include, but is not limited to paper,
microform, disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.



   "PERSON."  A human being who makes a request for inspection of public
records.



   "PUBLIC AGENCY."  Every city government board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city government agency, including the policy-making board
of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local officer, or any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a
hospital medical staff or a committee formed for the purpose of evaluating
the qualifications of public agency employees, established, created, or
controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an interagency
body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public agency" is defined
in this section.



(KRS 61.870)



   "PUBLIC RECORDS."  All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes,
discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other documentation regardless of
physical form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the
possession of, or retained by a public agency.  "PUBLIC RECORDS" shall not
include any records owned or maintained by or for a body referred to in
subsection (1) (h) of KRS 61.870 that are not related to functions,
activities, programs, or operations funded by state or local authority nor
any records that may be excluded by § 36.12.



   "REASONABLE FEE" or "FEE."  The fair payment required by a public
agency for making copies of non exempt public records requested for
noncommercial purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of
reproduction, including the costs of the media and any mechanical processing
cost incurred by the public agency, but not including the cost of staff.  If
a public agency is asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or
to tailor the format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the
public agency may at its discretion provide the requested format and recover
staff costs as well as any actual costs incurred.



   "REQUEST."  An oral or written application by any person to inspect
public records of the city.



   "SOFTWARE."  The program code which makes a computer system function,
but does not include that portion of the program code which contains public
records exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific
addresses of files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any
other mechanism for controlling the security or restricting access to public
records in the public agency's computer system.  "SOFTWARE" consists of the
operating system, application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines
such as translators and utility programs, but does not include that material
which is prohibited from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between
a public agency and an outside entity which supplied the material to the
agency.



(KRS 61.870)



PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS



§ 36.05  INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.



   (A)   As defined in § 36.01, and subject to the limitations set
forth in § 36.12, any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records
of the city shall make a request or complete a written application for such
records at the office of the City Clerk during regular office hours, except
during legal holidays.  The application shall be hand delivered, mailed, or
sent via facsimile to the City Clerk's office.



(KRS 61.872 (2))



   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person's request is in
compliance with the open records law and the requested records are
immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection.  Suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of
the City Clerk for the inspection.  No person shall remove original copies
of public records from the offices of any public agency without the written
permission of the official custodian of the record.



(KRS 61.872(1)).



   (C)   An applicant may inspect public records during the regular
business hours of the city, or by receiving copies of the public records from
the city through the mail if the applicant's residence or principal place of
business is outside of the county in which the city is located and he has
precisely described public records which are available within the city. If
the person requesting the public records requests that the records be mailed,
the official custodian shall mail the copies upon receipt of all fees and the
cost of mailing.  KRS 61.872(3).



   (D)   The applicant shall have the right to make abstracts of the
public records and to obtain copies of all public records not exempted by
this chapter.  When copies are requested, the custodian may require a
written request and advance payment of the prescribed fee as defined in §
36.01. 



(KRS 61.874(1))



   (E)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public
records used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy
format where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. 
Agencies are not required to convert hard copy format records to electronic
formats.



   (F)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as
not less than 8½ inches x 11 inches in at least one (1) color on white
paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format.  If the public agency
maintains electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and this
format conforms to the requestor's requirements, the public records may be
provided in this alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified
by the public agency.  Any request for a public record in a form other than
the forms described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized
request.



(KRS 61.874(2)(b))



   (G)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.  The public
agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are requested for a
commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the requestor
stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may require
the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency.  The contract shall
permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.  The fee may be based on the cost to the public agency of
media, mechanical processing and staff required to produce a copy of the
public record or records or the cost to the public agency of the creation
purchase, or the acquisition of the public records.



(KRS 61.874 (4))



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part
of a public record for a:



      (1)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial
purpose, if a certified statement from the requestor was required by the
public agency pursuant to subsection (G) of this section: or



      (2)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly
allows the use of the public record for a different commercial purpose; or



      (3)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly
allows the use of the public record for a commercial purpose.  A newspaper,
periodical, radio or television station shall not be held to have used or
knowingly allowed the use of the public record for a commercial purpose
merely because of its publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its
express permission for that commercial use.



(KRS 61.874 (5))



   (I)   Online access to public records in electronic form, as
provided under this section, may be provided and made available at the
discretion of the public agency.  If a party wishes to access public records
by electronic means and the public agency agrees to provide online access, a
public agency may require that the party enter into a contract, license, or
other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for these agreements. 
Fees shall not exceed:



      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and
reasonable cost of computer time access charges;



      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a
reasonable fee based on the factors set forth in subsection (G).



(KRS 61.874(6))



§ 36.06  REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.



   If the City Clerk does not have custody or control of the public record
or records requested, the City Clerk shall so notify the applicant and shall
furnish the name and location of the custodian of the public record.



(KRS 61.872(4))



§ 36.07  PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.



   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately so notify the applicant
and shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection of the public
records, not to exceed three (3) days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed
explanation of the cause is given for further delay and the place, time, and
earliest date on which the public record will be available for inspection or
duplication.



(KRS 61.872(5))



§ 36.08  REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.



   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies of public records.  However, refusal under this section must be
sustained by clear and convincing evidence.



(KRS 61.872(6))



§ 36.09  TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.



   (A)   The official custodian, upon any request for records made
under this chapter, shall determine within three (3) days, excepting
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after the receipt of any request
whether to comply with the request and shall notify in writing the person
making the request within the three-day period of its decision.  Any agency
response denying, in whole or in part, inspection of any record shall include
a statement of the specific exception authorizing the withholding of the
record and a brief explanation of how the exception applies to the record
withheld.  The response shall be issued by the official custodian or under
the official custodian's authority and shall constitute final agency action.



(KRS 61.880)



   (B)   If the requesting party wants the Attorney General to review
the denial of a request for inspection of a public record, he shall proceed
under the provisions of KRS 61.880 and 61.882.  Upon the Attorney General's
request, the agency will provide additional documentation.



   (C)   If upon request by the person seeking inspection, the Attorney
General reviews the denial and issues a written opinion upholding, in whole
or in part, the request for inspection, the requesting party may institute
appeal proceedings within thirty (30) days for injunctive or declaratory
relief in the circuit court.  In addition, if the Attorney General disallows
the request, or if the city continues to withhold the record notwithstanding
the Attorney General's opinion, and the person seeking disclosure institutes
proceedings in circuit court, the city shall notify the Attorney General of
such action.



(KRS 61.880, 61.882)



§ 36.10  CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.



   No official or employee of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy
any record with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these
rules and regulations.



§ 36.11  ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.



   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or in
which he is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(KRS 61.884)



§ 36.12  PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application
of this chapter and these rules and regulations, and shall be subject to
inspection only upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except that
no court shall authorize the inspection by any party of any materials
pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is provided by the Rules of
Civil Procedure governing pretrial discovery:



      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal
nature where the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.



      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and
compiled and maintained for scientific research.  This exemption shall not,
however, apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is directed
by other statute.



      (3)   (a)   Upon and after July 15, 1992, records
confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which
if opened would permit an unfair commercial advantage to competitors of the
entity that disclosed the records.



         (b)   Upon and after July 15, 1992, records
confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which
are compiled and maintained (i) in conjunction with an application or the
administration of a loan or grant; (ii) in conjunction with an application
for or the administration of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax
credits as described in KRS Chapter 154;  (iii) in conjunction with the
regulation of commercial enterprise, including mineral exploration records,
unpatented, secret commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulae, or
processes, which are used for the making, preparing, compounding, treating,
or processing of articles or materials which are trade commodities obtained
from a person; or (iv) for the grant or review of a license to do business. 
These exemptions shall not, however, apply to records the disclosure or
publication of which is directed by other statutes.



      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a
business or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the
business' or industry's interest in locating in, relocating within, or
expanding within the Commonwealth.  This exemption shall not include those
records pertaining to applications to agencies for permits or licenses
necessary to do business or to expand business operations within the state,
except as provided in division (A) (3) above.



      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in
conjunction with the regulation or supervision of financial institutions,
including but not limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and
credit unions, which disclose the agency's internal examining or audit
criteria and related analytical methods.



      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to the acquisition of property, until such time as all of the



property has been acquired.  The law of eminent domain shall not be affected
by this provision.



      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data
used to administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or
academic examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again.



      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved
in administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting
and investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the disclosure of
the information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants
not otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication.  Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action.  The exemptions provided by this
subdivision shall not be used by the custodian of the records to delay or
impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.



      (9)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would
have a reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating or responding to
a terrorist act and limited to:



            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence
assessments;



            2.   Vulnerability assessments;



            3.   Antiterrorism measures and plans;



            4.   Security and response needs assessments;



            5.   Infrastructure records that expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division through the disclosure of the
location, configuration, or security of critical systems, including public
utility critical systems.  These critical systems shall include but not be
limited to information technology, communication, electrical, fire
suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater, sewage and gas systems;



            6.   The following records when their disclosure
will expose a vulnerability referred to in this division: detailed drawings,
schematics, maps or specifications of structural elements, floor plans, and
operating utility or security systems of any building or facility owned,
occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency; and



            7.   Records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division and that describe the exact
physical location of hazardous chemical, radiological or biological materials.



         (b)   As used in this division, "TERRORIST ACT" means a
criminal act intended to:



            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all
or part of the civilian population;



            2.   Disrupt a system identified in this division;
or



            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or
facility owned, occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency.



         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a
request to inspect a public record for a reason identified with this
division, that public agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of
the request to the Executive Director of the Kentucky Office of Homeland
Security and the Attorney General;



         (d)   Nothing in this division shall affect the
obligations of a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of
public records under state environmental, health and safety programs;



         (e)   The exemption established in this division shall
not apply when a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seems to inspect a
public record identified in this division under the Open Records Law.



      (10)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with
private individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give
notice of final action of a public agency.



      (11)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda
in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended.



      (12)   All public records or information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by federal law or regulation.



      (13)   Public records or information the disclosure of which
is prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of
the General Assembly.



      (14)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chs. 45A or
56. This exemption shall not apply after:



         (a)   A contract is awarded; or



         (b)   The procurement process is canceled without award
of a contract and there is a determination that the contract will not be
resolicited; and



      (15)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to
any governmental function.



   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person. In addition, if any public record contains material
which is not excepted under this section, the city shall separate the
excepted and make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject
to the possible applicability of § 36.08.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or
limit the exchange of public records or the sharing of information between
public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need
or is necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.



   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny,
abridge, or impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for
employment, or an eligible person on an employment register to inspect and
copy any record, including preliminary and other supporting documentation,
that relates to that person.  Such records shall include, but not be limited
to work  plans, job performance, demotions, evaluations, promotions,
compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers, layoffs, disciplinary
actions, examination scores, and preliminary and other supporting
documentation.  A municipal employee, applicant, or eligible person on an
employment register shall not have the right to inspect or copy any
examination or any documents relating to ongoing criminal or administrative
investigations by an agency.



(KRS 61.878)



CHAPTER 37:  PUBLIC MEETINGS



Section



General



   37.01   Definitions



Public Meeting Requirements



   37.05   Meetings open to the public



   37.06   Requirements for closed sessions



   37.07   Public meeting schedules



   37.08   Special meetings



   37.09   Video teleconferences



   37.10   Enforcement



GENERAL



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   "ACTION TAKEN."  A collective decision, a commitment or promise to
make a positive or negative decision, or an actual vote by a majority of the
members of the governmental body.



(KRS 61.805(3))



   "MEETING."  All gatherings of every kind, including video
teleconferences, regardless of where the meeting is held, and whether regular
or special and informational or casual gatherings held in anticipation of or
in conjunction with a regular or special meeting.



(KRS 61.805(1))



   "MEMBER."  A member of the governing body of a public agency. 
"Member" does not include employees or licensees of the agency.



(KRS 61.805(4))



   "PUBLIC AGENCY."  Every city government board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city government agency, including the policy-making board
of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local officer, or any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a
hospital medical staff or a committee formed for the purpose of evaluating
the qualifications of public agency employees, established, created, or
controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an interagency
body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public agency" is defined
in this section.



(KRS 61.805(2))



   "VIDEO TELECONFERENCE."  One (1) meeting, occurring in two (2) or more
locations, where individuals can see and hear each other by means of video
and audio equipment. 



(KRS 61.805(5))



PUBLIC MEETING REQUIREMENTS



§ 37.05  MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.



   (A)   All meetings of a quorum of the members of any public agency
at which any public business is discussed or at which any action is taken by
the agency, shall be public meetings, open to the public at all times, except
for the following:



      (1)   Deliberations on the future acquisition or sale of real
property by a public agency, but only when publicity would be likely to
affect the value of a specific piece of property to be acquired for public
use or sold by a public agency;



      (2)   Discussions of proposed or pending litigation against or
on behalf of the public agency;



      (3)   Collective bargaining negotiations between public
employers and their employees or their representatives;



      (4)   Discussions or hearings which might lead to the
appointment, discipline, or dismissal of an individual employee, member, or
student without restricting that employee's, member's or student's right to a
public hearing if requested.  This exception shall not be interpreted to
permit discussion of general personnel matters in secret;



      (5)   Discussions between a public agency and a representative
of a business entity and discussions concerning a specific proposal, if open
discussions would jeopardize the siting, retention, expansion, or upgrading
of the business;



      (6)   Local cabinet meetings and executive cabinet meetings;



      (7)   Deliberations of quasi-judicial bodies regarding
individual adjudications or appointments, at which neither the person
involved, his representatives, nor any other individual not a member of the
agency's governing body or staff is present, but not including any meetings
of planning commissions, zoning commissions, or boards of adjustment;



      (8)   That portion of a meeting devoted to a discussion of a
specific public record exempted from disclosure under KRS 61.810(1)(i).
However, that portion of any public agency meeting shall not be disclosed to
a member of the Kentucky General Assembly;



      (9)   Meetings which federal or state law specifically require
to be conducted in privacy;



      (10)   Meetings which the Constitution provides shall be held
in secret; and



      (11)   Meetings of any selection committee, evaluation
committee, or other similar group established under KRS Chapter 45A or 56 to
select a successful bidder for award of a state contract.



   (B)   Any series of less than quorum meetings, where the members
attending one or more of the meetings collectively constitute at least a
quorum of the members of the public agency and where the meetings are held
for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section, shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
discussion between individual members where the purpose of the discussions is
to educate the members on specific issues.



(KRS 61.810)



§ 37.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR CLOSED SESSIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements shall be met as a condition for
conducting closed sessions by those public agencies authorized by § 37.05(A)
(1) and (4) except as (4) relates to students:



      (1)   Notice shall be given in regular open meetings of the
general nature of the business to be discussed in closed session, the reason
for the closed session, and the specific provision of § 37.05 authorizing
the closed session;



      (2)   Closed sessions may be held only after a motion is made
and carried by a majority vote in open, public session;



      (3)   No final action may be taken in closed session; and



      (4)   No matters may be discussed at a closed session other
than those publicly announced prior to convening the closed session.



   (B)   Public agencies and activities identified in § 37.05(A)
paragraphs (2), (3), (4), but only so far as (4) relates to students, (5),
(6), (7), (8), and (9) are excluded from the requirements of subsection (A)
of this section.



(KRS 61.815)



§ 37.07  PUBLIC MEETING SCHEDULES.



   (A)   All meetings of a public agency shall be held at specified
times and places which are convenient to the public. In considering locations
for public meetings, the agency shall evaluate space requirements, seating
capacity, and acoustics.



   (B)   All public agencies shall provide for a schedule of regular
meetings by ordinance, order, resolution, by laws or by whatever other means
may be required for the conduct of business of the public agency.  The
schedule of regular meetings shall be made available to the public.



(KRS 61.820)



§ 37.08  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Except as provided by subsection (F) of this section, special
meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of divisions (B),
(C) and (D) of this section:



   (B)   The presiding officer or a majority of the members of the
public agency may call a special meeting;



   (C)   The public agency shall provide written notice of the special
meeting containing the date, time, place of the special meeting and the
agenda. Discussions and action at the meeting shall be limited to items
listed on the agenda in the notice.



   (D)   (1)   As soon as possible, written notice shall be
delivered personally, transmitted by facsimile, or mailed to every member of
the public agency as well as each media organization which has filed a
written request, including a mailing address, to receive notice of special
meetings.  The notice shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours
before the special meeting.  The public agency may periodically, but no more
often than once in a calendar year, inform media organizations that they will
have to submit a new written request or no longer receive written notice of
special meetings until a new written request is filed.



      (2)   A public agency may satisfy the requirements of division
(1) of this section by transmitting the written notice by electronic mail to
public agency members and media organizations that have filed a written
request with the public agency indicating their preference to receive
electronic mail notification in lieu of notice by personal delivery,
facsimile machine, or mail.  The written request shall include the
electronic mail address or addresses of the agency member or media
organization.



   (E)   As soon as possible, written notice shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place in the building where the special meeting will take place
and in a conspicuous place in the building which houses the headquarters of
the agency.  The notice shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours
before the special meeting.



   (F)   In the case of an emergency which prevents compliance with the
notice requirements in this section, this subsection shall govern a public
agency's conduct of a special meeting.  The special meeting shall be called
pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.  The public agency shall make a
reasonable effort, under emergency circumstances, to notify the members of
the agency, media organizations which have filed a written request pursuant
to this section, and the public of the emergency meeting.  At the beginning
of the emergency meeting, the person chairing the meeting shall briefly
describe for the record the emergency circumstances preventing compliance
with the notice requirements of this section.  These comments shall appear
in the minutes.  Discussion and action at the emergency meeting shall be
limited to the emergency for which the meeting is called.



(KRS 61.823)



§  37.09  VIDEO TELECONFERENCES.



   (A)   A public agency may conduct any meeting through video
teleconference.



   (B)   Notice of a video teleconference shall comply with the
requirements of KRS 61.820 or 61.823 as appropriate, in addition the notice
of a video teleconference shall:



      (1)   Clearly state that the meeting will be a video
teleconference; and



      (2)   Precisely identify a primary location of the video
teleconference where all members can be seen and heard and the public may
attend in accordance with KRS 61.840.



   (C)   The same procedure with regard to participation, distribution
of materials, and other matters shall apply in all video teleconference
locations.



   (D)   Any interruption in the video or audio broadcast of a video
teleconference at any location shall result in the suspension of the video
teleconference until the broadcast is restored.



(KRS 61.826)



§ 37.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced pursuant to KRS 61.846
and 61.848 for enforcing KRS 61.805 to 61.850.



CHAPTER 38:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



   38.01   Personnel Policies adopted by reference



§ 38.01  PERSONNEL POLICIES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Personnel Policies attached to Ordinance 2014-10-02 as Exhibit A
are hereby adopted in full as the Personnel Policies of the City of Crestview
Hills, Kenton County, Kentucky, as if set out at length herein.



   (A)   A copy of the Personnel Policies shall at all times remain on
file in the office of the City Administrator for the City of Crestview Hills,
Kentucky.



   (B)   All previous versions of the Personnel Policies are hereby
repealed and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith are
to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed.



(Ord. 2014-10-02, passed 11-13-14)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



CHAPTER 50:  ELECTRIC



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "DEVELOPER."  Any property owner, builder, or subdivider.



   "ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES"  or "COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES." 
Include those facilities serving residential areas of the kind described
herein, and does not include facilities which deliver power or communication
service through such areas, or transmission facilities which terminate in
such areas.



   "FACILITIES."  Wires, cables, transformers, fixtures, cabinets,
closures, and appurtenances.



   "NEW RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS."  Subdivisions approved by Council
after the effective date of this chapter.



   "UTILITY COMPANY."  The Union Light, Heat, and Power Company,
Cincinnati Bell, Inc., or any person, firm, or corporation authorized by
Council to serve residents, businesses, or institutions in the city.



(Ord. 1973-9-4, passed 9-12-73; Am. Ord. 1981-10-1, passed 9-10-81)



§ 50.02  UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.



   In all new residential subdivisions of twelve (12) or more contiguous
lots:



   (A)   The developer shall provide electric distribution facilities,
street lighting facilities, and communication distribution facilities to be
installed by the appropriate utility company to serve the subdivision
underground within or along the right-of-way of existing or proposed public
streets, provided, prior to installation of such facilities, the developer
pays utility company's schedules and give utility company a written
commitment to pay utility company for the cost of any relocation of such
facilities and to provide all easements necessary for relocation and for any
extension, and the developer shall provide necessary easements to the utility
company at no cost to the utility company.



   (B)   All service lines connecting the customer's service with the
utility company's distribution lines shall be installed underground to
connection points on the distribution facilities determined by the utility
companies.  The customer's service line shall be installed by the developer
or customer, except for communications service lines.  The actual connection
to the utility company's facilities shall be made by the utility companies.



   (C)   (1)   Installation of pad-mounted supply transformers and
communication interconnection cabinets are discouraged and installation of
such transformers and cabinets shall be below the ground surface if feasible.



      (2)   In determining the feasibility of the sub-surface
installation, the physical terrain of the land shall be considered as well as
economic cost factors.  Payment of additional charges shall be made in
accordance with the rates and requirements of the appropriate utility company.



   (D)   Prior to paving any street, the developer shall install, at
his own cost, acceptable separate conduit crossovers for electric and
communication facilities at locations specified by the utility companies.



(Ord. 1973-9-4, passed 9-12-73)



§ 50.03  STREET LIGHTS; CONVERSIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the installation
and maintenance of street lighting poles or standards or to require the
conversion to underground of any existing overhead electric or communications
distribution or street lighting facilities.



(Ord. 1973-9-4, passed 9-12-73)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BUILDING DRAIN."  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer beginning three (3) feet outside the building wall.



      (1)   "BUILDING DRAIN - SANITARY."  A building drain which
conveys sewage only.



      (2)   "BUILDING DRAIN - STORM."  A building drain which
conveys storm water or other drainage, but no sewage.



   "BUILDING SEWER."  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



      (1)   "BUILDING SEWER - SANITARY."  A building sewer which
conveys sewage only.



      (2)   "BUILDING SEWER - STORM."  A building sewer which
conveys storm water or other drainage, but no sewage.



   "COOLING WATER."  The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or other.  It shall
be free from odor and oil and shall contain no polluting substances.



   "DISTRICT."  The Sanitation District No. 1 of Campbell and Kenton
Counties.



   "GARBAGE."  A solid waste from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of product.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTES."  The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   "NATURAL OUTLET."  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or ground water.



   "PRIVATE SEWER."  A sewer which is not owned by the public authority.



   "PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE."  The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers.



   "PUBLIC AUTHORITY."  Any governmental agency having jurisdiction by
law.



   "PUBLIC SEWER."  A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public
authority.



   "SANITARY SEWAGE."  A combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial
establishments contributed by reason of human occupancy.



   "SANITARY SEWER."  A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.



   "SEWERAGE WORKS."  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating,
and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.



   "STORM SEWER."  A sewer which carries storm, surface waters and
drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.



   "WATERCOURSE."  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 1973-2-1, passed 2-14-73)



§ 51.02  CONTROL OF SEWERS.



   (A)   All private sanitary sewers in the city shall be controlled by
the city but maintained and operated by their owners.  The city may accept
for maintenance, and operation any private sewer which meets the city
standards for same and for which a proper easement is dedicated to the city.



   (B)   All public or private sanitary sewers shall continue to be
owned by the respective public or private owners now owning same until such
time as the owner and the city mutually agree to a transfer of ownership to
the city.



   (C)   No sanitary sewer shall be constructed within the jurisdiction
of the city without the prior written approval of the Kentucky Water
Pollution Control Commission, Sanitation District No. 1 of Campbell and
Kenton Counties, and the city.



   (D)   Any connection to a sanitary sewer within the jurisdiction of
the city shall be subject to these rules and regulations, and to any charges,
rates, fees, and assessments, which are or may be established by the city as
being applicable, and shall be made under permits issued by the city.



   (E)   No extension or modification shall be made to any sanitary
sewer, controlled by the city without the prior written approval of the city.



(Ord. 1973-2-1, passed 2-14-73)



§ 51.03  USE OF SEWERS.



   (A)   (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or
cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water,
or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.



      (2)   Any such connections made either before or after the
effective date of these rules and regulations shall be considered illegal and
shall be subject to immediate removal by the owner of the premises so
connected and at such owner's expense.



      (3)   Should the owner of such illegally connected premises
fail to remove the connection within ninety (90) days, the city shall cause
the connection to be removed and the cost thereof shall be billed to the
owner of the premises, and shall constitute a lien against the premises.



   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or cause to be
discharged to any natural outlet or storm sewer any sanitary sewage or other
polluted waters.  Effluent from privately owned individual household
disposal devices, shall not be discharged to storm sewers.



   (C)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged into such sewers as are specifically designed and designated as
storm sewers or a natural outlet approved by the city.



   (D)   No person, firm, or corporation constructing a sanitary sewer,
building, or house connection shall leave same open, unsealed, or incomplete
in such a fashion as to permit storm, surface, or subsurface water to enter
such sewers.



   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any
public sewer any of the following described substances, materials, waters, or
wastes.



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F. (65°C.).



      (2)   Any water or wastes which contain grease or oil or other
substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures
between 30° and 150°F.



      (3)   Any water or wastes containing edible type oil and
grease exceeding an analysis on average of 100 parts per million (833 pounds
per million gallons) of either soluble matter.



      (4)   Any water or wastes containing nonedible type oil or
grease such as petroleum or mineral oil or grease.



      (5)   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.



      (6)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.



      (7)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, asphaltic materials, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, or viscous
substances, capable of causing some obstruction to the flow of sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works.



      (8)   Any long half-life (over 100 days) of toxic radioactive
isotopes; without special permit from the city.  The radioactive isotopes
such as I131 and p32 used at hospitals are not prohibited, if properly
diluted at the source and discharged in accordance with Atomic Energy
Commission recommendations.



   (F)   (1)   The accidental discharge of any prohibited liquid or
solid material into any sewer or natural outlet, either directly or
indirectly, shall be reported to the city immediately by the individual
company or industry responsible for the discharge.



      (2)   Although no penalty, as such, will be levied as a result
of such accidental discharge, it shall be understood that the individual,
company, or industry shall not be relieved of its responsibilities and shall
be liable for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such accidental discharge.



   (G)   No unauthorized person, firm, or corporation shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the
sewerage facilities.  Any person violating this provision shall be subject
to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.



(Ord. 1973-2-1, passed 2-14-73)



§ 51.04  APPROVAL OF SEWER PLANS.



   (A)   No sanitary sewers or sewage pumping facilities which drain
either directly or indirectly into sewers under the control of the city shall
be constructed without the prior written approval of the district, Kentucky
Water Pollution Control Commission, and the city of the plans thereof.



   (B)   All plans shall be submitted in quadruplicate, and shall be
accompanied by written request for approval.



   (C)   All plans shall be accompanied by an area plan showing all
existing and proposed sewers within the area to be served together with
copies of all pertinent computations of the design of the sewers and sewerage
facilities.



   (D)   Construction plans shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equal
fifty (50) feet.  Area plans shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equal to
two hundred (200) feet.



   (E)   All plans shall bear the signature of the registered
professional engineer who has prepared them, and shall provide space for the
approval of the City Engineer.



   (F)   (1)   The cost of plan review performed by the city shall
be at a rate per hour established and published from time to time by the
city, and shall be borne by the person, firm, or corporation submitting the
plans.  The person, firm or corporation is required to deposit with the city
a sum of money payable to the City Treasurer, in an amount to be determined
by the city for each application, before a plan will be considered for
review.  The city will require additional deposits to this fund if the
original deposit proves inadequate.



      (2)   When the city determines that no further field
engineering service will be required for the improvement, the city will
prepare a voucher in favor of the depositor refunding any balance remaining
in his account.



(Ord. 1973-2-1, passed 2-14-73)



§ 51.05  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb public or private sanitary sewers or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city.



   (B)   A separate and independent building sewer-sanitary shall be
provided for every residential building.



   (C)   All roof runoff drains which discharge on city streets will be
cast iron or steel pipe four (4) feet back from the curb or edge of paving. 
It will be the responsibility of the owner to insure that the discharge will
not undermine the city streets.



   (D)   The building sewer shall be constructed of a size not less
than and of materials meeting the standards of the district.  It shall be
laid at a minimum grade of one-fourth inch per lineal foot from the building
to the public sewer, except that the city may authorize the grade to be as
little as one-eighth inch per lineal foot if the city determines such to be
desirable or necessary.  In no case shall the basement floor be less than
thirty-six (36) inches above the crown of the sewer at the point of
connection.



   (E)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public or private sewer, sanitary sewage carried
by such building drains shall be lifted by an approved means, and discharged
to the building sewer.



CHAPTER 52:  GARBAGE



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALUMINUM MATERIALS."  Cans used to hold beverages, foil, wrappers,
containers for prepared foods, screens, frames, lawn chairs, and aluminum
siding.



   "BULKY ITEMS."  All ferrous metal products such as washers, dryers,
refrigerators, stoves, hot water heaters, bicycles, and other household goods
and appliances, as well as large non-metal items such as furniture, rugs,
mattresses, box springs, stereos, and television sets.



   "COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT."  Any non-residential building or
establishment, for profit or non-profit, including, but not limited to, those
used for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices,
professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or
shipping and receiving areas.



   "CORRUGATED CARDBOARD."  Paper in which a portion has been made to
have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between
two (2) flat surfaces for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to
form cartons.



   "CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS."  Demolition materials, broken concrete, broken
glass and like material that is not recyclable.



   "GARBAGE."  Any putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, as well as small
dead animals weighing not over fifteen (15) pounds, and animal excrement.



   "GLASS."  Bottles and jars, made of silica, sand, soda ash, and
limestone, being transparent or translucent, and used for packaging or
bottling of various materials.  This does not include plastics or glass
produces such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate glass,
safety glass, light bulbs, ceramics, or pieces of broken glass.



   "HIGH-GRADE PAPER."  Computer paper, tab cards, white letterhead,
ledger, and non-glossy copier paper.



   "MULTIFAMILY DWELLING."  Includes, but is not limited to, apartments,
stacked condominiums, cooperatives, or group houses where people reside, and
share common entrances.



   "NEWSPAPER."  Newsprint-grade paper, the common inexpensive
machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and
distributed.  This does not include magazines, slick paper, and telephone
books.



   "NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION."  An established organization or foundation
dedicated to public service or culture including, but not limited to,
religious, educational, and health care functions.  Federal, state, and
local governmental establishments are considered nonprofit organizations for
purposes of this Ordinance.  This term also shall include civic clubs, youth
groups, and extra-curricular school organizations.



   "NON-RECYCLABLE MATERIALS."  Garbage, construction debris, and any
other materials that are not designated as recyclable materials.



   "OCCUPIER OF LAND."  Any residential dwelling, commercial
establishment, or nonprofit organization that shall hold title to or shall be
in possession of any property in the city, whether as owner, lessee, or
tenant.



   "OIL."  A petroleum-based or synthetic oil that is used as a lubricant
for internal combustion engines, transmissions, gears, or axles, and which
through use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original
purpose.  This does not include oils used for cooking.



   "PLASTIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS."  Plastic milk jugs and plastic bottles
made of P.E.T. (polyethylene terephthalate), that are used to package soda,
seltzer, soft drinks, and the like.  This does not include bottles made of
other types of plastic.



   "RECYCLABLE MATERIALS."  Materials, as designated herein, that would
otherwise become solid waste that can be source separated, collected,
processed, and returned to the economic stream in the form of raw materials
or products.



   "REFUSE."  All solid waste generated by occupiers of land within the
city, whether recyclable or Non-recyclable materials.



   "SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING UNITS."  A dwelling standing by itself,
separated from other dwellings by open space, and/or condominium units that
have individual/separate access to the exterior of the building at ground
level.



   "TIN CANS."  Steel and tin-coated cans.



   "WASTE PAPER PRODUCT."  All uncontaminated paper material such as
magazines, slick paper, books, paper food cartons, cardboard boxes, wrapping
paper, bags, and discarded letters and envelopes.  This does not include
newspapers or high-grade paper.



   "YARD WASTE."  Plant material, grass cuttings, tree trimmings, hedge
clippings, bushes, flowers, roots, branches, and tree limbs not over four (4)
feet in diameter, sod and rocks not over four (4) inches in diameter, and
similar biodegradable materials.



(Ord. 1997-6-2, passed 8-14-97)



§ 52.02  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   The city shall contract as often as necessary with a person,
firm, corporation, or entity who scavenge for hire to pick up and dispose of
debris, garbage, refuse, recyclable and non-recyclable matter from all single
family attached, single family detached, and two family residential dwellings
units, excluding multifamily dwellings as defined in this chapter.



   (B)   Debris, garbage, refuse, recyclable and non-recyclable matter
produced in stores, restaurants, multifamily units and other commercial
establishments shall be disposed of by the owners or occupants at their own
expense.



(Ord. 1997-6-2, passed 8-14-97)



§ 52.03  COLLECTION FREQUENCY.



   Debris, garbage, refuse, recyclable and non-recyclable matter shall be
picked up and disposed of at least weekly or as often as provided by
contract.  Owners and occupants located in areas that require the owner or
occupant to dispose of construction debris, garbage, refuse, recyclable and
non-recyclable matter shall dispose of said matter as often as is necessary
(at least one time per week) to avoid injury to the health and welfare of the
general public.



(Ord. 1997-6-2, passed 8-14-97)



§ 52.04  COLLECTION HOURS RESTRICTED.



   All persons and entities are prohibited from emptying commercial refuse
dumpsters located within the city during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.



(Ord. 2000-12-2, passed 1-13-00)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of this chapter is punishable by fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
each day a violation continues is a separate violation.  Fines for repeat
offenses as within one year of a violation of this chapter shall be increased
to not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00).



   (B)   Violation of § 52.04 shall be punishable by a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each subsequent offense.



(Ord. 2000-12-2, passed 1-13-00)



(Ord. 1997-6-2, passed 8-14-97)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC RULES





         72.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES





         74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         75.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES."  Vehicles of the Fire Department or
Police Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney's office when on
official business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.



   "BOULEVARD."  Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is
required to stop before entering or crossing such boulevard.



   "BUSINESS DISTRICT."  Any portion of any street between two
consecutive intersections in which fifty percent (50%) or more of the
frontage on either side of the street is used for business purposes.



   "CHIEF OF POLICE."  The Chief of Police or other person or persons
authorized by the legislative body to direct the implementation and
enforcement of the provisions of this traffic code.



   "CROSSWALK."  The portion of the roadway included within the extension
of the sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of the
roadway between two intersections, as may be legally designated as crossing
places and marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.



   "CURB."  The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles
whether marked by curbstones or not.



   "FUNERAL PROCESSION."  Two (2) or more vehicles accompanying the body
of a deceased person when each vehicle has its headlights on or is displaying
a pennant attached in such a manner as to be clearly visible to approaching
traffic.



(KRS 189.378(1))



   "INTERSECTION."  That part of the public way embraced within the
extensions of the street lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an
angle whether or not one such street crosses the other.



   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES."  All signs, signals, warnings,
directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by
authority of the Chief of Police.



   "ONE-WAY STREET."  A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in
one direction only.



   "OPERATOR."  Every person who is in actual physical control of the
guidance, starting, and stopping of a vehicle.



   "PARK."  When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing,
whether occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to
receive or discharge passengers or property.



   "PEDESTRIAN."  Any person afoot.



   "PLAY STREET."  Any street or portion thereof so designated by the
Chief of Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all
traffic is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.



   "POLICE DEPARTMENT."  The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of § 70.03 or any other acts necessary to
implement and enforce this traffic code.



   "PUBLIC WAY."  The entire width between property lines of every way,
dedicated passway, or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths
and foot paths.



   "REVERSE TURN."  To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as
to proceed in the opposite direction.



   "RIGHT-OF-WAY."  The privilege of the immediate and preferential use
of the street.



   "ROADWAY."  That portion of any street, improved, designated, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   "SIDEWALK."  That portion of the street between the curb and the
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   "STOPPING."  As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is
actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers.



   "STREET."  Every public way, including alleys.



   "TRAFFIC."  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, uses, and
other conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for
the purpose of travel.



   "VEHICLE."  Includes all agencies for the transportation of persons or
property over or upon the public highways of the Commonwealth and all
vehicles passing over or upon the highways.  "MOTOR VEHICLE."  Includes all
vehicles, as defined above except, road rollers; road graders; farm tractors;
vehicles on which power shovels are mounted; construction equipment
customarily used only on the site of construction and which is not practical
for the transportation of persons or property upon the highways; vehicles
that travel exclusively upon rails; vehicles propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead wires while being operated within any municipality or
where the vehicles do not travel more than five (5) miles beyond the city
limits of any municipality; and vehicles propelled by muscular power.



(KRS 189.010(19))



§ 70.02  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction given by a uniformed
police officer, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic
regulations of this traffic code.



   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver
of any vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government,
this state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.



   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an
animal on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can
have no application.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in
the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions.



§ 70.04  AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.



   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to
alleviate unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police shall, at his
discretion, have authority to impose such traffic regulations as he may deem
necessary for temporary periods not to exceed (2) two weeks.  If these
temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer than two (2) weeks,
the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended order.



§ 70.06  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized and required to mark with
proper signs and signals such major and through streets as have been or may
hereafter be so designated by ordinances enacted by legislative body.



   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized and required to erect and
maintain suitable signs for the designation of one-way streets.



§ 70.07  TOWING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES PENDING PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT
CITATIONS OR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Lakeside Park-Crestview Hills Police Authority members
shall have the obligation, duty, and authority to seize and tow any motor
vehicle which a member may observe in a public place, which has three (3) or
more outstanding citations or violations pending against it, which have been
issued by members of the Police Authority.



   (B)   Upon payment of the delinquent and outstanding citations and
violations together with the towing and storage charges, the vehicle will be
released to the owner.  If the seized vehicle remains in storage for a
period of thirty (30) days or longer and the outstanding citations are
unpaid, the legal owner and others known to possess an interest in the motor
vehicle shall be notified of the public auction of the vehicle, and the
vehicle shall be sold to satisfy the outstanding charges and costs against it
and the balance, if any, paid to the legal owner.



(Ord. 86-6-1, passed 3-12-87)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.15  SIGNAL LEGENDS.



   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a
traffic-control sign or signs exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or
"Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights for purposes of traffic
control, the following colors only shall be used, and these terms and lights
shall indicate and be obeyed as follows:



   (A)   Green alone or "Go":  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn.  However, vehicular traffic shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.



   (B)   Steady yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the
green or "Go" signal:  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is
thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a
red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular
traffic shall not enter the intersection.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady
yellow signal may enter and clear the intersection.



   (C)   Red alone or double red or "Stop":  Vehicular traffic facing
the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible
line, and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone.



   (D)   Flashing red alone:  Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at
such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not
again proceed until it can do so without danger.



   (E)   Flashing yellow alone:  Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall reduce its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection
controlled by such signal.



   (F)   "Yield Right-of-Way":  Vehicular traffic facing the "Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering
the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  All traffic facing the
sign shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such
primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  No vehicle facing a "Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a
speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, except that this speed limit
shall not apply to vehicles entering an expressway.



   (G)   Lane lights:  When lane lights are installed over any street
for the purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular
traffic shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. 
However, when flashing yellow lights appear above a lane all left turns shall
be made from that lane.  Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles
shall not move against them.  If flashing yellow lights show above a lane,
that lane shall be used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at
such place prohibits such turn.



Penalty, see § 70.99



                   



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338



§ 70.16  ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The Chief of Police shall determine the character of all official
traffic-control devices and shall have the exclusive right to establish and
maintain all official traffic-control devices in the city, when and as
required under this traffic code, and may place and maintain such additional
traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary.  All traffic-control
devices shall be the same general type and all such traffic devices employed
to indicate one particular warning or regulation shall be uniform and as far
as possible shall be placed uniformly.  All signs shall conform to those
recommended by the National Conference on Street and Highway Safety.



§ 70.17  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey
the signal of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected
by any of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any
electric signal, gate, or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.  However, the type and the right to or
necessity for such barrier or sign shall be approved by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Such sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same
authority as the personal direction of a police officer.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.18  INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.



   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down, or remove any official control device or any railroad
sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.



Penalty see § 70.99



§ 70.19  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or
display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking,
or device which purports to be or in an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to
direct the movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any
railroad sign or signal.  No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal bearing any
commercial advertising.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as
restricting any public department or public utility of the city in any
emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign
whose placing has been approved by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a
public nuisance and the Chief of Police is empowered forthwith to remove it
or cause it to be removed.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.20  DEFECTIVE DEVICES.



   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall be
enforceable against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation the sign herein required is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.  However,
when any particular section of this traffic code does not state that signs
are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to
give notice thereof.



§ 70.21  TEMPORARY CONTROL OF DEVICES.



   In an emergency any police officer may at his discretion disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.



§ 70.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of Chapters 70 through 73, where no
penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not more than $100.



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



OPERATION GENERALLY



§ 71.01  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to
remain standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction
thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to



enter any intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding the indication of any traffic-control signal which may be
located at the intersection or crosswalk.



   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the Chief of Police to be of
special or critical importance to the movement of traffic shall be caused by
him to be marked in a distinctive manner in order to indicate its
importance.  Should the operator of any vehicle enter any intersection so
marked when there is insufficient room on the other side of the intersection
to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-control signal
notwithstanding, he shall be deemed to have violated this division rather
than division (B) above.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  REVERSE OR U TURNS.



   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
within an intersection or upon any street in a business district or where
authorized signs are erected to prohibit the movement or at any other
location unless the movement can be made with reasonable safety to other
users of the street and without interfering with the safe operation of any
traffic that may be affected by such movement.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  BACKING VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the
vehicle at any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning
movement.  A vehicle from any parking position shall be backed by the
operator in such manner as to proceed on the same side of the roadway in the
lawful direction of travel.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
within any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by
special permit from the Chief of Police.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
the vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building, or lot and across a
sidewalk, or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been
brought to a complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its
extension.  On entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or building
the operator shall yield the right-of-way to all intending to cross a
sidewalk and turn into an alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and
with caution.



Penalty, see § 70.99



ACCIDENTS



§ 71.15  DUTY OF OPERATOR.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of, or passenger in any
motor vehicle which is involved in an accident in which any person is injured
or property damaged to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the
injury or damage and render such assistance as may be needed.



Penalty, see § 70.99



                   



Statutory reference:



   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580



§ 71.16  ACCIDENT REPORT.



   The operator, owner, or passenger involved in an accident resulting in
the injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is
damaged, shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the
Police Department.



Penalty, see § 70.99



PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.25  OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.



   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the
vehicle in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of
pedestrians and other vehicles upon the highway.



   (B)   No person shall willfully operate any vehicle on any highway
in such a manner as to injure the highway.



(KRS 189.290)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.26  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle not on
official duty to follow an authorized emergency vehicle, traveling in
response to a fire alarm or other emergency, closer than 200 feet, or to park
any vehicle within a block in any direction of the location where these
vehicles are responding to a fire alarm.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle coach to
drive over unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any
street or private driveway, to be used at any fire, or alarm of fire, or for
any other purpose, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command or on duty at such point.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.27  SMOKE EMISSION.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in such manner as to cause
it to emit unnecessary smoke, gas, or vapor.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.28  VEHICLES TO BE OPERATED ONLY ON PAVED STREETS OR WAYS.



   (A)   Motorized vehicles shall be operated only on public and
private streets, avenues, or ways which are paved and used by the members of
the general public as a street, avenue or way.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle at any
time on a trail or other unpaved area for pleasure or for no apparent useful
purpose.



(Ord. 1988-4-4, passed 5-12-88)  Penalty, see § 71.99



FUNERAL PROCESSIONS



§ 71.30  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   A vehicle in a funeral procession has the right-of-way at an
intersection and may proceed through the intersection if the procession is
led by an escort vehicle displaying flashing yellow, red, or blue lights,
except:



      (1)   When the right-of-way is required by an emergency
vehicle as defined by KRS 189.910;



      (2)   When vehicles in the procession are directed otherwise
by a police or safety officer; or



      (3)   When the vehicle is a train or locomotive.



   (B)   Before assuming the right-of-way, a person who drives a
vehicle in a funeral procession shall exercise due caution with regard to
crossing traffic.



   (C)   A person who drives a vehicle that is not part of a funeral
procession shall not drive the vehicle between the vehicles of the funeral
procession or otherwise interfere with the progress of the procession, except
when:



      (1)   The person is authorized to do so by a police or safety
officer; or



      (2)   The vehicle is an emergency vehicle as defined by KRS
189.910.



   (D)   A person who drives a vehicle that is not part of a funeral
procession shall not illuminate the vehicle headlights or engage in any other
act for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted to funeral
processions.



   (E)   The escort vehicle, hearse, or other vehicles in a procession
may be equipped with flashing yellow lights for the purpose of notifying the
general public of the procession and gaining the right-of-way at
intersections, or signaling the end of a procession.



   (F)   Persons authorized to use flashing lights as defined in KRS
189.920 may use them while accompanying a funeral procession to warn traffic
that a procession is approaching or that it is in progress.



   (G)   When a funeral procession is in progress, a person driving a
vehicle not in the procession shall not pass or overtake any vehicle in the
procession unless:



      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a police or safety
officer;



      (2)   The procession is on a street, road, or highway outside
the corporate limits of a city, town, or urban-county; or



      (3)   The procession is on an interstate highway or a state
parkway.



(KRS 189.378)  Penalty, see § 71.99(B)



PARADES



§ 71.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "PARADE."  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city.



   "PARADE PERMIT."  A permit required by this subchapter.



§ 71.41  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid,
form, or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the
Chief of Police.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions; or



      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.42  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.



   (A)   Filing period.  An application for a parade permit shall be
filed with the Chief of Police not less than five (5) days or not more than
sixty (60) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.



   (B)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;



      (13)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should issue.



   (C)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee of $3.50.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.43  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of
the application and from other information obtained, he finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the
assembly areas;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of fire fighting equipment enroute to a fire;



   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays
enroute.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.44  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall act on the application for a parade permit
within three (3) days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excepted, after
filing thereof.  If he disapproves the application, he shall mail to the
applicant within the three (3) days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice of his
action stating the reasons for his denial of the permits.



§ 71.45  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the legislative body.  The appeal shall be taken within
thirty (30) days after notice.  The legislative body shall act on the appeal
within thirty (30) days after its receipt.



§ 71.46  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit,
shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a
time, or over a route different than that named by the applicant.  An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three (3) days
after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of
his acceptance with the Chief of Police.  An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit
under this subchapter.



§ 71.47  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police
shall send a copy thereof to the following persons:



   (A)   The Mayor;



   (B)   The City Attorney;



   (C)   The Fire Chief;



   (D)   The general manager or responsible head of each public
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade.



§ 71.48  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;



   (G)   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.49  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.  The parade chairman
or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit
on his person during the conduct of the parade.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.50  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of a vehicle except a
police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



Penalty, see § 70.99



________________



Cross-reference:



   Parking on parade routes, see § 72.07



§ 71.51  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set
forth.



SPEED



§ 71.60  SPEED LIMITS; POSTING.



   (A)   The speed limit for all publicly dedicated streets within the
corporate limits of the city, and other public ways, not designated federal,
county or state roads, shall be limited to twenty-five miles per hour (25
m.p.h.)



   (B)   Speed limit signs shall be posted in significant places within
the corporate limits advising members of the general public of the speed
limit.



   (C)   The speed limit on Thomas More Parkway within the corporate
limits of the city and Horse Branch Road within the corporate limits of the
city are fixed at thirty-five miles per hour (35 m.p.h.)



(Ord. 1969-1-1, passed 1-69; Am. Ord. 1997-1-1, passed 2-13-97; Am. Ord.
2001-4-1, passed 5-10-01)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Persons violating § 71.28, upon conviction, are guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.



(Ord 1988-4-4, passed 5-12-88)



   (B)   Any person who violates § 71.30 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned for not more
than ninety (90) days, or both.



(KRS 189.378)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Parking Generally



   72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking



   72.02   Manner of parking



   72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking



   72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets



   72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning



   72.06   Parking on city streets during the hours of 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m. prohibited; towing authorized



   72.07   Parking on parade route



   72.08   Parking on off-street facility



   72.09   Owner responsibility



   72.10   Parking in parks



   72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale



   72.12   Parking for persons with disabilities



   72.13   Standing and parking in shopping center area



   72.14   Parking on unpaved areas



Impounding



   72.20   City tow lots



   72.21   Removal of abandoned or illegally parked vehicles



   72.22   Removal of vehicle by owner-operator



   72.23   Towing and custodian care charges



   72.24   Supplemental emergency wrecker service



   72.25   Reports by custodian of city tow lots



   72.26   Sale of vehicle



   72.27   Release of vehicle from tow lots



Snow Emergency



   72.35   Announcement of snow emergency



   72.36   Termination of emergency



   72.37   Snow emergency routes



   72.38   Conflicting provisions



   72.39   Removal of vehicles in violation



   72.40   Evidence of violation



Fire Lanes



   72.50   Establishment of fire lanes



 



   72.99   Penalty



__________________



Statutory reference:



   Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS
65.120



PARKING GENERALLY



§ 72.01  OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or
any other thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction, or hindrance in or on
any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any
vehicle on the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any school bus or
any similar vehicle in excess of a weight of 16,000 pounds on any street or
pathway in the city, except for the loading or unloading of goods, people, or
materials on the street.



(Ord. 2008-2-3, passed 4-10-08)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  MANNER OF PARKING.



      (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
stop or park the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side
toward and parallel with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on
the left side of a one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and
except for commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.



      (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any
street unless its two (2) right wheels are within six (6) inches of and
parallel with the curb, except that on one-way streets where parking is
permitted on the left side the two (2) left wheels are to be within six (6)
inches of and parallel with the curb.



      (C)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street,
except that wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading provided
that such loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall
not consume more than thirty (30) minutes.  Such backing of trucks or wagons
is prohibited at all times and on all streets in the city where any truck or
wagon so backed interferes with the use of the roadway of moving vehicles or
occupies road space within ten (10) feet of the center line of the street.



      (D)   The Chief of Police may establish diagonal parking at
certain places, requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the
curb and within a certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto.  However,
diagonal parking shall not be established where the roadway space required
therefor would be within ten (10) feet of the center line of any street. 
The Chief of Police shall designate such places by suitable signs, and shall
indicate by markings on the pavement the required angle and the width of the
roadway space within such vehicle shall park.



      (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
so park such vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines
marking the side or the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.



      (F)   No owner, operator, or person shall park any motor
vehicle with the left side thereof nearest the curb, nor at any street
crossing, nor shall any motor vehicle be parked two or more abreast or be
assembled or situated so as to interfere with the flow of traffic on any
street.



(Ord. 1979-7-2, passed 7-12-79)



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop
or park such vehicle except in a case of real emergency or in compliance with
the provisions of this traffic code or when directed by a police officer or
traffic sign or signal at any time in the following places:



      (1)   On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any
other place in the roadway where vehicles stand in any manner other than as
specified in § 72.02.



      (2)   On a sidewalk.



      (3)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with
disabilities.



      (4)   In front of a public or private driveway.



      (5)   Within an intersection or on a crosswalk.



      (6)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking.  This does not apply to police officers when operating properly
identified vehicles during the performance of their official duties.



      (7)   Within thirty (30) feet of any flashing beacon, traffic
sign, or traffic-control device.



      (8)   On any controlled access highway.



      (9)   Within a highway tunnel.



      (10)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.



      (11)   In an area between the roadways of a divided highway.



      (12)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his
control into any such prohibited area.



(KRS 189.450(5), (6))  Penalty, see § 72.99



   (B)   The city-owned parking lot adjoining the City Building shall
be available for general public parking to accommodate businesses located in
the adjacent Crestview Hills Town Center and/or Town Center patrons during
the regular business hours of the Town Center businesses. It shall be illegal
for any motor vehicle operator to park a motor vehicle overnight on the
city-owned lot during the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (C)   The parking lot adjoining the Police Department shall not be
available for general public parking at any time, and it shall be illegal for
anyone to park in the lot adjoining the Police Department unless said person
is engaged in business with or for the Police Department.



   (D)   It shall be illegal for anyone to park a motor vehicle in a
spot marked "Reserved For City Purposes" on the city-owned parking lot that
adjoins the City Building. Only city employees or persons engaged in business
with or for the city may park in spots designated as "Reserved for City
Purposes".



   (E)   Signs shall be posted advising the public which portions of
the city-owned lot are available for general public parking, and which
portions are designated as either "Reserved For City Purposes'' or "No
Parking".



(Ord. 1996-3-1, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2015-06-01, passed 7-9-15)



§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.



   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices.



   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on
parking shall not relieve any person from his duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.



   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
divisions (F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time on any street so marked by official signs.



   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions
of divisions (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or
adjacent to any curb so marked.



   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
divisions (F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by official signs on any day
except Sundays on any street so marked.



   (F)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall determine on what streets
or portions thereof stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. 
Whenever under authority of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance
any parking limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets,
or parking areas are restricted to parking for persons with disabilities, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof.  However, in lieu of erecting such signs or in conjunction
therewith, the Chief of Police may cause the face and top of a curb or curbs
at or adjacent to which parking is prohibited at all times to be painted a
solid yellow color.



      (2)   No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective
unless the signs have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted
yellow at the time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those
parking restrictions which by their very nature would not require such signs
and markings.



   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above
in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a
time longer than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any
street so marked.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to designate daily street cleaning
areas, and he shall provide suitable signs and markings on the street to be
cleaned, restricting parking on that particular day.  It shall be unlawful
for the operator of any vehicle to stop on any street so designated.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  PARKING ON CITY STREETS DURING THE HOURS OF 3:00 A.M. TO 6:00 A.M.
PROHIBITED; TOWING AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   There shall be no parking of any vehicles on city streets,
public ways, or right of ways, from 3:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any day of
the week unless the resident has applied for and received an overnight
parking pass issued by the City Administrator.



   (B)   Upon request, the City Administrator may issue to residents a
temporary parking pass to permit parking of one or more vehicles on the city
streets, public ways, or right of ways from 3:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. due to
special circumstances, such as visitors, construction, moving, or other such
circumstances. Said parking pass is a limited privilege only, and shall not
exceed ten (10) consecutive days for any vehicle.



   (C)   (1)   Applications for a parking pass must be made in
advance of the date that the pass will be used. All applications must contain
the name of the person requesting the pass; their address and phone number;
the dates for the overnight pass; and the reason for the request. Requests
shall be granted in the order received, and based upon availability of
on-street parking on any given date. Routine use of parking passes by any
household for continued, ongoing parking or storage of one or more vehicles
on the public right of ways or streets shall not be permitted.



      (2)   The City Administrator may in his/her discretion deny
issuance of one or more parking passes to applicants if the City
Administrator has reason to believe that the applicant and/or members of the
applicant's household are abusing the parking pass privilege. Abuse of the
parking pass privilege includes, but is not limited to, any applicant or
applicant's household staggering multiple applications for routine, regular
parking of one or more household vehicles on the public rights-of-ways and
streets; misrepresenting the reason for the parking pass; misrepresenting the
applicant; or defacing or altering the parking pass.



   (D)   All permits must be visibly displayed in the vehicle by
hanging or affixing the permit to the rear view mirror.



(Ord. 1973-4-2, passed 4-11-73; Am. Ord. 2018-09-01, passed 10-11-18)



Penalty, see § 72.99



________________



Cross-reference:



      Removal of abandoned vehicles, see § 72.21 et seq.



§ 72.07  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized, whenever in his judgment it
is necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street
or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade or procession,
or erect temporary traffic signs to that effect, and to prohibit and prevent
such parking.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation of such signs or directions.



Penalty, see § 72.99



________________



Cross-reference:



   Parades, see §§ 71.40 through 71.51



§ 72.08  PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park
or abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another's
property, or on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without
the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of such property or
facility.



   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise
trespasses in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee,
or person in charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized
motor vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 72.20 through
72.27.



   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking
facility shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or
facility is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at
the owner's expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).



Penalty, see § 72.99



____________________



Statutory reference:



   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725



§ 72.09  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions
of this subchapter regulating stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and
the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.10  PARKING IN PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on
any section of any public park, playground, play lot, or tot lot within the
city not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a
roadway.  However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and
regularly maintained roadway in any such park or playground where at least
two wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on such roadway.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.



   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a
motor vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor
vehicle bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk
pursuant to appropriate county ordinances for persons with disabilities, when
operated by persons with disabilities or when transporting persons with
disabilities, may be parked in a designated parking place for persons with
disabilities, or when parked in a metered parking space may be parked for two
(2) hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking limit is imposed may
be parked for two (2) hours in excess of the parking limit.  The motor
vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for that period of time necessary to
permit entrance or exit of the persons with disabilities to or from the
parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than thirty (30) minutes.



   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a "no stopping" or
"no parking" zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating
a fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon, or
evening hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not physically
disabled to park in areas reserved and designated as reserved as parking
areas for the physically disabled.



(Ord. 1981-2-3, passed 3-12-81) Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.13  STANDING AND PARKING IN SHOPPING CENTER AREA.



   (A)   The parking or standing of motor vehicles, whether attended or
unattended, next to or contiguous with the sidewalk area surrounding the
perimeter of the buildings comprising the main buildings of the shopping
center is prohibited.



   (B)   Signs indicating that the parking or standing of motor
vehicles is prohibited shall be erected at appropriate places and intervals
to advise the public that the area is restricted.



(Ord. 1979-12-3, passed 12-13-79)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.14  PARKING ON UNPAVED AREAS.



   It is illegal to park motor vehicles on unpaved areas within the city.



(Ord. 1981-5-1, passed 5-14-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



IMPOUNDING



§ 72.20  CITY TOW LOTS.



   City tow lots shall be under the direction of the Chief of Police who
shall designate a custodian responsible for its operation.  The city tow
lots shall be maintained and operated on a 24-hour service and shall have
storage facilities to take care of all vehicles towed by city and contract
wreckers.  The city tow lots which are designated for storage of all motor
vehicles towed by city wreckers or contract wreckers shall be secured in such
a manner as to preclude tampering with vehicles stored therein and shall be
required to take all necessary steps to prevent damage accruing to such
vehicles while in their custody.



§ 72.21  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.



   All motor vehicles abandoned or illegally parked on the public streets
and ways of the city, or parked in violation of §§ 72.01 through 72.10,
except in violation of § 72.05, shall be removed at the direction of the
Police Department by a city wrecker or by contract wrecker employed by the
Chief of Police and shall be placed in custody of city tow lots.



               



Cross-reference:



   Towing and storage of vehicles pending payment of delinquent citations
or violations, see § 70.07



§ 72.22  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE BY OWNER-OPERATOR.



   (A)   (1)   An abandoned or illegally parked vehicle may be
removed by the owner or operator of the vehicle at any time prior to the
vehicle becoming physically attached to a wrecker or tow truck.



      (2)   After a vehicle has been physically attached to a
wrecker, but before the wrecker has left the scene, the owner or operator of
the vehicle may take possession of the vehicle only on payment to the wrecker
driver of a fee of $12 in return for which the wrecker driver shall issue a
release to the owner or operator.  Such release shall be in the form of a
receipt furnished by the Police Department and signed by the driver of the
wrecker acknowledging payment of $12.  Each driver of a city wrecker and
driver or owner of each contract wrecker shall make a daily report to the
Police Department of each such release issued during the preceding 24-hour
period and shall remit with the report all fees collected during the period.



   (B)   Neither the removal of a vehicle by an owner or operator as
referred to in division (A)(1) nor the issuance of the release referred to in
division (A)(2) shall be construed as relieving the owner or operator of any
such vehicle from responsibility for any violation of the traffic code with
which he may be charged.



§ 72.23  TOWING AND CUSTODIAN CARE CHARGES.



   (A)   A towing charge of $20 for each hour or fraction of an hour
required for towing shall be made by the Police Department for each motor
vehicle.  This charge shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle before it is
released.  Where it is necessary to use more than one wrecker or other
additional equipment in moving or recovering a vehicle, an additional charge
of $18 per hour or fraction of an hour shall be assessed for each additional
wrecker or additional equipment used.  However, if the additional wrecker or
equipment is furnished by a contract wrecker or other private person the
charge made shall be the actual cost of the equipment to the city but not
less than $20 per hour or fraction thereof.



   (B)   The city tow lots shall charge an amount agreed to by the
legislative body for storage and handling.  It shall be the duty of the
custodian of the city tow lots on presentation of a proper lease to collect
all towing charges and storage charges from the owner of the vehicle, and the
custodian shall account for and remit all charges so collected to the city at
least every 72 hours.



§ 72.24  SUPPLEMENTAL EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE.



   The Chief of Police shall contract with independent wreckers and award
contracts for a one-year period.  The independent wreckers shall furnish
supplementary emergency wrecker services and these services shall be
performed on a 24-hour basis in lieu of the regular city wreckers.  The
wrecker's qualifications shall be determined by the Chief of Police.  The
wreckers shall be equipped to perform the services with efficiency to conform
with the charges set forth by §§ 72.22(A)(2) and 72.23(A) and (B).  The
contractor is to protect the city by furnishing insurance fully covered as to
public liability, property damage, cargo, workman's compensation, and any
other insurance necessary in the performance of its duties.



§ 72.25  REPORTS BY CUSTODIAN OF CITY TOW LOTS.



   The custodian of the city tow lots shall be required to render an
immediate report to the Police Department as to the condition of each motor
vehicle placed in his custody.  This report shall be made on a form to be
furnished by the Department which report shall be signed by the driver of the
wrecker delivering the vehicle and by an employee of the custodian receiving
the vehicle.



§ 72.26  SALE OF VEHICLE.



   Any motor vehicle remaining in the possession of the custodian of the
city tow lots to whom it has been delivered and with whom it has remained for
a period of forty-five (45) days without being reclaimed by the rightful
owner thereof, and without the payment of the towing and storage charges
thereon, may after authorization from the Chief of Police, be sold to pay
such towing and storage.  The advertisement of the proposed sale shall be
published once a week for three (3) weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation as set forth in KRS 424.130.  The last such advertisement shall
be made at least seven (7) days before sale is held.  Notice of sale shall
be sent by registered mail to the owner of the motor vehicle and to any other
person known to have any interest therein, addressed to such person at their
last known address at least ten (10) days before the sale is held.  The
owner of any motor vehicle may sign waiver of notice of sale and waiting
period and permit the custodian of city tow lots to sell the motor vehicles
whenever he deems proper and necessary.



§ 72.27  RELEASE OF VEHICLE FROM TOW LOTS.



   No motor vehicle shall be released by the custodian of the city tow
lots except on written order from the Police Department.



SNOW EMERGENCY



§ 72.35  ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Whenever the Mayor finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet,
or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast of snow, sleet, or freezing
rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle
traffic be expedited and that parking on city streets be prohibited or
restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the Mayor shall put into
effect a parking prohibition on parts of, or all streets within the city as
he deems necessary, by declaring it in a manner prescribed by this subchapter.



   (B)   Once in effect, a prohibition under this subchapter shall
remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the Mayor in accordance
with this subchapter, except that any street area which has become
substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the
entire street shall be automatically excluded therefrom.  While the
prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any
vehicle on any portion of a Snow Emergency Route to which it applies.



   (C)   The Mayor shall cause each declaration made by him pursuant to
this subchapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts from local
stations with a normal operating range covering the city and he may cause
such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general
circulation.  Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the
Mayor, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall
specify the streets or areas affected.  A parking prohibition declared by
the Mayor shall not go into effect until at least four (4) hours after it has
been announced, in accordance with this subchapter.



   (D)   The Mayor shall make or cause to be made a record of each time
and date when any declaration is announced to the public in accordance with
this subchapter.



(Ord. 1978-12-1, passed 12-14-78)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.36  TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Chief of Police shall find that some or all of the
conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to
this subchapter no longer exist, he shall declare the prohibition terminated,
in whole or in part, in a manner prescribed by this subchapter, effective
immediately upon announcement.



(Ord. 1978-12-1, passed 12-14-78)



§ 72.37  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   On each street within the city declared by the Mayor to be a snow
emergency street, the Mayor shall post special signs with the wording: 
"Snow Emergency Route.  No Parking During Emergency.  Tow Away Zone." 
These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be
plainly readable to persons traveling on the street or highway.



(Ord. 1978-12-1, passed 12-14-78)



§ 72.38  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   Any provision of this subchapter which becomes effective by declaration
of the Mayor shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other
conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not
take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents,
emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic
directions by a police officer.



(Ord. 1978-12-1, passed 12-14-78)



§ 72.39  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION.



   (A)   Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove or
have removed a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage or other place of
safety (including another place on a street) or to a garage designated or
maintained by the Police Department, or otherwise maintained by this city,
when:



      (1)   The vehicle is parked on a part of a Snow Emergency
Route on which a parking prohibition is in effect.



      (2)   The vehicle is stalled on a part of a Snow Emergency
Route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet, or ice or on which there
is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who was operating such
vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions
of this subchapter.



      (3)   The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking
ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with
snow removal operations.



   (B)   Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle from a
street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to
ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address
of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be
given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the removal and the
reasons therefore and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. 
In the event that any vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the
notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage.



   (C)   Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle from a
street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the
name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to
the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not
returned to the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event
the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of
such removal by mail to the Kentucky Department of Public Safety, and shall
file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which
the vehicle may be stored.  The notice shall include a complete description
of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for
the removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.



   (D)   No person shall recover any vehicle removed in accordance with
this section except as provided herein.  Before the owner or person in
charge of the vehicle shall be allowed to recover it from the place where it
has been placed or impounded, he shall present to a member of the Police
Department evidence of his identity and right to possession of the vehicle,
and shall sign a receipt for its return, shall pay the cost of removal, and
shall pay any cost of storage accrued.  Until paid, these charges constitute
a lien on the vehicle, which may be enforced in the same manner as a garage
keeper's lien in accordance with the provisions of KRS 376.280.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to keep a record
of each vehicle removed in accordance with this section. The record shall
include a description of the vehicle, its license number, the date and time
of its removal, where it was removed from,its location, the name and address
of its owner and last operator, if known, its final disposition, and the
parking violation involved.



   (F)   This section shall be supplemental to any other provisions of
law granting members of the Police Department authority to remove vehicles.



(Ord. 1978-12-1, passed 12-14-78)



§ 72.40  EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.



   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place
or in a condition in violation of any provisions of this subchapter, proof
that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in
violation of a provision of this subchapter, together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the
person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1978-12-1, passed 12-14-78)



FIRE LANES



§ 72.50  ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE LANES.



   (A)   Fire lanes and parking areas shall be established on all city
side streets and the fire lanes and parking areas shall be designated and
posted by the Safety Commission with the advice of the City Engineer.



   (B)   No person shall be deemed in violation of this section unless
the fire lane has been posted, in which event the violator shall be subject
to the reasonable cost of towing of the vehicle in violation, as well as the
penalties provided for violation of this section.



(Ord. 1970-10-1, passed 10-7-70)   Penalty, see § 72.99



                 



Cross-reference:



   Fire lanes designated, see Chapter 75 Schedule I



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates § 72.06 shall be fined five dollars ($5) for
each violation.



(Ord. 1985-8-1, passed - - )



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 72.12 shall be fined
twenty-five dollars ($25).



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or the schedule
in Chapter 75 for which no penalty is otherwise specifically provided, shall
be fined fifteen dollars ($15).



(Ord. 1984-4-1, passed 5-10-84)



   (D)   For the violation of § 72.03(B), (C), or (D), the operator or
owner of a motor vehicle shall be subject to a civil penalty of ten dollars
($10.00) for each separate violation. In addition, the motor vehicle in
violation shall be subject to tow, the costs of which shall be the debt of
the owner/operator.



(Ord. 1996-3-1, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2015-06-01, passed 7-9-15)



   (E)   Violation of § 72.01(C) shall be punishable by a fine of 
twenty-five dollars ($25).  In addition, the motor vehicle in violation
shall be subject to tow, the costs of which shall be the debt of the
owner/operator of the vehicle.



(Ord. 2008-2-3, passed 4-10-08)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES



________________



Cross-reference:



   Required obedience to traffic directions, see § 70.02 (C)



§ 73.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.



   (B)    No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public
park, playground, play lot, or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking
area.



   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such
bicycle.



   (D)   Persons making a left turn are required to extend the left arm
out horizontally.  Right turns shall be indicated by extending the left arm
out horizontally and turned upward at the elbow.  A stop or slowing of a
bicycle shall be indicated by extending either arm out horizontally and
turned down at the elbow.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.



   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall carry another person except on a seat attached thereto or in a
side car attached to the vehicle.



   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or
in a parking area.



   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  SKATING AND COASTING.



   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as "play
streets" by the Chief of Police and protected by barriers or official signs,
it shall be unlawful for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or
toy vehicle of any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller
skates, or any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street,
or fasten or attach the vehicle on which he is riding thereto.



   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or
fenders of any vehicle.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $50.



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop intersections



SCHEDULE I.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   Stop signs controlling the flow of vehicular and motor vehicular
traffic within the city limits are deemed necessary for the health, safety,
and welfare of citizens of the city and members of the general public at the
following locations:



 

Stop Sign On
 
At Intersection With




Bryan Station Lane
 
Springside Drive


Calumet Court
 
Claibourne Court


Calumet Court
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Campus Drive
 
College Park Drive


Campus Drive
 
Dudley Road


Centre View Boulevard
 
Chancellor Drive


Centre View Boulevard
 
Rhine Valley Lane


Chancellor Drive
 
Centre View Boulevard


Chapel Place
 
Centre View Boulevard


Claibourne Court
 
Calumet Drive


Claibourne Court
 
Lookout Farm Drive


College Park Drive
 
Fraternity Court


College Park Drive
 
Turkeyfoot Road


Copper Coin
 
War Horse Place


Crestview Hills Mall Egress
 
Mall Road


Darby Dan Court
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Day Care Drive (Goodard School and Dr.'s Office)
 
Legends Way


Dixie Lane
 
Parkway Avenue


Dixie Lane
 
Summit Drive


Driveway of Lookout Farm Clubhouse
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Driveway of Summit Hills Country Club
 
Dudley Road


Driveway of Thomas More Park
 
Thomas More Parkway


Druid Lane
 
Rossmoyne Avenue


Flottman Printing egress
 
Centreview Boulevard


Four Seasons egresses
 
Thomas More Parkway


Fraternity Court
 
College Park Drive


Hurstland Court
 
Shaker Heights Lane


Leatherwood Court
 
War Horse Place


Legends Way
 
Palmer Court


Legends Way
 
Thomas More Parkway


Lookout Farm Drive
 
Claibourne Court


Lookout Farm Drive
 
Shinkle Road


Main Chase Lane
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Mall Road
 
Entrance and exit to Crestview Hills Mall


Man O War Court
 
Claibourne Court


Mansion Place
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Napa Valley Lane
 
Rhine Valley Lane


Palmeadow
 
Shinkle Road


Palmeadow
 
Parrish Hill Lane


Palmer Court
 
Legends Way


Parkway Drive
 
Dixie Highway


Parkway Drive
 
Vernon Avenue


Parkway Drive
 
Winding Way


Rennaisance Drive
 
Thomas More Parkway


Rhine Valley Lane
 
Centre View Boulevard


Rhine Valley Lane
 
Horsebranch Road


Right Fork Road
 
Horsebranch Road


Rose Terrace
 
Dixie Highway


Rosemont
 
Winding Way


Rossmoyne Avenue
 
Druid Lane


Rossmoyne Avenue
 
Vernon Avenue


Rossmoyne Avenue
 
Winding Way


Saxony Drive
 
Shinkle Road


Secretariat Court
 
Shinkle Road


Shaker Heights Lane
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Shinkle Road
 
Lookout Farm Drive


Shinkle Road
 
Secretariat Court


Sorority Court
 
College Park Drive


Springside Drive
 
Shinkle Road


Summer Lane
 
Shinkle Road


Summit Drive
 
Dixie Lane


Summit Drive
 
Vernon Avenue


Sunset Drive
 
Vernon Avenue


Sunset Drive
 
Winding Way


Trevino Ridge
 
Legends Way


University Circle
 
College Park Drive


Varsity Court
 
Campus Drive


Vernon Avenue
 
Summit Drive


Villa Madonna Drive
 
Turkeyfoot Road


Villa Madonna Drive
 
Thomas More Parkway


Violet Drive
 
Rose Terrace


War Horse Place
 
Shinkle Road


Warwick Court
 
Rossmoyne Avenue


Whitehouse Drive
 
Dixie Highway


Winding Way
 
Sunset Drive


Woodspoint Drive
 
Winding Way




 



(Ord. 1986-7-4, passed 9-11-86; Am. Ord. 1987-6-1, passed 7-9-87; Am. Ord.
1988-7-3, passed 8-11-88; Am. Ord. 1996-8-4, passed - -; Am. ord. 2000-12-3,
passed 1-11-01; Am. Ord. 2001-6-1, passed 7-12-01; Am. Ord. 2007-9-1, passed
10-11-07)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



SCHEDULE I.  FIRE LANES.



   The following named streets within the city limits shall have a fire
emergency lane located thereon which restricts the parking and unattended
stopping of motor vehicles in the area so marked or noticed.  Signs shall be
erected at reasonable intervals to advise the motoring public of the parking
prohibition.  The parking restriction is located on the right or left side
of each street as follows:



 

STREET
 
RESTRICTED SIDE




 


Almahurst Court
 
W/B


Brookdale Court
 
N/B


Bryan Station Lane
 
N/B


Calumet Court
 
W/B


Campus Drive
 
S/B


Centre View Blvd.
 
W/B


Champions Way
 
E/B


Chancellor Drive
 
E/B Thomas More Pkwy. to Centre View Blvd.


Chancellor Drive
 
W/B Centre View Blvd. to end


Claibourne Court
 
S/B Lookout Farm Drive to Circle


Claibourne Court
 
N/B Lookout Farm Drive to Calumet Court


College Park Drive
 
W/B


Copper Coin Place
 
S/B


Darby Dan Court
 
S/B


Day Care Drive
 
N/B and S/B Legends Way to Goddard School


Day Care Drive
 
S/B Legends Way to end


Dixie Lane
 
N/B and S/B


Druid Lane
 
S/B


Duntreath Court
 
E/B


Elmsead Court
 
N/B


Fraternity Court
 
W/B


Horsebranch Road
 
N/B and S/B


Hurstland Court
 
S/B


Leatherwood Court
 
S/B


Legends Way
 
W/B


Lookout Farm Drive
 
E/B Dixie Highway to Shinkle Road


Lookout Farm Drive
 
W/B Shinkle Road to Claibourne Court


Lookout Farm Drive
 
E/B Shinkle Road to Extension Circle


Main Chase Lane
 
S/B


Man O War Court
 
E/B


Nicholaus Court
 
W/B


Palmeadow
 
S/B


Palmer Court
 
S/B


Parkway Avenue
 
E/B


Parrish Hill
 
W/B


Rhine Valley Lane
 
N/B and S/B


Rose Terrace
 
E/B


Rosemont Avenue
 
E/B


Rossmoyne Avenue
 
E/B


Saxony Court
 
W/B


Secretariat Court
 
W/B


Shaker Heights Lane
 
W/B


Shinkle Road
 
N/B and S/B


Sorority Court
 
N/B


Spindletop Court
 
E/B and W/B


Springside Court
 
W/B


Steelway Farm Court
 
W/B


Summit Drive
 
W/B and E/B Dixie Highway to Dixie Lane


Summit Drive
 
W/B Dixie Lane to Vernon Ave.


Sunset Avenue
 
E/B


Thomas More Parkway
 
E/B and W/B


Trevino Ridge
 
N/B


University Circle
 
S/B


Varsity Court
 
E/B


Vernon Avenue
 
N/B


Violet
 
N/B


War Horse Place
 
W/B


Warwick Court
 
N/B


Whitney Court
 
N/B


Winding Way
 
E/B


Woodspoint Drive
 
W/B




 



Note:  W/B (Westbound), E/B (Eastbound), S/B (Southbound), N/B (Northbound)



(Am. Ord. 2000-12-3, passed 1-11-01)  Penalty, see § 72.99 (C)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         92.   NUISANCES





         93.   FIRE PREVENTION, FIREWORKS, AND EXPLOSIVES





         94.   LITTERING





         95.   TAXATION





         96.   ALARM DROPS




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Powers of Animal Control



   90.03   Adoption and mandatory spay/neuter



   90.04   Dog and/or cat licensing



   90.05   Rabies vaccination



   90.06   Humane treatment of animals



   90.07   Animals to be under control



   90.08   Wild and exotic animals



   90.09   Humane societies; standards and licensing



Commercial Animal Establishments



   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   Licensing provisions



   90.22   Minimum standards



   90.23   Inspections



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ABANDON."  Any animal left more than 48 hours without a person
checking on the condition of the animal and providing food and potable water
or not providing a timed feeder/waterer. Any animal left on private property
without the owner's consent or deserted or dumped on public property or
roadways.



   "ADEQUATE FOOD."  Wholesome foodstuffs suitable for the species
provided at suitable intervals in a sanitary manner in quantities sufficient
to maintain good health in an animal, considering its age and condition.



   "ADEQUATE SHELTER."  A structurally sound, properly ventilated,
sanitary and weatherproof shelter suitable for the species, condition and age
of the animal which provides access to shade from direct sunlight and regress
from exposure to inclement weather conditions, but which does not exacerbate
existing weather conditions.



   "ADEQUATE WATER."  A supply of clean, fresh, potable water provided at
suitable intervals or on a continual basis in a sanitary manner suitable for
the species, condition and age of the animal, in sufficient amounts to
maintain good health in the animal.



   "ANIMAL." Any live vertebrate creature.



   "ANIMAL CONTROL." The department of the county which is designated by
the Fiscal Court to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to operate the
Animal Shelter.



   "ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER." Any person designated by the Director of
Animal Control who is qualified to perform the duties under the laws and
ordinances of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the county and all peace
officers. An Animal Control Officer shall be a law enforcement officer for
the purposes of animal control only.



   "ANIMAL SHELTER." Any premises operated or approved for operation by
the Fiscal Court for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held
under the authority of this chapter.



   "COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT." Any pet shop, boarding or breeding
kennel, grooming facility, auction, petting zoo, zoological park, circus,
performing animal exhibit, or any person engaged in the business of breeding,
buying, or selling at retail or wholesale, any species of animal for profit.



   "DAY." For the purposes of this chapter, a 24-hour period shall
constitute a day.



   "DIRECTOR OF ANIMAL CONTROL." The person appointed by the Judge/
Executive and approved by the Fiscal Court as the Chief Animal Control
Officer.



   "DOMESTIC ANIMAL." Animals that are habituated to live in or about the
habitations of human beings, and which are kept, cared for, sheltered, fed,
or harbored for use as a pet or as a source of food, raw materials or income.



   "DWELLING." The house or other structure in which a human being lives. 



   "EXOTIC ANIMAL." Any animal not indigenous to the United States.



   "HUMANE SOCIETY." Any person or organization operating from a fixed
site and taking in or accepting stray or unwanted animals.



   "IMPOUNDED." Having been received into the custody of Animal Control or
any authorized representative thereof.



   "LIVESTOCK." Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses or any other animals
of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, or equine species.



   "OWNER." Any person owning, keeping, harboring or sheltering one or
more animals.



   "PERSON." All natural persons, corporations, partnerships, firms,
associations, governmental bodies, agencies, and other entities.



   "PET." Domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   "PUBLIC NUISANCE." Any animal which:



      (1)   Molests passers-by or passing vehicles;



      (2)   Attacks people or other animals;



      (3)   Damages public or private property;



      (4)   Is repeatedly at large;



      (5)   Makes noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely
manner;



      (6)   Creates unsanitary conditions; or



      (7)   Disturbs the peace, comfort or health of persons in any
other manner.



   "RESTRAINT." Enclosed in an area by a form of fencing designed to
control the movement of the animal or secured by a leash or chain. An animal
shall be deemed to be retrained if it remains on the premises of its owner or
if it is accompanied by a responsible person and is under that person's
immediate control.



   "RUNNING AT LARGE." Any animal, other than a hunting dog released for
the purpose of hunting, that is off the property of the owner, custodian,
possessor or harborer and is not restrained.



   "SHOW/PET QUALITY." Those animals registered by the American Kennel
Association, Cat Fancier's Association or similar nationally recognized
organization depending on the type of animal. Also those animals deemed to be
of show/pet quality by one who specializes in breeding of said animal.



   "STRAY." Any animal, other than a hunting dog released for the purpose
of hunting, that is running at large.



   "VETERINARIAN." One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and
injuries of animals.



   "VETERINARY HOSPITAL CLINIC." Any establishment maintained and operated
by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals.



   "VICIOUS ANIMAL."



      (1)   Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or domestic animals which, due to a known propensity to endanger life,
by an unprovoked assault or bite which has resulted in serious bodily harm;



      (2)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, approaches in a
terrorizing manner, any person in an attitude of attack upon streets,
sidewalks or any public grounds or places;



      (3)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to unprovoked attacks which cause injury or endanger the safety
of human beings or domestic animals;



      (4)   Any animal which bites multiple times to the extent of
causing severe injury and assaults or otherwise attacks human beings or
domestic animals;



      (5)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for
the purpose of fighting with animals;



      (6)   It shall be prima facie evidence that an animal is
vicious if the animal bites a human being or domestic animal more than once
in the same attack;



      (7)   Exceptions. An animal shall not be deemed vicious solely
because:



         (a)   It bites, attacks, or menaces:



            1.   Any person assaulting its owner;



            2.   Any person or animal who has tormented or
abused it;



         (b)   It is otherwise acting in defense of any attack
from a person or other animal upon its owner or another person;



         (c)   It is protecting or defending its young or the
young of any other animal; or



         (d)   Its breed or assumed/known component of its breed.



   "WILD ANIMAL." Any animal not domesticated or not ordinarily tame and
which is by nature an animal that lives apart from human beings.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)



                         



Cross-reference:



   For other definitions relevant to this chapter, see § 10.02



§ 90.02  POWERS OF ANIMAL CONTROL.



   (A)   The Director and all officers of Animal Control shall have the
powers of a peace officer for the purposes of enforcing animal control laws
or ordinances in the county if they otherwise qualify as a peace officer
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   (B)   All officers of Animal Control shall comply with KRS 61.300.



   (C)   Whenever it is necessary for Animal Control to make an
inspection in order to perform any duty or enforce any provision of this
chapter or any other applicable state statute, they are hereby empowered to
enter property at a reasonable time and inspect the premises.  Animal
Control shall have the power only if consent of the owner or occupant of the
property is freely given, a search warrant is obtained or such exigent
circumstances exist that a warrantless, non-consensual search is required.



   (D)   All animals of any age running at large, as defined in this
chapter, and found in the county, may be picked up by Animal Control and
impounded in the animal shelter. If Animal Control can reasonably return the
animal they may do so and issue a warning to the owner. All animals of any
age which have bitten a human being may be picked up by Animal Control and
impounded in the animal shelter for any applicable quarantine period. In the
event an animal is impounded for a quarantine period, the owner shall be
responsible for a reasonable fee for board, administration and medical
attention during the impoundment.



   (E)   Any animal required to be licensed but found unlicensed shall
be impounded for a minimum period of five days unless it is earlier claimed
by its owner. If the animal is not claimed by its owner within five days of
impoundment, the animal may then be offered for adoption or may be euthanized
at the discretion of the Director of Animal Control. Any person claiming or
reclaiming an animal pursuant to this section shall pay a reasonable fee for
board, administration, and medical attention for the animal during
impoundment and obtain proper licensing for such animal, if applicable, from
Animal Control. Animal Control shall make reasonable efforts to locate and
inform the owner of any animal that the animal has been impounded.



   (F)   Any stray cat impounded in the Animal Shelter shall be held
for a minimum of three days or unless it is earlier claimed by its owner. If
the animal is not claimed by its owner within three days of impoundment, the
animal may then be offered for adoption or may be euthanized at the
discretion of the Director of Animal Control. Any person claiming or
reclaiming an animal pursuant to this section shall pay a reasonable fee for
board, administration and medical attention for such animal during
impoundment.



   (G)   Any animal taken into custody pursuant to KRS 525.125 or KRS
525.130 may be humanely disposed of at the discretion of the Director of
Animal Control five days after the animal is taken into custody. Any person
claiming an interest in an animal in custody pursuant to this section, may
prevent human disposition of the animal by posting a bond or security in an
amount sufficient to pay a reasonable fee for board, administration and
medical attention for at least 30 days, inclusive of the date on which the
animal was taken into custody. If a bond or security is posted, Animal
Control may humanely dispose of the animal at the end of the duration for
which expenses are covered by the bond or security, unless there is a court
order prohibiting the animal's disposition.  The court order must provide
for a bond or other security in the amount necessary to protect Animal
Control from paying any cost of the care, maintenance or disposal of the
animal. The person convicted for violating KRS 525.125 or KRS 525.130 shall
pay all reasonable expenses related to the incidents of cruelty, including
investigation, disposition, veterinary costs, or maintaining or disposing of
the animal. Upon taking custody of an animal pursuant to KRS 525.125 or KRS
525.130, Animal Control shall give notice of the seized animal by posting a
notice at the location where the animal is taken into custody or by
delivering notice to a person residing at the property.



   (H)   When any licensed animal or animal whose owner is known, is
impounded in the Animal Shelter, Animal Control shall notify the owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, within seven days of impoundment.



   (I)   The registered owner shall reclaim the animal within three
days of the receipt of notice of impoundment. Any licensed animal or animal
whose owner is known which is not reclaimed by its owner within three days of
receipt of the notice of impoundment may then be offered for adoption or may
be euthanized at the discretion of the Director of Animal Control. Any person
claiming or reclaiming an animal pursuant to this section, shall pay to the
Animal Control a fee of $30 for the first day and an additional $10 for each
subsequent day for board, administration and medical attention during the
impoundment.



   (J)   An Animal Control Officer may choose to issue a warning
citation in lieu of a uniform citation if a violation is minor in nature. The
warning citation shall allow up to but not exceed seven days to correct the
minor violation. Should the violation not be corrected within the allotted
time then a uniform citation shall issue. If a violation is serious in nature
the Animal Control Officer may issue a uniform citation.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)



                               



Statutory reference:



   Impounding, destruction of dogs; exemption of hunting dogs, see KRS
258.215



§ 90.03  ADOPTION AND MANDATORY SPAY/NEUTER.



   (A)   Prior to the adoption of any animal from the Animal Shelter an
application must be completed by the person wishing to adopt the animal. The
application is designed to determine the prospective owner's ability to care
for the animal. Any person wishing to adopt an animal who has been issued a
uniform citation for inhumane treatment of animals in the last five years
will not be able to adopt.



   (B)   Animal Control and the Animal Shelter are not obligated to
sell or transfer possession of any animal in their custody.



   (C)   All dogs and cats adopted from the Animal Shelter must be
surgically altered to prevent breeding. Animals reclaimed by their owners
must also have surgical alteration within 30 days unless the animal is deemed
to be a registered purebred of show quality.



   (D)   The fee for adoption of animals shall be $80.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  DOG AND/OR CAT LICENSING.



   (A)   The owners of all dogs and cats, or those who harbor or
maintain dogs and cats in the unincorporated or incorporated areas of the
county, shall have each and every dog and cat licensed, or as an option
microchipped and registered with the Kenton County Animal Shelter in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable Kentucky
Revised Statutes.



   (B)   The annual license fee for each dog and cat shall be as set
forth in division (D) of this section. The license fee period shall begin on
July 1 in each year and will terminate on June 30 of the following year.
Licenses must be renewed each year during the month of July. Failure to
license, or to renew a license, will result in a penalty except as noted
below. At the time of licensing and registration, the owner shall provide his
or her name, address and telephone number, as well as the name, breed, color
and sex of each dog/cat to be licensed. Upon payment of the license fee, the
owner shall be issued a certificate of registration and a serial numbered
license tag for each dog/cat. The license tag shall be fastened to the dog's
or cat's collar and worn by the dog or cat at all times.



   (C)   All dogs/cats that are microchipped and registered with Kenton
County on or before June 30, 2004 shall be exempt from the annual licensing
fee for the lifetime of the animal. The microchip shall be county-approved,
and coded with a unique identifying number implanted in the neck of the dog
or cat. The owner shall provide his or her name, address and phone number, as
well as the name, breed, color and sex of each dog/cat microchipped. The
information, along with the unique identifying number, will be entered into
the computer data base for future reference. Upon payment of the microchip
fee, the owner shall be issued a certificate of registration for each dog/cat
implanted.  Should the ownership of the dog/cat change for any reason
whatsoever, the change of ownership shall be made in the data base for a
nominal fee to be set by the Fiscal Court.



   (D)   Dog and cat license fee schedule.



 

Classification
 
Fee


Dogs and cats not altered or microchipped (except vicious)
 
$15


Microchipped registered on county animal shelter database
 
$9


Altered animals (evidence required)
 
$9


Microchipped and altered
 
$5


*Court ordered vicious animal renewal license
 
$50



 



 

Classification
 
Fee


*Court ordered microchipping of any vicious animal
 
$50


*Commercial animal establishments license
 
$50



 



   (E)   Failure to register a dog and to obtain the license set forth
herein within 30 days of acquiring or possessing the animal, or failure to
renew between July 1 or July 31 each year thereafter, or failure to display
the license on the dog, or failure to microchip a dog in place of buying a
license shall result in a fine as provided in § 90.99.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



                                 



Statutory reference:



   Licensing of dogs and license fees, see KRS 258.135



§ 90.05  RABIES VACCINATION.



   (A)   All dogs and cats, four months of age and older, shall be
vaccinated for rabies and revaccinated for rabies at the expiration of the
immunization period as certified by a veterinarian.



   (B)   Any dog or cat reclaimed or adopted from the Animal Shelter
must have a valid rabies vaccination.



   (C)   Any dogs or cats which are found to be have been vaccinated
for rabies, whether discovered by a veterinarian or by other means, must
within 14 days be vaccinated.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhumanely treat any
animal, including, but not limited to, the deprivation of necessities,
beating, mutilating, torturing, killing, overloading, overworking, or
otherwise abusing any animal. Nothing herein shall prevent Animal Control
from humanely euthanizing any animal.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, display or
keep any animal without providing adequate food, adequate water, adequate
shelter or medical attention.



   (D)   Any animal which is chained, tied or otherwise restrained
shall be provided no less than ten feet of chain, rope, and the like with a
swivel attached to prevent entanglement.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an animal within
the passenger compartment of an automobile without adequate ventilation in
the summer or adequate warmth in the winter. No person shall enclose any
animal in the trunk of an automobile.  An Animal Control or Police Officer
shall rescue any animal confined in such a manner.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, cause,
instigate, permit, observe, or attend any dog-fight, cock-fight, bull-fight,
or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set free any hare,
rabbit or other animal for the purpose of violating any provision of this
chapter.



   (H)   No performing animal exhibition, circus or horse show, shall
be permitted, in which the animals are induced or encouraged to perform
through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a
manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering.
All equipment used on animals in such shows shall fit properly and be in good
working order.



   (I)   Any person, who as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domestic animal, shall stop at once and render assistance as may be possible
and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner, if
known, or to Animal Control or any Police Officer.



   (J)   No person shall expose any poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be likely to be eaten by a domestic
animal, provided that the substance shall not be unlawful for a person to
expose on his or her own property, poisonous substance, or to Animal Control
or any Police Officer.



   (K)   No person shall give away any live animal as a prize or for
inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as an
inducement to enter into any business agreement, whereby the offer was for
the purpose of attracting the trade, except that it shall not be unlawful to
give away small fish, not to exceed four inches, as a prize.



   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person to color, stain, dye or
otherwise change the natural color of any live animal or to offer such
colored animals for sale in the county, except that the mane and tail of an
equine may be changed pursuant to accepted practices in showing the equine.



   (M)   It shall be unlawful to sell baby chicks, ducks or rabbits
under the age of two months in quantities less than six.



   (N)   It shall be unlawful to place an animal in the rear of a truck
without securing the animal so that the animal cannot jump out.



   (O)   It shall be unlawful to possess more than six domestic (cats
and/or dogs) or exotic animals or a combination thereof in ones residential
dwelling if that said dwelling is within 100 feet of a neighbor.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  ANIMALS TO BE UNDER CONTROL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned
or harbored by him or her, to run at large. When livestock are running at
large, Animal Control or the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify
the owner as soon as possible. If reasonably possible and feasible, the owner
of the livestock shall be notified prior to the actual capture and
impoundment of the livestock.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to own or possess a vicious animal.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to own or possess an animal that conducts
itself in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to allow a female dog to be exposed
during estrus (in season, in heat) so as to attract male dogs. Every female
that is in season shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such
a manner that such female dog cannot come in contact with a male dog except
for planned breeding.



   (E)   All animals that are caught running at large and taken to the
Animal Shelter, shall be micro-chipped before being released to their
rightful owner.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own, harbor or keep as a pet, a
wild or exotic animal, not indigenous to the United States, unless the animal
has been approved for sale or retention by appropriate state and federal
governmental agencies and any required permits have been obtained.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own, harbor or keep as a pet, a
wild animal native to the United States, unless the animal has been approved
for sale or retention by appropriate state and federal governmental agencies
and any required permits have been obtained.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  HUMANE SOCIETIES; STANDARDS AND LICENSING.



   (A)   All humane societies in the county shall be governed by the
same standards set forth in §§ 90.20 et seq. of this chapter, and shall be
subject to any ordinance pertaining to commercial animal establishments.



   (B)   Humane societies shall maintain records on each animal
accepted or houses, noting the following:



      (1)   Name and address of previous owner or person turning in
the animal.



      (2)   Date received.



      (3)   Condition of the animal and any medical treatment.



      (4)   Date of adoption, redemption or euthanization.



      (5)   Name and address of new owner.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions provided in § 90.01 of this chapter,
the following definition shall apply to the provisions of this subchapter,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "OWNER" or "OPERATOR."  Any person, group of persons, partnership, or
any entity owning or operating a commercial animal establishment. This
definition does not apply to veterinarians as long as animals on the premise
are there for treatment only.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)



§ 90.21  LICENSING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Licensing. All commercial animal establishments shall obtain
and maintain a valid commercial animal establishment license in order to
operate a commercial animal establishment within the county.



   (B)   The commercial animal establishment licenses shall be issued
by the Kenton County Fiscal Court.



   (C)   The commercial animal establishment license shall be valid for
a period of one year, effective July 1 through July 30 of each year.



   (D)   The commercial animal establishment license shall be renewed
annually.



   (E)   The annual fee for a commercial animal establishment license
shall be as established by the Fiscal Court.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide an adequate
environment for each animal which is compatible with the general health and
welfare of the animal.



   (B)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate
space for each animal. Each cage or enclosure shall be large enough for the
animal to stand, sit, lie and turn around without touching the walls or
ceiling of the cage or enclosure, or another animal.



   (C)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate
sanitation. Each cage or enclosure shall be maintained as follows:



      (1)   Cages or enclosures containing dogs or cats, of any age,
shall be cleaned with hot water, disinfectant and detergent daily (including
holidays), or more if conditions require additional cleaning or disinfecting
to keep animals out of contact with feces or urine. Litter boxes shall be
cleaned daily (including holidays) and the litter changed when needed.



      (2)   Cages or enclosures containing birds shall contain a
perch and shall be cleaned with hot water and disinfectant at least twice
weekly or more if conditions require additional cleaning.



      (3)   Cages or enclosures containing small animals shall be
cleaned with hot water and disinfectant at least twice weekly or more if
conditions require additional cleaning.



   (D)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate
nourishment and water for each animal as follows:



      (1)   Each animal shall be given fresh food and water daily,
including holidays.



      (2)   Soft food shall be available to those animals unable to
chew standard dry food.



      (3)   Potable water shall be available to each animals at all
times.



      (4)   Food and water containers shall be washed and
disinfected daily.



   (E)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide proper
medical treatment from a veterinarian for sick or injured animals.



   (F)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide an adequate
room (cage) temperature for the general health and welfare of the animal.



   (G)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide for general
cleanliness of its establishment, and shall not permit a flea, roach, tick,
ant, lice or mice infestation.



   (H)   All commercial animal establishments shall obtain any
necessary licenses or permits from an appropriate state or federal agency to
offer for sale any exotic or wild animal.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  INSPECTIONS.



   The Director of the Animal Shelter or any Animal Control Officer shall
be permitted and empowered to make an inspection of any commercial animal
establishment within the county, and shall further be permitted to take
photographs of commercial animal establishments during the inspection. The
inspection shall take place upon the verbal request of the Director of the
Animal Shelter or any Animal Control Officer, during regular business hours
of the commercial animal establishment.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person failing to comply with the mandatory spay/neuter
requirements of § 90.03 of this chapter shall:



      (1)   For the first offense either show the court proof from a
licensed veterinarian that the surgical procedure has been performed or be
ordered by the court to surrender the animal to Animal Control Officer
without a refund of adoption fees, and be fined a sum not less than $10 nor
more than $100.



      (2)   For the second offense immediately surrender the animal
to Animal Control without a refund of adoption fees, and be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $250.



   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the licensing requirements
of §§ 90.04 and 90.08 or the vaccination requirements of § 90.05 shall on
a first offense be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200; on a second
or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $350.



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of § 90.06 of this chapter
relating to the humane treatment of animals shall on the first offense be
fined not less than $200 nor more than $500, or up to 30 days in the County
Jail, or both; on a second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than
$350 nor more than $750, or up to 90 days in the County Jail, or both. Owner
will also forfeit the animal to Animal Control.



   (D)   Any person violating § 90.07(A) of this chapter relating to
animals running at large shall on the first offense be issued a warning; on
the second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $100. Each day that such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (E)   Any livestock owner who violates § 90.07(A) of this chapter
shall on the first offense be issued a warning and be required to reimburse
the county for all reasonable expenses incurred in capturing, impounding,
boarding, and providing necessary medical services to the livestock. On
second or subsequent offense, the owner shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, and the owner shall reimburse the county for all reasonable
expenses incurred in capturing, impounding, boarding, and providing necessary
medical services to the livestock. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (F)   Upon conviction under § 90.07(B) of this chapter relating to
possession of a vicious animal, the penalty shall be a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500, or up to 90 days in the County Jail, or both. In
addition the court shall order one of the following:



      (1)   That the following regulations be followed as a
condition of the owner retaining the animal:



         (a)   The vicious animal shall be registered with Animal
Control.



         (b)   The vicious animal shall be confined in an
enclosure constructed that satisfies Animal Control as to the possibility of
the animal escaping. All such enclosures shall be designed to prevent the
entry of small children and shall be suitable to confine the vicious animal.
Such enclosures shall be securely closed and locked, and shall be designed to
prevent the animal from digging out or otherwise escaping from the enclosure.



         (c)   The enclosure shall display a sign warning of the
vicious animal and shall be visible from the public roadway or public access
if applicable.



         (d)   The vicious animal shall not be permitted outside
of the dwelling of its owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is
necessary to obtain veterinary care or under the direction of Animal Control.
If the vicious animal must be allowed outside the permitted areas, it shall
be under the direct control and supervision of its owner or keeper and shall
be muzzled and restrained with a lead or leash not to exceed three feet in
length, or placed in a secure animal carrier.



         (e)   The owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall
immediately notify Animal Control if the animal is loose, unconfined, has
attacked an animal or human being, or is deceased.



      (2)   In the alternative to division (F)(1) above, the court
may order that the animal be immediately surrendered to Animal Control to be
euthanized.



   (G)   Upon a conviction of a second or subsequent offense under §
90.07(B) of this chapter relating to possession of a vicious animal, the
penalty shall be a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500, or up to
one year in the County Jail, or both; and if the violation involves the same
animal, the court shall order the animal immediately surrendered to Animal
Control to be euthanized.



   (H)   Any person failing to comply with the provisions of § 90.08
of this chapter relating to wild and exotic animals shall on the first
offense be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100; on the second or
subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.



   (I)   Any humane society which fails to comply with the requirements
of § 90.09 shall for the first offense be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $100; on the second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $500. In addition to the fine, the fourth offense shall
result in permanent license revocation.



(Ord. 2006-3-1, passed 4-13-06)



CHAPTER 91:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Road and Bridge Projects



   91.01      Public hearing required



   91.02      Notice requirements



   91.03      Public may testify; effect of testimony



   91.04      Hearing to be held prior to construction



   91.05      Separate hearing for each project not required



   91.06      Exemptions from hearing requirement



Obstructions



   91.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   91.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   91.32   Materials on street or sidewalk



   91.33   Removal of ice and snow



Public Rights-of-Way



   91.40      General provisions



   91.41      Definitions



   91.42      Administration and enforcement



   91.43      General conditions related to facilities located in
the rights-of-way



   91.44      Existing facilities



   91.45      Registration



   91.46      Requirements for registrants



   91.47      Permits



   91.48      Emergencies; power to order repairs



   91.49      Insurance



   91.50      Indemnification; hold harmless



   91.51      Joint planning and construction; coordination of
excavation



   91.52      Installation, relocation, or discontinuation of
facilities



   91.53      Above-ground facilities



   91.54      Patching and restoration standards



   91.55      Inspections



   91.56      Appeal



 



   91.99   Penalty



ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS



§ 91.01  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   Before the city expends state derived tax revenues on a municipal
highway, road, street, or bridge it shall hold a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter to take the sense of the public with regard
to the project and to priorities for use of tax moneys for road and bridge
purposes.



(KRS 174.100)



§ 91.02  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state derived tax
revenues on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall hold a public
hearing for the purpose of taking the sense of the public with regard to road
and bridge matters within the city. Notice of the hearing shall be given not
less than seven (7) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days before the
scheduled date of the public hearing and before beginning work on any project
covered by this subchapter.



(KRS 174.100 (1))



§ 91.03  PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.



   (A)   At the hearing any person may speak with regard to any
proposed project, any project which he feels should be built or done which
has been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any other
matter related to road or bridge projects.



   (B)   The city shall not be bound by the testimony heard at the
hearing but shall give due consideration to it.



(KRS 174.100 (2), (3))



§ 91.04  HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.



   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project
wherein state derived tax revenues are involved until the hearing as provided
herein has been held.



(KRS 174.100 (4))



§ 91.05  SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.



   This subchapter shall not be construed as to require a separate hearing
for each project.  A single hearing encompassing the entire road and bridge
program, provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified
at the hearing, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.



(KRS 174.100 (5))



§ 91.06  EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency
repair or replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or
man-caused disasters nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to projects
which are under construction as of the effective date of this subchapter
unless construction is suspended after the effective date of this subchapter
and the city desires to reactivate the project.



(KRS 174.100 (6), (7))



OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 91.30  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.31  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any fence or
building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a
separate offense.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.32  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof.



Penalty, see § 91.99



________________



Cross-reference:



   Littering on streets or sidewalks, see Ch. 94,



§ 91.33  REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his premises free and clear of snow and ice, and to remove
therefrom all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time,
which will ordinarily not exceed twelve (12) hours after the abatement of any
storm during which the snow and ice may have accumulated.



Penalty, see § 91.99



________________



Cross-reference:



   "Reasonable time" requirement, see § 10.04 (D)



PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 91.40  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as the “City of
Crestview Hills Right-of-Way Ordinance” and shall apply to all facilities
located in right-of-way controlled by the city.



   (B)   Subchapter not in lieu of franchise. Compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter shall not excuse any person from complying
with all other requirements of law, including, to the extent applicable,
holding a valid franchise, contract, or easement from or with the city. Any
franchise, contract, or easement may include additional regulations,
obligations, fees, and costs.



   (C)   Subchapter not intended to impair existing contracts. Nothing
in this subchapter is intended to impair the legal right or obligation of any
contract, franchise, or easement previously granted by the city or authorized
under state or Federal law.



   (D)   Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city does not
diminish or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers
and rights which it now or may have hereafter to regulate the use of the
rights-of-way or charge reasonable compensation for such use. Any public
utility or special purpose governmental entity, as defined herein, does not
diminish or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers
and rights which it now has or may have hereafter.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.41  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions apply to this subchapter.



   “ABOVE-GROUND FACILITIES.” Any facilities located above ground,
which are capable of being installed without significant underground
excavation, including, but not limited to, utility poles and miniature
cellular phone towers.



   “DEGRADATION.” A material decrease in the useful remaining life of
the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way,
resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be
required if the excavation did not occur.



   “DIRECTOR.” The city’s Director of Public Works, or his or her
designee, unless otherwise specified.



   “EMERGENCY.” A situation when placement, repair, or maintenance of
facilities is needed to be undertaken immediately because of a danger to
human life or health or of significant damage to property, including, but not
limited to, unanticipated leaks, interruptions, or reductions in existing
services, or other situations defined as being emergency or dangerous
conditions pursuant to federal, state, or local law. The installation of
facilities that only serve to expand existing service or provide new service
shall not be considered an emergency.



   “EXCAVATE or EXCAVATION.” To dig into or in any way remove or
physically cut, disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   “FACILITY or FACILITIES.” Any tangible asset in the right-of-way,
including but not limited to, equipment and apparatus such as pipes,
conduits, wires, cables, amplifiers, transformers, fiber optic lines,
antennae, poles, towers, or ducts, which are required, necessary, used, or
useful in the provision of utility or other services.



   “INSTALL, INSTALLED, OR INSTALLATION.” Placement of facilities
within the rights-of-way, including the replacement of existing facilities.



   “LESSEE.” A person who provides services within the city solely by
leasing facilities and who has no control over what or where or how any
facilities are erected, installed, maintained, operated, repaired, removed,
restored, or otherwise used.



   “MATERIAL.” With respect to degradation, means of a nature that
causes or results in an alteration or disruption to the city right-of-way.



   “PARTY or PERSON.” means any natural or corporate person, business
association, or other business entity including, but not limited to, a
partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or
private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the
foregoing, or any other legal entity.



   “PLANNED PUBLIC PROJECT.” Any beautification, installation,
excavation, re-paving, or restoration activity in the rights-of-way that is
undertaken by the city as part of a budgeted public improvements plan
approved by the City Council and which is funded in whole or in part with
public tax dollars in any given fiscal year.



   “PUBLIC UTILITY or UTILITY.” A party that is defined in KRS Chapter
278 as a utility:



      (1)   Is subject to the jurisdiction of the Kentucky Public
Service Commission, the FCC, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; or



      (2)   Is required to obtain a franchise from the city to use
and occupy the right-of-way pursuant to Sections 163 and 164 of the Kentucky
Constitution.



   “PERMIT.” An encroachment permit issued pursuant to this subchapter.



   “PERMITTEE.” A party holding an encroachment permit.



   “REGISTRANT.” Any party filing or required to file a registration
statement pursuant to this subchapter.



   “RESELLER SERVICE PROVIDER.” A person who provides services within
the city solely by reselling services and who has no control over what,
where, or how any facilities are erected, installed, maintained, operated,
repaired, removed, restored or otherwise used.



   “RIGHT-OF-WAY.” The surface of and the space above and below a
public roadway, highway, street, freeway, lane, path, sidewalk, alley, court,
boulevard, avenue, parkway, cartway, bicycle lane or path, public sidewalk,
or easement held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall
include rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city. A
right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard
to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.



   “TARIFF.” The internal regulations or guidelines of the utility
industry as promulgated or adopted by the Kentucky Public Service Commission
or the Federal Communications Commission.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.42  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Director or the person designated by the Director in his or her
absence is the principal city official responsible for the administration of
this subchapter, and he or she may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder. The Director shall be responsible for enforcing compliance with
this subchapter and may adopt reasonable procedures consistent with this
chapter that are necessary for its administration or enforcement.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.43   GENERAL CONDITIONS RELATED TO FACILITIES LOCATED IN THE
RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Responsibility for costs. Any act that a party is required to
perform under this subchapter shall be performed at that party's cost, unless
expressly provided for otherwise in this subchapter.



   (B)   Construction procedures and placement of facilities;
obligation to minimize interference with the rights-of-way.



      (1)   All activities in the rights-of-way that are subject to
this subchapter shall be performed in compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations. Each party subject to this subchapter
shall obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority as required
by this subchapter or other applicable rule, law, or regulation.



      (2)   The city may require that facilities be installed at a
particular time, at a specific place or location, or in a particular manner,
as a condition of access to a particular right-of-way; may deny access if a
party is not willing to comply with the city's reasonable requirements; and
may remove, or require removal of, any facility that is not installed in
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter and charge that party for
all the costs associated with removal. Regardless of any other criteria, in
the event the placement or location of a facility in a particular area of the
right-of-way would constitute a public safety concern, the city may deny the
placement of that facility in that area or order its relocation or removal.



      (3)   In order to minimize interference with the use of the
rights-of-way by others, each party subject to this subchapter shall make
reasonable efforts to minimize the number of surface cuts made, shall make
reasonable efforts to coordinate such surface cuts with the city's paving
schedule, and, if appropriate, shall enter into joint trenching and other
arrangements with other parties.



      (4)   Any right-of-way or public property that is disturbed or
damaged during the construction, excavation, installation, operation,
maintenance, or repair of a facility shall be repaired within sixty (60)
calendar days of the completion of those activities which caused the
disturbance or damage by the party that disturbed or damaged the
rights-of-way or public property. This time may be extended by the Director
upon demonstration of reasonable cause by the subject party. Reasonable cause
shall include, but not be limited to, inclement weather, natural disasters,
and similar emergencies, including natural disasters and emergencies in other
regions where a utility has sent local crews to provide assistance.
Reasonable cause shall also include delay due to unforeseen public bidding
complications and/or contractor non-availability for public utilities that
are subject to state laws governing bidding and public procurements.



      (5)   Parties subject to this subchapter shall make every
reasonable effort to stack or bundle conduit where feasible so as to occupy
as little space as possible in the right-of-way, consistent with, and to the
extent permitted by, applicable codes, standards, and regulations.



      (6)   The minimum clearance of wires and cables above the
rights-of-way, and the placement of underground facilities, shall conform to
Applicable codes, standards, and regulations.



   (C)   Duty to maintain all property in right-of-way. All parties
subject to this subchapter shall maintain all of their facilities located in
the right-of-way in a manner that promotes the public safety. By way of
example, but not limitation, all facilities, including but not limited to
poles and manholes, shall be maintained in a safe condition at all times. In
the event any facility in the right-of-way endangers the public safety, the
party responsible for such facility shall take reasonable steps to rectify
the situation immediately upon notification and in accordance with this
subchapter.



   (D)   Standards. All parties subject to this subchapter shall at all
times use ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly
accepted methods and devices and utilize due diligence in performing any
installation, construction, maintenance or other work in the right-of-way.



   (E)   Relocation or removal. Pursuant to § 91.54 and consistent
with the procedures and criteria contained therein, all parties subject to
this chapter shall, upon the provision of reasonable written notice of, and
at the direction of the Director, promptly relocate or remove facilities, or
rearrange aerial facilities, if required by a tariff, state or federal law, a
franchise agreement with the city, or for a public purpose pursuant to this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.44  EXISTING FACILITIES.



   Facilities located in the rights-of-way prior to the effective date of
this subchapter may remain in the rights-of-way and shall not be considered
in violation of this subchapter, provided the party responsible for such
facilities under this subchapter complies with the provisions of this
subchapter, including the filing of a registration statement and the payment
of any applicable franchise fee within one hundred twenty (120) days of its
effective date. The registration statement of each party having any
facilities within the rights-of-way as of the date this subchapter is adopted
shall contain a general description of such registrant's facilities and the
types of services offered. Upon request by the city, the party responsible
for such facilities shall provide a map or other information regarding the
location of existing facilities. In addition, upon the request of the city
and in order to assist the city with implementing or enforcing the provisions
of this subchapter, each registrant shall make available for inspection on a
reasonable basis more detailed information, if available, regarding the
location of its facilities.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.45  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Requirement to register. Unless otherwise indicated by this
subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any party to install, operate,
construct, or maintain any facilities within the rights-of-way unless such
facilities are registered with the city by filing the registration statement
required herein and all applicable franchise fees are paid to the city.



   (B)   Registration. Any party who owns any facilities within the
right-of-way or who seeks to occupy the right-of-way to install, construct,
or maintain any facilities within the rights-of-way shall file a registration
statement, which shall be filed with the Director on a form provided by the
city. The registration statement shall include the following information:



      (1)   The identity and legal status of the registrant,
including any affiliates who own or operate any facilities in the
rights-of-way and the name, title, address, and telephone number of the
individual responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.



      (2)   The registrant's address, telephone number, facsimile
number, and e-mail address, as well as a local point of contact available to
be contacted in the event of an emergency.



      (3)   A general description of all facilities that the
registrant will be installing in the right-of-way.



      (4)   A statement of the amount, if any, of any fee to which
the registrant is subject pursuant to any franchise agreement, lease, or
other agreement between the registrant and the city.



      (5)   Proof that the registrant is insured in the form of a
copy of a certificate of insurance or self-insurance that is in compliance
with the insurance requirements of this subchapter or its franchise agreement.



      (6)   If the registrant is a utility, the number of the
registrant's certificate of authorization or license to provide utility
service issued by the Kentucky Public Service Commission, or other state or
federal authority, if any.



   (C)   Fee. In order to compensate the city for its costs in
administering this subchapter, each registrant shall submit a fee of fifteen
dollars ($15) with each registration filed with the city.



   (D)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall notify the city within
thirty (30) days of any change in information contained in the registration
statement.



   (E)   Exceptions for reseller service providers and lessees. A
reseller service provider shall not be required to register those facilities
it utilizes solely for the purpose of reselling, or those facilities it
utilizes as a lessee.



   (F)   Effect of registration. Registration does not convey legal or
equitable title to the rights-of-way, nor does it place a registrant in a
position of priority with respect to other registrants. Registration does not
excuse a party from having to obtain a franchise, lease, or other agreement,
if otherwise required, or from obtaining any required or necessary agreement
with the city or other party with respect to the placement of facilities on
the city's or another party's facilities.



   (G)   Exceptions. The following types of facilities are not required
to be registered pursuant to this subchapter, and the party responsible for
such facilities is not otherwise required to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter expressly pertaining to registrants. However, the party
responsible for such facilities is required to comply with all remaining
provisions of this subchapter that are not expressly limited to registrants,
unless otherwise exempted.



      (1)   Newspaper stands;



      (2)   Signage;



      (3)   Facilities associated with sidewalk cafes or the sale of
goods or merchandise;



      (4)   Facilities owned by the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



      (5)   Facilities installed by the city that are not used to
provide competitive utility services.



   (H)   Rejection or cancellation of registration.



      (1)   (a)   Within ten working days of the filing of the
registration statement or the discovery of the inaccuracy of the registration
statement by the city, the Director shall provide written notice to any party
who;



            1.   Does not possess proper authorization to
occupy the rights-of-way with facilities; or



            2.   Fails to accurately complete the registration
statement.



         (b)   Such written notice shall specify the deficiency
and shall notify the party what corrective action must be taken. If the party
fails to correct the deficiency within ten (10) days, the Director shall
reject or cancel the registration unless it can be shown by the party that
significant steps have been taken to correct the deficiency, upon which
showing the Director may provide an additional reasonable extension of time,
or provide approval of the registration contingent upon the party's ability
to correct the deficiency to the satisfaction of the Director.



      (2)   A registrant who no longer continues to place, maintain,
or own any facilities in the rights-of-way may cancel its registration upon
providing the city with written notice.



      (3)   Reconsideration.



         (a)   If the Director rejects or cancels a registration
statement, the registrant may file with the Director within ten (10) days of
receipt of the notice of rejection or cancellation a written request for
reconsideration, which shall include the basis for the registrant's position.



         (b)   The Director may hear any relevant evidence in
deciding the reconsideration and will notify the registrant in the event that
further information is required. The Director shall render a final decision
in writing within ten (10) days of receipt of the registrant's written
request for reconsideration or the receipt of any further evidence, whichever
is later, and will provide the registrant the basis for his or her decision.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.46  REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRANTS.



   In addition to the other requirements set forth herein, each registrant
shall use reasonable efforts to:



   (A)   Cooperate with other registrants and the city to reasonably
minimize traffic and other disruptions, including surface cuts, taking into
account the efficiency, aesthetics, obtrusiveness, safety and costs of the
use;



   (B)   Participate in such joint planning, construction, and advance
notification of right-of-way work, including, but not limited to,
coordination and consolidation of surface cut work, as currently coordinated
by Planning and Development Services of Kenton County (PDS);



   (C)   Cooperate with the city in any emergencies involving the
rights-of-way as further provided in this subchapter, including the
maintenance of a twenty-four (24) hour emergency contact;



   (D)   Designate a single point of contact for all purposes
hereunder, as well as comply with such other contact and notice protocols as
required by this subchapter or as promulgated by the Director pursuant to
this subchapter;



   (E)   Require that any party performing any work or service in the
right-of-way on behalf of said registrant will comply with all applicable
provisions of this subchapter as well any other additional local regulation
pertaining to the performance of such work, and will identify the registrant
for whom such contractor is working. Said registrant shall be responsible and
liable hereunder only to the city for any damage to the right-of-way caused
by the actions of any such subcontractor or others as if said registrant had
performed or failed to perform any such obligation; and



   (F)   Take reasonable steps to provide notice to all occupants where
any work or service which requires an encroachment permit is scheduled to be
performed and may have an adverse effect on those properties that abut the
impacted site or impedes access to those properties abutting the impacted
site. Registrants shall make a good faith attempt to notify occupants
regardless of whether the registrant holds an easement on or over the
property so that occupants know which utility to contact with questions or
concerns.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.47  PERMITS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise exempted by this subchapter, any party
performing an activity within the rights-of-way requires an encroachment
permit issued by the city.



   (B)   Activities which may be performed by registrants without a
permit. Any registrant maintaining a valid registration pursuant to this
subchapter may perform the following activities without a permit, unless such
work will require the registrant to block a portion of a street in a manner
that obstructs traffic:



      (1)   Installation or replacement of cable or wiring on
existing above-ground utility poles;



      (2)   Repair, replacement, or maintenance of existing
above-ground facilities, including poles or miniature cellular towers, in the
same location with no street, curb, apron, sod, or sidewalk cuts, provided
any replacement facilities are of comparable size as the existing facilities;
or



      (3)   Any work performed inside existing conduits, vaults, or
similar structures that do not otherwise require an encroachment permit.



      (4)   Any work which temporarily blocks or occupies a
right-of-way, unless the temporary blockage or occupation occurs on high
volume traffic areas. For the purpose of this sub-chapter high volume traffic
areas are: Thomas More Parkway, Center View Blvd., Rhine Valley Drive, and
Horse Branch Road. These high volume traffic areas require an encroachment
permit prior to any activity undertaken by registrants; however if the
blockage or occupation of these rights of ways shall only be for two hours or
less, the permit fee shall be waived.



   (C)   Encroachment permit. Except for those activities authorized
without a permit by division (B), a registrant shall apply to the city for an
encroachment permit in order to:



      (1)   Perform any excavating, digging, cutting, boring, or
tunneling into, through, or under any paved street surface, curb, sidewalk,
sod, or apron within the rights-of-way, and said permit shall include all
aspects of the anticipated activities without the need for multiple permits;



      (2)   Perform any construction, installation, repair,
replacement, or maintenance of facilities in the right-of-way; or



      (3)   Temporarily occupy the right-of-way.



   (D)   Time for application.



      (1)   An encroachment permit for the performance of
non-emergency work shall be applied for at least ten (10) days prior to such
planned activity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director may waive said
time period for good cause shown. The city shall approve, deny, or
conditionally approve a permit application within five (5) business days of
the receipt of the application, and in the case of a conditional approval or
denial, state in writing the basis for such determination and what conditions
must be met by the applicant in order to obtain a permit. Any work performed
without proper notification shall constitute work being done without a
permit, and as such constitute a violation of this subchapter.



      (2)   A permit issued pursuant to an emergency shall be
applied for no later than three (3) business days after the discovery of the
emergency. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director may waive said time
period for good cause shown. Emergency work, as defined by this subchapter,
may be completed without first obtaining a permit.



   (E)   Application for permit.



      (1)   All applications for permits shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   The identity and legal status of the applicant
(the party to whom the permit is issued).



         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the
officer, agent, or employee requesting the permit.



         (c)   A description of all activities covered by the
permit, the locations and estimated dates and times of commencement and
completion thereof.



         (d)   The number of all surface cuts, if any, to be
covered by the permit, and the approximate dimensions of each cut.



      (2)   A single permit may be issued for multiple surface cuts
or installations, provided that no such surface cut or installation covered
in a single permit shall be more than five hundred (500) feet apart, or upon
a showing by the permit applicant that the granting of a single permit shall
not significantly affect the city's ability to efficiently administer this
subchapter.



   (F)   Fee.



      (1)   In order to compensate the city for its costs in
administering this subchapter, each registrant shall be assessed a fee of:



         (a)   Fifty dollars ($50) upon application for a permit
authorizing a street surface cut;



         (b)   Twenty dollars ($20) upon application for a permit
authorizing a sidewalk or bike path cut, or for a permit authorizing a bore
cut; and/or



         (c)   Fifteen dollars ($15) upon application for a
permit authorizing a sod cut, for a permit authorizing the blocking of any
street in a manner that obstructs traffic, or for any other encroachment not
listed above.



      (2)   The appropriate fee shall be assessed for each category
applied for on one permit, but no applicant shall be assessed a fee of more
than fifty dollars ($50) total per project or permit application.



      (3)   The city shall invoice all permit fees to the applicant
on a quarterly basis, which shall be due to the city thirty (30) days after
the date of the invoice.



   (G)   Notification of inspections. If the city knows at the time of
the issuance of the permit that it shall require an inspection pursuant to
this subchapter, it shall notify the permittee that such an inspection is
required.



   (H)   Denial. The Director, in his or her reasonable discretion, may
deny or revoke an encroachment permit, or may issue a permit that is
contingent upon the applicant performing certain requirements that shall be
specified in the permit. A decision by the Director to deny an encroachment
permit application shall be based on at least one (1) of the following
criteria:



      (1)   It significantly conflicts with the location of existing
facilities or facilities that are planned or permitted for installation, or
city improvements or facilities that are planned in that area;



      (2)   It significantly conflicts with the timing of other
ongoing activity taking place in the same area of the right-of-way, or with a
previously scheduled activity;



      (3)   It conflicts with the planned grading, re-grading,
construction, reconstruction, widening, or altering of any right-of-way,
including streets and sidewalks, or the construction, reconstruction, repair,
maintenance, or alteration of a public improvement, including, but not
limited to, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and street lights;



      (4)   It conflicts with an approved development plan in that
geographic area that requires all or certain types of facilities to be
located in certain locations, areas, or parts of the rights-of-way;



      (5)   It is an above-ground facility other than a utility
pole, fire hydrant, or street light that, because of its size, presents
significant public safety concerns or violates guidelines or procedures
pertaining to aesthetics that are duly adopted by the city;



      (6)   It fails to take reasonable measures to disguise or
cover the facility as required by the city;



      (7)   It conflicts with a requirement contained in the
applicant's franchise agreement;



      (8)   It is located in a type of right-of-way, such as a
bicycle lane or path, in which the city has made a determination that
facilities are not to be installed;



      (9)   It would threaten public health, safety, or welfare, or
otherwise constitute a violation of the provisions of this subchapter; or



      (10)   The applicant is not otherwise in material compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (I)   Exceptions. Permits shall not be required to be obtained
pursuant to this subchapter if the facilities involved are of the following
nature. However, the party responsible for such facilities shall comply with
all remaining provisions of this subchapter, as well as any other chapter
that may apply, unless otherwise exempted.



      (1)   Newspaper stands;



      (2)   Signage;



      (3)   Facilities associated with sidewalk cafes or the sale of
goods or merchandise;



      (4)   Facilities owned by the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



      (5)   Facilities installed to provide new development with
connections to utility service and for which the city is provided performance
and warranty surety protection under its land development regulations; and



      (6)   Facilities installed by the city that are not used to
provide competitive utility services.



   (J)   Permit availability. Permits issued pursuant to this
subchapter shall be available at all times at the indicated work site and
shall be available for inspection by the Director or other city employees or
officials upon request.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.48  EMERGENCIES; POWER TO ORDER REPAIRS.



   (A)   Because emergency repairs can be disruptive to the community,
including planned business activities of residents, a registrant shall notify
the city within two (2) business days from discovery of the emergency, via
telephone, facsimile, text, e-mail, or in-person communication with a city
official, of any event regarding its facilities already located within the
right-of-way that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed
to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to an emergency. Within
three (3) business days of the discovery of the emergency, the registrant
shall have applied for any necessary permit and provided the city with a
written notification of said emergency, which notice shall include, at a
minimum, the time, date, location, and extent of any excavation or other work
performed. If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the Director or his or her designee shall attempt to contact that
registrant immediately.



   (B)   If the city determines that the right-of-way associated with a
surface cut has been degraded or caved in more than one-half (1/2) inch below
grade, and within two (2) years after any surface cut, it shall notify the
party or parties responsible for such degradation or cave-in of this
determination and, in the case of a clear and immediate danger or hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the city shall order the party or parties
responsible to take immediate precautionary measures to direct vehicular or
pedestrian traffic around and away from the degradation or cave-in. In
addition, the city shall order the party or parties responsible to make
necessary corrections and repairs, which may be temporary in nature, to cure
the immediate danger or hazard within two (2) days and perform any additional
work consistent with the issuance of any necessary permit. The city shall
thereafter order the party or parties responsible to make all necessary
permanent corrections and repairs within ninety (90) days.



   (C)   In all other cases of degradation or cave-in, the city shall
order the party or parties responsible for such degradation or cave-in to
take immediate precautionary measures to direct vehicular or pedestrian
traffic around and away from the degradation or cave-in, and shall order the
party or parties responsible to make all necessary corrections and repairs
within thirty (30) days.



   (D)   In the event the city orders corrections or repairs pursuant
to this section, and the party responsible fails to respond within the time
allotted, the city shall cause the necessary corrections and repairs to be
made, and shall submit a statement for the costs incurred by the city in
making such corrections and repairs to the responsible party, which statement
shall include an additional administrative fee of five hundred dollars
($500). In that event, and if the said statement of costs and fees is not
paid by the responsible party within forty-five (45) days, the city shall
suspend the issuance of all future permits to the responsible party until
such time as the costs are paid.



   (E)   This section shall not be interpreted to preclude the city
from taking any and all reasonable protective measures with respect to the
right-of-way and the health and safety of the general public, including, but
not limited to, blocking the general public's access to the area, temporarily
repairing the right-of-way, or removing any facility that constitutes an
immediate health or safety concern. The city shall not undertake to repair or
remove a facility unless all other reasonable methods of response to the
emergency have been exercised.



   (F)   Any other provision in this section notwithstanding, the
Director may extend any time period under this section for good cause, and
the requested extension upon a showing of good cause by the applicant, shall
not be unreasonably withheld or denied. Good cause shall include, but not be
limited to, inclement weather, natural disasters, and similar emergencies,
including natural disasters and emergencies in other regions where a utility
has sent local crews to provide assistance.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.49  INSURANCE.



   Each registrant shall maintain in full force and effect a commercial
general liability insurance policy reasonably acceptable to the city with a
minimum policy limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and
shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance evidencing the
insurance policy required by this section. The certificate shall state that
the insurance policy shall not be canceled or non-renewed until after thirty
(30) days’ notice has been provided to the city; however, insurance may be
canceled and replaced with a policy that continues to meet the requirements
of this section. A registrant may satisfy the insurance requirements and
conditions of this section under a reasonably acceptable self-insurance plan.
The city reserves the right to impose reasonable additional insurance
requirements as part of a franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.50  INDEMNIFICATION; HOLD HARMLESS.



   (A)   (1)   Consistent with Kentucky law, each registrant shall
defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed
officials, boards, members, agents, and employees against any and all claims,
suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable
relief, and costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising
from liability or claims of liability for bodily injury or death to persons
or property damage in which the claim arises out of the installation,
construction, repair, maintenance, or operation of its facilities, and in the
event of a final judgment being obtained against the city either
independently or jointly with the registrant, the registrant shall pay such
judgment with all costs and hold the city harmless thereon.



      (2)   Within ten (10) business days of learning of any claim,
suit, cause of action, proceeding judgement for damages or equitable relief
that might trigger the indemnification obligation, the city shall notify the
registrant of the existence of the claim, suit, cause of action, proceeding
or judgment in writing and shall provide all information known to the city
regarding same. Registrant shall defend against the claim, suit, cause of
action, proceeding or judgment on behalf of the city and may select the
counsel to represent the city in such an action or proceeding. The city shall
not agree to any settlement or compromise for which an indemnification
obligation applies unless the registrant consents to the settlement or
compromise.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to registrants which are
political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, municipal
corporations, special districts, or special purpose governmental entities.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.51  JOINT PLANNING AND CONSTRUCTION; COORDINATION OF EXCAVATION.



   (A)   Any registrant owning, operating, or installing facilities in
the rights-of-way that provide water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone,
internet, cable, video, cellular, or other utility services, may at their
discretion prepare and submit to the director a master plan or future plans
for right-of-way work in the city.



   (B)   The city shall annually prepare a listing of planned public
improvements including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bike paths,
storm water improvements or other such improvements along with their
anticipated bid date. The list of planned public improvements shall be
prepared and be available at least six (6) months prior to their intended bid
date. The list shall be provided to utilities on record as having filed a
registration with the city at that time. The list of public improvements
shall also be submitted to Planning and Development Services of Kenton
County. Implementation of planned public improvements shall be contingent
upon approval by City Council and the availability of necessary funding.



   (C)   Prior to applying for a permit for work involving a surface
cut in the right-of-way, a party shall review the city's current repaying and
resurfacing and shall coordinate, to the extent practicable with each
registrant, utility and street work shown on such plan to minimize damage to,
and avoid undue disruption and interference with, the public use of the
rights-of-way.



   (D)   Any item of information provided by a registrant consistent
with this sub-chapter which the registrant considers to be proprietary must
be clearly and conspicuously designated “proprietary” by the registrant.
Any item clearly and conspicuously designated as proprietary by the
registrant shall be maintained confidentially by the city and not publicly
disclosed, disseminated, or shared with third parties without specific
written consent of the registrant. Any item not labeled proprietary shall be
not be considered proprietary by the city and may be subject to public
disclosure under Kentucky's Open Records laws.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.52  INSTALLATION, RELOCATION, OR DISCONTINUATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Provisions apply unless direct conflict exists. The provisions
of this section shall apply unless they directly conflict with a tariff,
state or Federal law, or the provisions of the applicant's franchise
agreement with the city. This section shall not be interpreted to impair the
ability of a registrant to perform work not requiring a permit unless a
public safety concern would arise if such work were to be performed.



   (B)   General application. Upon the written notice of and at the
direction of the Director, a registrant shall relocate or remove facilities,
or rearrange aerial facilities, if required by a tariff, state or Federal
law, a franchise agreement with the city, or the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Coordination. To the extent reasonably possible, registrants
shall coordinate the installation, relocation, and removal of their
facilities with each other in order to avoid issues with respect to the
location of facilities within the right-of-way.



   (D)   Procedure. The Director shall notify the applicant if the
Director determines that a facility may not be installed as requested by the
applicant. Upon determining that a facility may not be installed as
requested, the Director shall provide written notice to the applicant as
early as practicable and in conformity with any specific applicable notice
requirement. The notice shall contain a description of the area affected as
well as the reason for the Director's determination. The Director may issue a
permit that is contingent upon certain condition(s) being fulfilled with
respect to the criteria contained below.



   (E)   Reservation of rights. Notwithstanding any other provision in
this subchapter, the city specifically reserves the right to order the
removal or relocation of any facility installed after the effective date of
this chapter, at no cost to the city, for which the appropriate permit was
not obtained.



   (F)   Preclusion on cutting newly paved surfaces.



      (1)   If any street is designated for resurfacing or
reconstruction by the city on the list maintained pursuant to this
subchapter, the registrant shall make any extensions, changes, or
installations of or to its facilities ahead of such activity. The registrant
shall notify the Director no less than forty-five (45) days prior to the
city's anticipated bid date of its desire to perform such extensions,
changes, or installations, and may be allowed up to ninety (90) additional
days to complete the work.



      (2)   If any street is about to be constructed, reconstructed,
widened, altered, or paved by the city, the Director shall provide notice to
registrants, and the registrant shall make any extensions, changes, or
installations of or to its facilities ahead of such activity. Depending on
the amount of such extensions, changes, or installations to be performed, the
registrant may be allowed up to one hundred twenty (120) days to complete the
work, which the Director may extend for good cause. It is expected that the
registrant shall not disturb the city's improvements within the following two
(2) year period, so as to minimize the premature degradation of the
right-of-way caused by multiple alterations and surface cuts. Upon a
registrant's showing of undue hardship or emergency, the Director may grant
permission for limited disturbment of the newly paved surface within the two
(2) year period. Registrant shall in those instances comply with all other
relevant provisions of this chapter pertaining to restoration of the
right-of-way.



   (G)   Relocation.



      (1)   Upon providing reasonable advanced written notice to the
registrant or other responsible party, the Director may order the relocation
or rearrangement of any facility, in his or her reasonable discretion and in
good faith, if any of the following arise with respect to that facility:



         (a)   The relocation or rearrangement is necessary for
the purpose of public safety.



         (b)   The relocation or rearrangement is required by a
tariff, state or Federal law, or a franchise agreement with the city.



         (c)   The relocation or rearrangement is necessary to
assist in the installation of facilities by another registrant or permittee.



         (d)   The relocation or rearrangement is necessary as a
result of the city adopting a planned public project or policy requiring that
facilities be relocated.



         (e)   So as to conform to the established grade or line
of a right-of-way or so as not to interfere with public improvements whenever
the city shall grade, regrade, construct, reconstruct, widen, or alter any
right-of-way, or construct, reconstruct, repair, maintain or alter a public
improvement, including, but not limited to, storm sewers, or street lights
therein.



      (2)   The city shall coordinate the new location with the
registrant or permittee as part of the permitting process.



      (3)   Relocation underground. If, as a result of a planned
public project, a registrant is required to relocate facilities that were
previously and lawfully located above-ground, and the city requests, as part
of the relocation, that the facilities be relocated to underground, the city
shall bear the cost for the difference in cost between an aerial and
underground facility of the same type, unless an agreement to the contrary is
otherwise entered into by the appropriate parties.



      (4)   Relocation for public safety reasons. If the basis for
the city ordering the relocation of a facility is a public safety concern,
the registrant shall relocate the facility at no cost to the city.



      (5)   Relocations to assist in the placement of other
facilities. If a registrant is required to relocate facilities to assist in
the installation of facilities by another registrant or permittee, the party
seeking to install the facilities shall bear the costs of said relocation,
unless an agreement to the contrary is otherwise entered into by the
appropriate parties.



      (6)   Relocations where the cost is borne by the city.
Notwithstanding any language in this subchapter to the contrary, unless an
agreement to the contrary is otherwise entered into by the appropriate
parties, the cost of the following types of relocations shall be borne by the
city:



         (a)   The relocation is the result of the city adopting
a plan or policy requiring that facilities be placed underground in that
location, if, at the time the facility was installed, such a plan was not in
place;



         (b)   The location in which the facility is currently
sited was not a part of the right-of-way or was not otherwise owned or
controlled by the city at the time the facility was installed;



         (c)   The city has previously ordered that the facility
be relocated to comply with a public improvement project, the registrant or
party has substantially complied with such order, and the city then orders
the registrant or party to relocate that facility to a different area as part
of the same project; or



         (d)   The city orders the relocation of a facility to
accommodate a public improvement project, and the construction of such
project is subsequently terminated by the city.



   (H)   Discontinuance of use.



      (1)   Any party discontinuing use of a facility shall notify
the Director in writing of such discontinued use within thirty (30) days.
Said notice shall describe the facilities for which the use is to be
discontinued and include a statement as to whether the registrant intends to
leave the facilities in place for potential future use, remove the
facilities, or abandon the facilities in place. The registrant shall remain
responsible for the maintenance, repair, and condition of discontinued
facilities at all times.



      (2)   The Director may order that the responsible party
remove, replace, or repair any discontinued facility which significantly
interferes with the city's maintenance of the right-of-way.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.53  ABOVE-GROUND FACILITIES.



   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to above-ground
facilities:



      (1)   To the extent possible, registrants shall use poles and
conduit existing at the time of permitting in installing above-ground
facilities.



      (2)   All poles or wire holding structures are subject to any
applicable, duly adopted regulations regarding location, height, type, or
other pertinent aspect.



      (3)   All transmission and distribution structures, poles, and
other lines and equipment installed or erected by registrant under this
subchapter shall be located so as to minimize any interference with the
proper use of the right-of-way with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners whose property adjoins or abuts any affected right-of-way.
Subject to applicable codes, overhead drops shall be as close as possible to
other utility drops in order to concentrate the drops in as small an area as
possible to minimize visual clutter and interference with the use of private
property.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.54  PATCHING AND RESTORATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Minimum standards. Patching and restoration of the
rights-of-way shall be performed according to the applicable standards and
with materials comparable to those used by the city, and at a minimum shall
comply with the applicable standard engineering drawing. All edges of a
surface cut made to a paved street shall be sawed, and such surface cuts
shall be sealed with a sealant approved by the city. In addition, the city
shall approve all backfill material utilized.



   (B)   Additional standards. In special circumstances, the Director
may impose additional restoration requirements upon a determination that the
minimum patching and restoration standards are inadequate because of at least
one of the following considerations:



      (1)   The number, size, depth, and duration of the excavations;



      (2)   Disruptions or damage to the right-of-way;



      (3)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way;



      (4)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; and



      (5)   The remaining life expectancy of the right-of-way
affected by the excavation.



   (C)   Guarantees. Each party performing excavations pursuant to a
permit required by this subchapter guarantees its restoration work and shall
maintain it for one (1) year following its completion. During this period, it
shall, upon notification from the Director, correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary, using the method required by the Director.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.55  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Site inspection.



      (1)   Any party issued a permit pursuant to this subchapter
shall make the worksite available to the city and to all others as authorized
by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and
upon completion of the work. If the city has given the party notice of its
intent to inspect the excavation, the permittee shall provide the city with
advanced notice of at least two (2) business days when the appropriate
portion of the activity is ready for inspection, if the permittee was not
notified of the city's intent to inspect the excavation site as a condition
of the permit or the city failed to inspect after being provided the required
notice, the excavation may be permanently covered.



      (2)   Any excavation with a required approval or inspection
that has been covered prior to the two (2) day notification period shall be
uncovered for inspection at that permittee's expense, upon request of the
city.



      (3)   If the construction or restoration does not meet the
standards under this chapter, the city may order reasonable corrective
measures.



   (B)   Authority of the Director.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work that he or she in good faith believes poses a
serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any
work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
ordinance, resolution, regulation, standard, condition, or code. The order
shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for
revocation of the permit. The permittee shall proceed with the corrective
work before undertaking any additional work under the permit. Within thirty
(30) days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to
the Director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not
been presented within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit.
or for good cause shown, extend the period of time allowed for the corrective
work to be completed.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.56  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any party aggrieved by the following actions of the Director
or the city may appeal pursuant to this section:



      (1)   The denial of registration following the reconsideration
process provided for in this subchapter;



      (2)   The denial of a permit under this subchapter;



      (3)   The issuance of a conditional permit under this
subchapter, where the party disagrees with certain of the conditions(s)
imposed;



      (4)   The revocation of any permit under this subchapter;



      (5)   A decision pertaining to installation, relocation, or
removal of a facility pursuant to this subchapter;



      (6)   The imposition of any fee, penalty, or charge under this
subchapter which the party believes to be invalid.



   (B)   The appealed action shall be reviewed, upon written request,
by the City Administrator, or his or her designee, who shall act within a
period of ten (10) days from the receipt of the written request. The
appealing party shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present
relevant evidence to the City Administrator should it desire to do so, and
the decision by the City Administrator shall be in writing and provide the
basis for the decision.



   (C)   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the City Administrator
pursuant to division (B) may appeal the City Administrator's decision, in
writing, to the City's Public Works Committee within ten (10) days of the
City Administrator's decision. The appealing party shall be afforded the
opportunity to be heard and present relevant evidence to the Public Works
Committee should it desire to do so, and the decision by the Public Works
Committee, shall be in writing and provide the basis for the decision. The
written decision of the Public Works Committee shall constitute a final
administrative decision, which may be appealed to the Kenton Circuit Court
within thirty (30) days of the Public Works Committee's written decision.



(Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 91.30 to 91.33 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than
one hundred dollars ($100) per day, and each day that a violation exists
shall be deemed a separate day and subject to separate penalty.



   (B)   Any entity which violates the provisions of § 91.45(A) or (B)
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000).



   (C)   Any entity which violates the provisions of § 91.47 shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100) for the
first violation within a four (4) year period; five hundred dollars ($500)
for the second violation within a four (4) year period; one thousand dollars
($1,000) for the third violation within a four (4) year period; and three
thousand dollars ($3,000) for each subsequent violation within a four (4)
year period.



   (D)   Any entity which violates any provision of §§ 91.40 to
91.55, other than §§ 91.45(A), 91.45(B), or 91.47, shall be assessed a
civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100) per violation.



(Am. Ord. 2018-11-01, passed 12-13-18)



CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AUTOMOBILE PARTS."  Any portion or parts of any motor driven vehicle
as detached from the vehicle as a whole.



   "INOPERATIVE CONDITION."  Unable to move under its own power due to
defective or missing parts, and which has remained in such condition for a
period of not less than ten (10) consecutive days.



   "MOTOR VEHICLE."  Any style or type of motor driven vehicle used for
the conveyance of persons or property.



   "NUISANCE."  Public nuisance.



   "SCRAP METAL."  Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper,
aluminum, or any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any other
material, whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness in its
original form and can no longer be used for its originally intended purpose.



   "UNFIT FOR FURTHER USE."  In such a dangerous condition; having
defective or missing parts; or in such a condition generally as to be unfit
for further use as a conveyance.



________________



Cross-reference:



   For other definitions relevant to this chapter, see § 10.02



§ 92.02  COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.



   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public
nuisance, those offenses which are known to the common law and statutes of
Kentucky as public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded against
as is provided in this chapter or in accordance with any other provision of
law.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person having control
or management of any land within the city to permit a public nuisance to
develop thereon.  The following conditions are declared to be public
nuisances:



   (A)   Dangerous trees or stacks adjoining street.  Any tree, stack,
or other object standing in such a condition that it will, if the condition
is allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb, or property of, or cause
hurt, damage, or injury to persons or property upon the public streets or
public ways adjacent thereto, by the falling thereof or of parts thereof.



   (B)   Accumulation of rubbish.  An accumulation on any premises of
filth, refuse, trash, garbage, or other waste material which endangers the
public health, welfare, or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger
of its catching or communicating fire, its attracting and propagating vermin,
rodents, or insects, or its blowing of rubbish into any street, sidewalk, or
property of another.



   (C)   Storage of explosives.  The storage of explosive material
which creates a safety hazard to other property or persons in the vicinity.



   (D)   Weeds and grass.  The excessive growth of weeds, grass, or
other vegetation.  Unless otherwise provided, "EXCESSIVE" shall mean growth
to a height of twelve (12) inches or more.



   (E)   Open wells.  The maintenance of any open, uncovered, or
insecurely covered cistern, cellar, well, pit, excavation, or vault situated
upon private premises in any open or unfenced lot or place.



   (F)   Trees and shrubbery obstructing streets, sidewalks, and
drainage.  The growing and maintenance of trees or shrubbery which in any
way interferes with the use, construction, or maintenance of streets or
sidewalks, causes injury to streets or sidewalks, or constitutes an
obstruction to drainage.



   (G)   Keeping of animals. The failure to keep the animal's pen,
yard, lot or other enclosure in a sanitary condition free from preventable
offensive odors or the keeping or having within the city an animal that
habitually or repeatedly makes loud noises or conducts itself in any way as
to be a public nuisance.



   (H)   Junk; scrap metal; motor vehicles.  The storage of motor
vehicles in an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use,
automobile parts, or scrap metal within the city limits except on premises
authorized by the city for such purposes.



   (I)   The feeding of ducks, geese, pigeons, and similar such birds
and wild animals, such as, raccoons and squirrels in a manner causing or
contributing to unsanitary conditions and offensive odors within the city
limits.  This would include making mass quantities of food available to
groups of waterfowl, pigeons, or wild animals, on repeated occasions, so as
to encourage them to amass in one particular location.  This does not
include maintenance of birdhouses or backyard bird feeders designed to feed
sparrows, cardinals, hummingbirds, or similar such birds.



(Am. Ord. 2001-5-2, passed 6-14-01; Am. Ord. 2011-05-01, passed 6-9-11) 
Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person having
the control or management of any land within the city to permit a public
nuisance, health hazard, or source of filth to develop thereon.



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance situation is discovered, the authorized
city official shall give five (5) days' written notice to remedy the nuisance
situation.  The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner of property, as it appears on the current tax assessment roll.  Upon
the failure of the owner of the property to comply, the authorized city
official is authorized to send employees upon the property to remedy the
situation.



   (C)   The city shall have a lien against the property for the
reasonable value of labor and materials used in remedying the nuisance
situation.  The affidavit of the authorized city official shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the
proceedings pursuant to KRS 381.770 and this section, and shall be recorded
in the office of the County Clerk.  The lien shall be notice to all persons
from the time of its recording and shall bear interest at the rate
established by the city thereafter until paid.  The lien created shall take
precedence over all other subsequent liens, except state, county, school
board, and city taxes, and may be enforced by judicial proceeding.  In
addition to this remedy or any other remedy authorized by law, the owner of a
property upon which a lien has been attached pursuant to this section shall
be personally liable for the amount of the lien, including all interest,
civil penalties, and other charges and the city may bring a civil action
against the owner and shall have the same remedies as provided for the
recovery of a debt owed.



§ 92.05  NUISANCE CREATED BY OTHERS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by the owner, occupant, or person
having control or management of the premises, but merely that the nuisance be
created or contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests, or other persons
for whose conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for
whose conduct the owner or operator is not responsible, but by the exercise
care ought to have become aware of.



§ 92.06  SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Whenever it is brought to the attention of the City Council
that a nuisance exists and the City Council deems that there is an immediate
threat to the public health, safety, welfare, the City Council may by
majority vote suspend the license of any person conducting business upon the
premises where the nuisance exists.



   (B)   The Clerk shall cause notice of the suspension to be served
personally upon the licensee or at the premises where the nuisance exists.



   (C)   Upon the application of the licensee, the City Council may
remove the suspension upon such terms as it may direct.



§ 92.07  CUTTING WEEDS DURING SUMMER MONTHS.



   (A)   The owners, users, or occupiers of lots located within
residential zones of the city shall cause the grass, weeds and other
vegetation growing on same to be cut and maintained.  The lots shall be cut
one time each and every month each year beginning with the month of April and
ending in the month of September.



   (B)   Any owners, users, or occupiers who fail or refuse to cut
their real property by the dates set forth in division (A) above shall be
subject to a fine of $25 and in addition shall reimburse the city its cost of
cutting the lots or areas subject to a minimum of $25.



(Ord. 1970-8-1, passed 8-5-70; Am. Ord. 1972-7-2, passed 7-5-72; Am. Ord.
1982-9-1, passed 11-11-82; Am. Ord. 1991-9-1 passed 10-10-91) Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each
offense.  Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PREVENTION, FIREWORKS, AND EXPLOSIVES



Section



   93.01   Definitions; legality of items



   93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display



   93.03   Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale



   93.04   Bond or liability insurance requirement



   93.05   Exempted sales and uses



   93.06   Destruction of fireworks



   93.07   Storage of explosives



   93.08   Sale of fireworks to minors prohibited; use of fireworks by
minors without adult supervision prohibited



Gas Space Heaters



   93.15   Definition



   93.16   Installation



   93.17   Violations; service shut off



Sprinkler Systems



   93.25   Security caps for buildings with sprinkler systems



Explosives



   93.30   Authority and scope



   93.31   Storage, transportation, and scope



   93.32   Blasting permits



   93.33   Manufacture and sale



Burning of Trash and Other Debris



   93.40   General prohibition



   93.41   Issuance of permit



   93.42   Permit fee



   93.43   Recreational fire restrictions, outdoor fire restrictions
and unrestricted fires



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.



   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, “FIREWORKS” means any
composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the
definition of “consumer fireworks”as defined in division (B) or
“display” fireworks as defined in division (D) and as set forth in the
U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT) hazardous materials regulations.



      (1)   Exception number 1:  Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns,
or other devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance
with DOT regulations, and packed and shipped according to said regulations,
are not considered to be fireworks and shall be allowed to be used and sold
at all times.



      (2)   Exception number 2:  Model rockets and model rocket
motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable
aero models are not considered to be fireworks.



      (3)   Exception number 3:  Propelling or expelling charges
consisting of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter are not considered
as being designed for producing audible effects.



(KRS 227.700)



   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, “CONSUMER
FIREWORKS” means fireworks that are suitable for use by the public,
designed primarily to produce visible effects by combustion, and comply with
the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission. The types, sizes, and amount of
pyrotechnic contents of these devices are limited as enumerated in this
chapter.  Some small devices designed to produce audible effects are
included, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing fifty (50)
milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial devices containing
one hundred and thirty (130) milligrams or less of explosive composition. 
“CONSUMER FIREWORKS” are further defined by the Consumer Product Safety
Commission in CPSC, 16 CPSC, 16 C.F.R. Pts 1500 and 1507, are classified as
division 1.4 explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation and include
the following:



      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.



         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler.  These
devices consist a metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with
pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower
of sparks is produced.  Sparklers may contain up to one hundred (100) grams
of pyrotechnic composition per item.  Those devices containing any
perchlorate or chlorate salts may not exceed five (5) grams of pyrotechnic
composition per item.  Wire sparklers which contain no magnesium and which
contain less than one hundred (100) grams of composition per item are not
included in this category, in accordance with DOT regulations.



         (b)   Cylindrical fountain.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than seventy-five (75) grams of pyrotechnic
composition.  Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks, and sometimes a
whistling effect or smoke, is produced.  This device may be provided with a
spike for insertion into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or plastic base
for placing on the ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard handle, if
intended to be hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one (1) tube is
mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed two
hundred (200) grams, or five hundred (500) grams if the tubes are separated
from each other on the base by a distance of at least one half (1/2) inch.



         (c)   Cone fountain.  Cardboard or heavy paper cone
containing up to fifty (50) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  The effect is
the same as that of a cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is
mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed
two hundred (200) grams, or five hundred (500) grams of the tubes are
separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one half
(1/2) inch.



         (d)   Illuminating torch.  Cylindrical tube containing
up to one hundred (100) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition,
colored fire is produced.  May be spike, base, or hand-held. When more than
one tube is mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may
not exceed two hundred (200) grams, or five hundred (500) grams if the tubes
are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one half
(1/2) inch.



         (e)   Wheel.  A device attached to a post or tree by
means of a nail or string.  A wheel may have one or more drivers, each of
which may contain not more than sixty (60) grams of pyrotechnic
composition.  No wheel contain more than two hundred (200) grams total
pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition, the wheel revolves, producing a
shower of color and sparks and, sometimes, a whistling effect.



         (f)   Ground spinner.  Small device containing not more
than twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a
wheel but intended to be placed on the ground and ignited.  A shower of
sparks and color is produced by the rapidly spinning device.



         (g)   Flitter sparkler.  Narrow paper tube attached to
a stick or wire and filled with not more than one hundred (100) grams of
pyrotechnic composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition. The
paper at one end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.



         (h)   Toy smoke device.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than one hundred (100) grams of pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.



      (2)   Aerial devices.



         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Sky
rockets contain a wooden stick for guidance and stability and rise into the
air upon ignition.  A burst of color or noise or both is produced at the
height of flight.



         (b)   Missile-type rocket.  A device similar to a sky
rocket in size, composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a stick
for guidance and stability.



         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner.  A tube containing up
to twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  A propeller or blade is
attached, which, upon ignition, lifts the rapidly spinning device into the
air.  A visible or audible effect is produced at the height of flight.



         (d)   Roman candles.  Heavy paper or cardboard tube
containing up to twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition, up to ten (10) stars (pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition
that burn with bright color) are individually expelled at several second
intervals.



         (e)   Mine, shell.  Heavy cardboard or paper tube
usually attached to a wood or plastic base and containing up to 60 grams of
total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible or audible
effect composition).  Upon ignition, “stars,” components producing
reports containing up to one hundred and thirty (130) milligrams of explosive
composition per report, or other devices are propelled into the air.  The
term “mine” refers to a device with no internal components containing a
bursting charge, and the term “shell” refers to a device that propels a
component that subsequently bursts open in the air.  A mine or shell device
may contain more than one tube provided the tubes fire in sequence upon
ignition of one (1) external fuse.  The term “cake” refers to a
dense-packed collection of mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition
including lift charges of any multiple tube devices may not exceed two
hundred (200) grams. The maximum quantity of lift charge in any one tube of a
mine or shell device shall not exceed twenty (20) grams, and the maximum
quality of break or bursting charge in any component shall not exceed
twenty-five (25%) of the total weight of chemical composition in the
component.



         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube.  A package kit
containing a cardboard, high-density polyethylene (HDPE), or equivalent
launching tube with multiple- shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is
limited to a maximum of sixty (60) grams of total chemical composition (lift
charge, bust charge, and visible or audible effect composition), and the
maximum diameter of each shell shall not exceed one and three fourths (1 3/4)
inches. In addition, the maximum quantity of lift charge in any shell shall
not exceed twenty (20) grams, and the maximum quantity of break or bursting
charge in any shell shall not exceed  twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
weight of chemical composition in the shell.  The total chemical composition
of all the shells in the kit, including lift charge, shall not exceed four
hundred (400) grams.  The user lower a shell into the launching tube, at the
time of firing, with the fusing extending out of the top of the tube.  After
the firing, the tube is then reloaded with another shell for the next
firing.  All launching tubes shall be capable of firing twice the number of
shells in the kit without failure of the tube.  Each package of
multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning label requirements
of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.



      (3)   Audible ground devices.



         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes.  Small paper-wrapped or
cardboard tube containing not more than fifty (50) milligrams of pyrotechnic
composition.  Those used in aerial devices may contain not more than one
hundred and thirty (130) milligrams of explosive composition per report. 
Upon ignition, noise and a flash of light is produced.



         (b)   Chaser.  Small paper or cardboard tube that
travels along the ground upon ignition.  A whistling effect, or other noise,
is often produced.  The explosive composition used to create the noise may
not exceed fifty (50) milligrams.



(KRS 227.702)



   (C)   Items listed below are classified as “NOVELTIES” and
“TRICK NOISEMAKERS” and are not classified as consumer fireworks by the
U.S. Department of Transportation and their transportation, storage, retail
sale, possession, sale, and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all
times.



      (1)   Snake, glow worm.  Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic
composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning.  The ash
expands in length as the pellet burns.  These devices may not contain
mercuric thiocyanate.



      (2)   Smoke device.  Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the
primary effect.



      (3)   Wire sparkler.  Wire coated with pyrotechnic
composition that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition.  These items may
not contain magnesium and must not exceed one hundred (100) grams of
composition per item.  Devices containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts
may not exceed five (5) grams of composition per item.



      (4)   Trick noisemaker.  Item that produces a small report
intended to surprise the user.  These devices include:



         (a)   Party popper.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than sixteen (16) milligrams of explosive composition
that is friction sensitive.  A string protruding from the device is pulled
to ignite it, expelling paper streamers and producing a small report.



         (b)   Booby trap.  Small tube with string protruding
from both ends, similar to a party popper in design.  The ends of the string
are pulled to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small
report.



         (c)   Snapper.  Small, paper-wrapped item containing a
minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand.  When
dropped, the device explodes producing a small report.



         (d)   Trick match.  Kitchen or book match that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition of the match a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.



         (e)   Cigarette load.  Small wooden peg that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive composition.  Upon ignition of a
cigarette containing one (1) of the pegs, a small report is produced.



         (f)   Auto burglar alarm.  Tube which contains
pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when
ignited.  A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding fifty (50) milligrams
may also be used to produce a small report.  A squib is used to ignite the
device.



(KRS 227.704)



   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, “DISPLAY
FIREWORKS” means pyrotechnic devices or large fireworks designed primarily
to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or
detonation.  This term includes, but is not limited to, firecrackers
containing more than two (2) grains (one hundred and thirty (130) milligrams)
of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than forty (40) grams
of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits
for classification as consumer fireworks.  Display fireworks are defined by
the Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 C.F.R. Pts. 1500 and 1507,
and are classified as class B explosives by the U.S. Department of
Transportation.



(KRS 227.706)



   (E)   Legality of items.



      (1)    Items described in division (B)(1) above are legal for
retail sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with
respect thereto are met.



      (2)   Items described in divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), and (D) are
not legal for retail sale but are legal under permits granted pursuant to
this chapter for the purposes specified in this chapter for public displays
and may be sold at wholesale as provided in this chapter.



      (3)   Items described in division (C) are legal for retail
sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect
thereto are met.



(KRS 227.708)



§ 93.02  SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.



   No person, firm, co-partnership or corporation shall offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell, possess, use, or
explode, any display fireworks, except as follows:



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized
city official may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks
by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or
groups of individuals. 



      (2)   Every display shall be handled by a competent display
operator to be approved by the public official by whom the permit is granted,
and shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the
opinion of the official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person. 



      (3)   “COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR” shall be defined as the
person with overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a
fireworks display.  The competent display operator shall have a Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) License and have
participated as an assistant in firing at least five (5) public displays.  A
“competent display operator” is also an employee possessor.  A permit
under division (1) shall be issued only to a competent display operator
holding an ATF license.



      (4)   At least one competent display operator shall be on site
during display set- up and firing.  This complement display operator shall
maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by the local authority
having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site and at all times
the display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of the State Fire
Marshal or local Fire Chief.  All public displays that require issuance of a
permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of National Fire
Protection Association (NEPA) 1123 Code for Fireworks Display (adopted
edition).



      (5)   Permits shall be filed with the office of the State Fire
Marshal at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display. 
After this privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose
only.  No permit granted under this subsection shall be transferable.  For
the purpose of this section, “public display of fireworks” shall include
the use of pyrotechnic devices or pyrotechnic materials before a proximate
audience, whether indoors or outdoors.



      (6)   Any person remaining within the display area shall be
identified as licensed by the ATF, or an employee thereof, or be an assistant
in training to become a competent display operator.  All persons remaining
within the display area shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.



      (7)   The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings
and Construction with recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall
promulgate administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 13A to
administer the provisions of this division. The regulations shall address the
process by which permits are issued and any other procedures that are
reasonably necessary to effectuate this division.



   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, and Explosives if the sale is to a person holding a display permit
as outlined in subsection (A) of this section.  The permit holder shall
present the permit along with other verifiable identification at the time of
sale.



   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license
issued by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.



   (D)   The sale, and use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic
signaling devices and distress signals for marine, aviation, and highway use.



   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads.



   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or
theater or for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports.



   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations.



   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the
direct supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent
or local agency.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm,
co-partnership, non-profit, or corporation from offering for sale, exposing
for sale, selling at retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using
consumer fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702 as permitted pursuant to KRS
227.715.



(KRS 227.710)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 93.02, the consumer fireworks
described in KRS 227.702 may be offered for sale, sold at retail, or kept
with the intent to sell, only if the requirements of this section are met.



   (B)   Any person firm, co-partnership, non-profit, or business
intending to sell consumer fireworks described in KRS 227.702(1) shall
register annually with the State Fire Marshal's office in accordance with KRS
227.715, and display its registration certificate in a conspicuous location
at the site.



   (C)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the International Building Code, with
Kentucky Amendments (adopted edition), and NFPA 1124 (National Fire
Protection Association) Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage,
and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted addition);



   (D)   No person or business shall give, offer for sale, or sell any
consumer fireworks listed in § 93.01(B) to any person under 18 years of age.



   (E)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed by a fireworks
distribution facility, or manufacturing facility.  No person under 18 years
of age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer fireworks retail sales
facility registered under KRS 227.715 unless the individual is supervised by
a parent or guardian.



(KRS 227.715 (7) through (9))  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.



   No permit shall be issued under § 93.02 unless the applicant shall
give bond or evidence of liability insurance deemed adequate by the official
to whom application for the permit is made, in a sum not less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000).  However, the Fire Chief or State Fire Marshal
may require a larger amount if in their judgment the situation requires it,
conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused thereby either
to a person or to property by reason of the permitted display, and arising
from any acts of the licensee, his agents, employees or subcontractors.



(KRS 227.720)  Penalty, see § 93.99(B)



§ 93.05  EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of
explosives or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or
industry, or gold star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or
chlorate, toy snakes which contain no mercury, smoke novelties and party
novelties, which contain less than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of
explosive mixture, or shells or cartridges, used as ammunition in firearms,
or blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal or ceremonial
purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations, or the
sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be shipped by the
seller directly out of the state.



(KRS 227.730)



________________



Statutory reference:



   Approval by State Fire Marshal required prior to sale or use, see KRS
272.740



§ 93.06  DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having
jurisdiction which has been deputized to act on behalf of the state fire
marshal, shall cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks which are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a
period of sixty (60) days, the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by
closed bid to a properly certified fireworks wholesaler.



   (B)   After a period of sixty (60) days, the seized fireworks may be
offered for sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer,
distributor, or wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class
1.3G or "Display" designation shall require the notification of the United
States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The state fire
marshal shall provide the owner or possessor a receipt containing the
complete inventory of any fireworks seized within five (5) business days of
the seizure.



   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:



      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the
state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall give notice by registered
mail or personal service to the owner of the state fire marshal's intention
to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the state
fire marshal's intent. The state fire marshal shall conduct an administrative
hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the disposal of
fireworks; or



      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is
not known to the state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall cause to be
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
seizure was made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal's
intention to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once
each week for three consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of the
fireworks within ten days of the date of the last publication, the state fire
marshal may proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim
the fireworks within ten (10) days of the date of the last publication, a
hearing as set out in division (A) shall be held.



   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local
government from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks
within its jurisdiction.



(KRS 227.750)



§ 93.07  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the city a quantity of
gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 100 pounds without
the express authorization of the legislative body.



Penalty, see § 93.99 (A)



§ 93.08  SALE OF FIREWORKS TO MINORS PROHIBITED; USE OF FIREWORKS BY MINORS
WITHOUT ADULT SUPERVISION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall sell any fireworks as defined in KRS 227.700
or common fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702 or novelties and trick
noisemakers as defined in KRS 227.704, to a minor within the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to use fireworks as defined
in KRS 227.700, common fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702(1) or novelties
and trick noisemakers as defined in KRS 227.704 without adult supervision.



(Ord. 1990-8-1, passed 9-13-90)  Penalty, see § 93.99(C)



GAS SPACE HEATERS



§ 93.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, "APPROVED," as applied to a material,
device, or mode of construction, means materials, devices, or equipment
listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., The Testing Laboratory of the
American Gas Association, Forest Products Laboratory, or other recognized
testing authority and approved by the State Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 1956-1, passed 7-3-56)



§ 93.16  INSTALLATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or display for
sale in the city any gas heater which is not an approved vented gas space
heater, equipped with an approved gas pressure regulator.



   (B)   It shall also be unlawful to install in the city any gas space
heater which is not an approved vented gas space heater equipped with an
approved gas pressure regulator without connecting such gas space heater to
an approved flue in an approved manner.



   (C)   Existing gas space heaters may be reinstalled, provided they
are connected to an approved flue in an approved manner and provided they are
approved as nonhazardous.



(Ord. 1956-1, passed 7-3-56)  Penalty, see § 93.99 (A)



§ 93.17  VIOLATIONS; SERVICE SHUT OFF.



   (A)   Whenever it shall appear, on inspection, that gas equipment
used for space heating is discharging dangerous fumes, or is unsafe for use,
and when, in the opinion of the Fire Inspector or Building Inspector,
immediate action is necessary, he shall be authorized to shut off the supply
of gas to the equipment by turning off the valve of cock to the equipment,
or, when required, by capping or plugging gas lines to the equipment or other
mechanical means to accomplish shut off of gas to the equipment and attaching
thereto a tag, and seal out of service so as to make inoperative or to take
any necessary steps in the interest of the public safety, with or without
notice to the owners of the property or equipment involved.



   (B)   Whenever it shall appear, on inspection, that gas equipment
used for space heating is in violation of any of the requirements of any
section of this subchapter, or of any law or ordinance relating to the same
subject matter, an order shall be issued to the owner or the person in
control of the gas equipment to correct same.  After such order and the
failure of the owner or person in control of such gas equipment to correct
the violation within the specified time in the order, the Fire Inspector or
Building Inspector shall be authorized to shut off the supply of gas to the
gas equipment in the manner herein provided.



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any section
of this subchapter, or any person who shall remove the tag, seal, cap, plug,
or other mechanism or sealing device, or uses or permits to be used any gas
equipment which use has been ordered discontinued, as set forth herein, shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 1956-1, passed 7-3-56)  Penalty, see § 93.99 (A)



SPRINKLER SYSTEMS



§ 93.25  SECURITY CAPS FOR BUILDINGS WITH SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Any building located in the city which is protected by an
automatic sprinkler system or standpipe system and which the fire department
connection to such system is exposed to the public, shall have installed
thereon a fire department connection security cap. The fire department
security cap shall be of a type approved by the fire chief of the city.



   (B)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to
owner-occupied single or double family dwellings.



   (C)   All existing buildings subject to this section shall comply
with this section within six months from its effective date. All newly
constructed buildings, which are not yet occupied and those that may still be
under construction, which are subject to this section shall comply with the
requirements of this section immediately.



(Ord. 2003-5-2, passed 6-11-03)



EXPLOSIVES



§ 93.30  AUTHORITY AND SCOPE.



   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to the manufacture, possession,
storage, sale, transportation, and use of explosives and blasting agents.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Explosives or blasting agents while in the course of
transportation via railroad, water, highway, or air when the explosives or
blasting agents are moving under the jurisdiction of, and in conformity with,
regulations adopted by and federal or state department or agency.



      (2)   The transportation and use of explosives or blasting
agents in the normal and emergency operation of state or federal agencies nor
to municipal fire and police departments, providing they are acting in their
official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties.



      (3)   Small arms ammunition and components therefor, which are
subject to the Gun Control Act of 1968 (Title 18, Chapter 44, U.S. Code) and
regulations promulgated thereunder.



      (4)   Blasting standards KRS 351.330 and regulations 805 KAR
4:010 through 4:060.



      (5)   Explosives or blasting agents being used on the site of
federal or state projects.



(Ord. 1976-9-4, passed 9-8-76)



§ 93.31  STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION, AND USE.



   All activities within the scope of this subchapter shall conform to the
regulations of the Kentucky Department of Mines and Minerals 805 KAR 4:070
through 4:080 and 805 KAR 4:090 through 4:145 (E&B R900 through 914).



(Ord. 1976-9-4, passed 9-8-76)  Penalty, see § 93.99 (D)



§ 93.32  BLASTING PERMITS.



   (A)   No person or corporation shall conduct a blasting operation
within the city without first obtaining a permit from the City Building
Inspector.



   (B)   The fee for a blasting permit or permit renewal shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25).



   (C)   No person or corporation shall be issued a permit to blast on
public property unless the person to be in charge of the blasting holds a
valid Kentucky Blasters License.



   (D)   No person or corporation shall be issued a permit to blast on
private property with more than five (5) pounds of explosives unless the
person in charge of the blasting holds a valid Kentucky Blasters License.



   (E)   The blasting permits shall specify the location of the
blasting to be permitted.



   (F)   In the event that a project is not completed, blasting permits
must be renewed annually upon the applicant's payment of the renewal fee.



   (G)   A permit allowing blasting shall be issued upon application
but, on public property, shall not become valid until seven (7) days after
its issuance.



   (H)   If unanticipated blasting is required, the permit may become
valid as soon as the City Building Inspector notifies all required agencies.



   (I)   On any contract issued by an agency of the city, blasting
permits shall be issued by the City Building Inspector unless otherwise
specified in the contract.



   (J)   False statements, made for the purpose of obtaining a permit,
shall render the permit null and void from the time of issue.



   (K)   Copies of the blasting permit shall be distributed by the City
Building Inspector to the following required agencies:  Police and Municipal
Engineer.



(Ord. 1976-9-4, passed 9-8-76)  Penalty, see § 93.99 (D)



§ 93.33  MANUFACTURE AND SALE.



   (A)   No person or corporation shall operate a business
establishment where explosives are maintained for the sale, or manufacture
for sale, of explosives in the city without first obtaining a permit from the
City Building Inspector.



   (B)   The fee for this permit is forty dollars ($40).



(Ord. 1976-9-4, passed 9-8-76)  Penalty, see § 93.99 (D)



BURNING OF TRASH AND OTHER DEBRIS



§ 93.40  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of land within the
corporate limits of the city to burn the trash and other debris thereon or
within the city limits.



(Ord. 1984-6-1, passed 7-12-84)  Penalty, see § 93.99 (E)



§ 93.41  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   No person shall build, make or maintain a bonfire or other
similar fire or burning or assist in so doing, within the limits of the city,
unless the fire is authorized under § 93.41, or a permit therefore has been
first issued under the provisions of § 93.41 which permit has not been
revoked.



   (B)   No person shall burn any wood, plastic, cardboard, grass,
leaves, brush, trees, place paper or other combustible material or assist in
so doing, within the limits of the city, except in an improved fireplace or
furnace within an enclosed building, unless the fire is authorized under §
93.41 or a permit therefore has been first issued under the provisions of §
93.41, which permit has not been revoked.



(Ord. 84-6-1, passed 7-12-84; Am. Ord. 2009-12-1, passed 1-14-10)  Penalty,
see § 93.99 (E)



§ 93.42  PERMIT FEE.



   There shall be no cost for the issuance of a burning permit.



(Ord. 84-6-1, passed 7-12-84)



§ 93.43  RECREATIONAL FIRE RESTRICTIONS, OUTDOOR FIRE RESTRICTIONS AND
UNRESTRICTED FIRES.



   (A)   Recreational Fire Restrictions.



      (1)   It is the intent of the City of Crestview Hills,
Kentucky that all citizens, property owners and renters shall have the
opportunity to have recreational fires at single and multi-family dwellings
provided that such recreational fires are in compliance with the requirements
and restrictions relating to recreational fires. It is further the intent of
the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky that the Police Department, the Fire
Department and any Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce these
requirements/restrictions so as to insure that such recreational fires do not
become a public nuisance or compromise public safety.



      (2)   A recreational fire is a fire that meets the
requirements/restrictions laid out in this section of the City of Crestview
Hill's ordinances. If the fire does not meet the requirements and
restrictions of a recreational fire, outdoor cooking fire, or unrestricted
fires, then it is deemed a bonfire and subject to permit requirements and
restrictions under § 93.41.



      (3)   Portable fire pits, chimaeras, patio hearths, fire
tables and other similar devices shall be elevated from the ground and shall
be fabricated from steel, concrete, clay, or similar materials. Permanent
fire pits shall be dug into the ground and shall comply with the provisions
of this section governing such pits.



      (4)   Recreational Fire Requirements and Restrictions.



         (a)   The residential fire must be fueled by seasoned
(i.e. not green) firewood, charcoal, natural gas, propane, or other clean
burning fuel, with emissions equal or less than that created by seasoned
firewood and all devices must be based upon a non-combustible surface, or a
surface protected by a fire retardant mat designed specifically for this
purpose.



         (b)   Material used to make a recreational fire cannot
include construction materials, plastics, trash or rubbish.



         (c)   The recreational fire's total area (i.e. fuel
area, firebox, or other center area of a fire pit where fuel is placed) can
be no more than three (3) feet in diameter, height, or width: and no higher
than three (3) feet, measured from the location upon which the wood or other
fuel source is placed upon the top of the wood or other fuel source. No
burning firewood or other burning fire fueling material shall extend outside
the fire pit.



         (d)   Recreational fires shall not be located within
twenty-five (25) ft. of a structure or combustible material unless contained
in an approved manner.



         (e)   The means for extinguishing any fire must be kept
immediately available at all times when a recreational fire is burning.



         (f)   No recreational fire shall be started or allowed
to continue burning when the wind directed or wind speed will cause embers or
other burning material to be carried onto any building or combustible
material; nor any time that wind direction will carry smoke into the open
windows of any building. Smoke from any recreational fire shall not create a
nuisance for neighboring properties and fires shall be completely
extinguished when a police officer, fire department member, or Code
Enforcement Officer determines a nuisance is present or the fire otherwise
compromise public safety.



         (g)   If a permanent fire pit is used, the construction
and use of the permanent fire pit shall, in addition to the above
requirement, comply with the following additional requirements:



            1.   The diameter, width, and height of the pit
opening or base upon which the fuel material is placed shall not exceed three
(3) feet:



            2.   The depth of the pit shall be at least one
(1) foot:



            3.   The stop of the rim of the pit shall be lined
with rock, concrete brick, steel, or other non-combustible material designed
and of a sufficient width to stop the spread of fire.



   (B)   Outdoor Cooking Fire Restrictions. Outdoor cooking over a fire
contained in a device or structure designed for such use is permitted but
subject to the following requirements/restrictions:



      (1)   Material used to make a cooking fire cannot include
construction materials, plastics, trash or rubbish.



      (2)   All cooking devices must be in good working condition to
prevent the possible spread of the fire.



      (3)   For all multi-family dwellings the use and/or storage of
any portable cooking device, except listed electric powered cooking devices,
including any portable fireplaces is strictly prohibited on any balcony or
under any overhanging portion or within ten (10) feet of any structure. The
definition of a multi-family dwelling shall mean a single structure
containing three (3) or more dwelling units, regardless of whether such units
are rented or owned as a condominium or other form of ownership.



      (4)   No cooking fire shall be started or allowed to continue
burning when the wind direction or wind speed will cause embers or other
burning material to be carried onto any building or combustible material; nor
any time that wind direction will carry smoke into the open windows of any
building. Smoke from any cooking fire shall not create a nuisance for
neighboring properties and fires shall be completely extinguished when a
police officer, Fire Department member, or Code Enforcement Officer
determines a nuisance is present or the fire otherwise compromises public
safety.



      (5)   A fire shall be deemed a recreational fire and not a
cooking fire and thus subject to the requirements and restrictions of
recreational fires, if, in the opinion and judgment of a member of the Police
Department, Fire Department or Code Enforcement Officer, the primary use of
the fire is recreational in nature and not for cooking.



   (C)   Unrestricted Fires.



      (1)   The following devices that involve an open fire or flame
may be used without restrictions as long as they are used in a safe manner
and the use follows the recommended manufacturer's guidelines: The burning
and/or use of: lighters, matches, candles, lanterns, lamps, grills, insect
repellant torches, tiki type torches, cigarettes, cigars, and/or braziers, or
any other similar devices.



      (2)   Fires that are lit and burned in an approved furnace or
fireplace within an enclosed building are unrestricted and permitted.



   (D)   Nuisance Orders.  Members of the Police Department, Fire
Department, and any Code Enforcement Officer are authorized and shall issue
orders to any individual or property owner to immediately extinguish any
fire, however classified, including, without limitation, a recreational fire,
cooking fire, unrestricted fire, or bonfire deemed to be a nuisance or that
otherwise compromises public safety. Members of the Police Department of the
Fire Chief, any Assistant Fire Chief, or any designee of the Fire Chief, in
the event of a second or subsequent call concerning a recreational fire at a
particular address or types of fires specified in the orders or permitting
additional fires or types of fires specified in the orders with such
conditions or restrictions deemed appropriate, for either an indefinite
period of time or for a specific period of time specified in the order.
Appeal of such orders may be had to the Fire Chief by delivering notice of
that appeal to the Fire Chief, who may uphold the order, rescind the order,
or modify the order as deemed appropriate in the Fire Chief’s reasonable
judgment. Provided a citation has been issued an additional appeal may be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Board, who may uphold the order, rescind
the order, or modify the order. No person shall violate any order issued
under this section.



   (E)   Penalty.  The penalties for any violation of this section
shall be as set forth in § 93.99. In addition to the foregoing penalties,
any person who fails to maintain a fire in accordance with the applicable
City of Crestview Hills Code of Ordinances or negligently allows such a fire
to burn out of control shall pay any and all costs incurred by the City of
Crestview Hills or any other municipality responding under mutual-aid for any
fire, police ambulance or other related services provided as a result of the
party's failure to comply with this section.



(Ord. 2009-12-1, passed 1-14-10)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a violation and
shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100).



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 93.02 or 93.04,
the regulations issued thereunder or any order issued thereunder, or who
knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions
of those sections, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or imprisoned for not more than
thirty (30) days, or both.



(KRS 227.990 (4))



   (C)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of § 93.07
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an amount not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
to exceed thirty (30) days, or both.  The parents of any child found
violating § 93.07 shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100).



(Ord. 1991-8-1, passed 9-13-90)



   (D)   Any building owner violating the provisions of § 93.25 shall
be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day that such
violation shall continue after notification shall be considered a separate
violation at three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day.



(Ord. 2003-5-2, passed 6-11-03)



   (E)   Any person or corporation violating the provisions of §§
93.30 through 93.33 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500), or shall be imprisoned up to, but no more than six (6) months, or
both.



(Ord. 1976-9-4, passed 9-8-76)



   (F)   Violations of §§ 93.40 through 93.42 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500).



(Ord. 84-6-1, passed 7-12-84)



CHAPTER 94:  LITTERING



§ 94.01  THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.



   No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon
private property.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the
city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street,
alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter of any kind.



   (B)   No person, firm, corporation, or agent thereof shall deposit
or cause or permit to be deposited upon the streets of the city any mud,
dirt, litter, trash, or other debris.  No person, firm, corporation, or
agent thereof shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner that mud, dirt,
litter, trash or other debris is left upon any streets which my constitute a
hazard to the life, limb, or property of any person traveling upon those
streets.



      (1)   The deposit of sand, salt, or other chemicals on ice or
snow on public streets by duly-authorized emergency crews to make the streets
safe for travel shall not be deemed a violation of this section.



      (2)   All of the owners of any interest in any real estate in
the city from which any mud, dirt, litter, trash, or other debris has been
removed and deposited upon any city street shall be jointly and severally
liable and obligated to the city for all reasonable costs and expenses
incurred by, and the reasonable value of all labor and equipment provided by,
the city in the removal thereof.  The city shall have a lien upon the entire
lot or parcel of real estate from which the mud, dirt, litter, or debris was
removed to secure the aforedescribed obligation and liability, and all costs,
fees, and expenses incurred by the city in the collection thereof, including,
but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees.  The lien may be enforced by
civil actions for the foreclosure thereof.



      (3)   The City Building Inspector is authorized to withdraw
all building permits where debris is identifiably deposited in a location
where new construction is being performed.



(Am. Ord. 1988-1-1, passed 2-11-88)  Penalty, see § 94.99



________________



Cross-reference:



   Materials on streets and sidewalks, see § 91.32



§ 94.03  HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.



   Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel,
cement, fill dirt, or loose material of any kind in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be
hauled in vehicles provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded
as to prevent any of the contents from falling or being thrown, blown, or
deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place.  Any
materials which fall from, or which are thrown, blown, or deposited from any
vehicle upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, shall be
removed immediately by the person in charge of the vehicle.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.



   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other
public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.  Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  MERCHANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER.



   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk.  Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.



Penalty, see § 94.99



_____________



Cross-reference:



   Materials on streets and sidewalks, see § 91.32



§ 94.06  POSTING NOTICES.



   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or
device which is calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any
lamp post, public utility pole, or shade tree, or upon any public structure
or building, except as may be authorized by law.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied
private property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of the private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
streets, sidewalks, or other public places, or upon any private property.



   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant
private property within the city whether owned by that person or not.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation and shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100).  Each day the violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the affirmative action mentioned in that
provision, a violator of § 94.02(B) shall be guilty of a violation and may
be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100) and each day of a violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 1988-1-1, passed 2-11-88)



CHAPTER 95:  TAXATION



Section



   95.01   Reserved



Real Property Tax



   95.10   Imposition of tax



   95.11   City Clerk to prepare bills



   95.12   Payment of bills



   95.13   Notice; delinquency; penalty



   95.14   Recovery of unpaid taxes



Waste Collection Assessment



   95.20   Definition



   95.21   Assessment; delinquency; penalty



Tax on Bank Shares



   95.30   Tax on bank shares



   95.31   Tax on bank shares of stock of shareholders



§ 95.01  RESERVED.



REAL PROPERTY TAX



§ 95.10  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There shall be imposed, levied and collected by the city under KRS
92.070 through 92.520, 92.530, and 92.640, on each one hundred dollars ($100)
valuation of real property, within the corporate limits of the city, liable
for taxation, and not exempt from municipal taxation, under the laws of the
Commonwealth and Constitution, as assessed by the County Tax Assessor,
corrected by its Board of Supervisors, and returned to the City Council, a
sum to be determined each year by the City Council on each one hundred
dollars ($100) of property listed, valued, and corrected, as follows:



   (A)   For the General Revenue Fund, the sum determined yearly by
City Council.



   (B)   The funds so realized, as herein provided, shall be used for
no other purpose.



(Am. Ord. 1995-9-4, passed 10-12-95)   Penalty, see § 10.99



               



Cross-reference:



   See Table of Special Ordinances V for rates



§ 95.11  CITY CLERK TO PREPARE BILLS.



   The City Clerk shall make out the necessary tax bills in a stub-book
furnished by the City Council; he shall take the receipt from the City
Treasurer after turning over the tax bills, and make a list of the number of
tax bills and the aggregate amount thereof, and the tax bills shall show each
item of taxation, the value thereof, and the tax imposed.  The City Clerk
shall mail the tax bills to residents on or about October 31st of each year.



(Ord. 1995-9-4, passed 10-12-95; Am. Ord. 2010-06-01, passed 7-8-10)



§ 95.12  PAYMENT OF BILLS.



   The tax levied and imposed by this subchapter shall be due and payable
in the Office of the City Treasurer, City Building, Mall Road, Crestview
Hills, Kentucky, on the first day of November, and the City Treasurer shall
collect all taxes and shall correctly account for same to the City Council.



(Ord. 1995-9-4, passed 10-12-95)



§ 95.13  NOTICE; DELINQUENCY; PENALTY.



   (A)   On or before the first business day in February of the past
due year, it shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to mail written notice
to delinquent property owners, said notices shall recite that the taxes are
due and unpaid and are in his hands for collection and payment, and are in
default of payment on and after the first day of January of the past due
year, and that a penalty, as set forth by law and this chapter shall be
attached.  On or before the first business day in April of the past due
year, the City Treasurer shall send a second notice to the delinquent
property owner.



   (B)   Tax bills shall be endorsed by the City Treasurer, and all tax
bills remaining in his hands on the first day of January of the past due
year, shall be endorsed by him as delinquent, and returned to the City
Council, as the City Council may direct on the first regular meeting in
January.



   (C)   The City Council shall thereupon order the City Treasurer to
proceed to attach a penalty of ten percent (10%) to each tax bill that is
delinquent and such delinquent tax bills shall carry a twelve percent (12%)
interest per annum charge until paid.  The City Council shall order the City
Treasurer to turn over to the Tax Collector, the delinquent tax bills and
receive a receipt therefor.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall note in the minutes of the first regular
meeting for the following year, the total amount so collected by the City
Treasurer, and the City Treasurer shall make a full and complete settlement
for all taxes collected by him for the current year, that were placed in his
hands for collection, at the first regular meeting of the City Council to be
held in January.



   (E)   In addition to taxes, penalties and interest, the City may
collect from the delinquent property owner the full amount of the City’s
attorney fees, or any other fees or costs expended by the City towards the
collection of delinquent taxes.



(Ord. 1995-9-4, passed 10-12-95; Am. Ord. 1996-9-2, passed 10-10-96; Am. Ord.
2010-06-01, passed 7-8-10)



§ 95.14  RECOVERY OF UNPAID TAXES.



   (A)   On the first business day in May of each year the City Clerk
shall prepare and deliver to the City Attorney a list of all delinquent real
estate taxes and assessments, such list shall contain the following:



      (1)   A description of the land and improvements as shown on
the tax bill or assessment bill, including the street address of the land.



      (2)   A statement of the amount of each tax or assessment bill
upon such parcel, including all tax or assessment bills thereon which are
delinquent, the year for which the tax or assessment was assessed, and the
date from which and the rate at which interest and penalties shall be
computed.



      (3)   The name of the last known person appearing on the
records of the City Clerk in whose name the tax bills on such real estate
were listed or charged for the year preceding the calendar year in which such
list is filed.



      (4)   A photocopy of each such tax or assessment bill shall be
attached to the list.



   (B)   On or before the first business day of June of each year the
City Attorney shall write a letter to each person in whose name a bill is
listed on the list so supplied by the City Clerk. Such letter shall demand
payment of bill with interest, penalty and costs and inform the person that a
lien will be filed by the City on the property.



   (C)   On or before June 7th of each year, the City Attorney will
prepare and file notices of delinquent city tax liens on all properties which
remain delinquent.



   (D)   On or before the first business day in July the City Attorney
shall send notice to all delinquent taxpayers that taxes are due for a second
year. If the delinquent tax bill is for commercial property the City Attorney
shall inform the property owner that foreclosure procedures may take place by
January of the following calendar year. If the delinquent bill is for
non-commercial property and amount in arrears exceeds three thousand dollars
($3,000) then notice will alert the property owner that foreclosure
procedures may take place in January of the following calendar year.



   (E)   All non-commercial property with taxes that have been
delinquent for three (3) years may have a foreclosure complaint filed by the
City Attorney.



(Ord. 2010-06-01, passed 7-8-10)



WASTE COLLECTION ASSESSMENT



§ 95.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "DWELLING UNIT."  A one-family residence, the premises of which a
family of one or more reside; and, in the case of apartment buildings, each
apartment shall be considered a separate dwelling unit.



(Ord. 1977-8-2, passed 8-10-77)



§ 95.21  ASSESSMENT; DELINQUENCY; PENALTY.



   (A)   A waste collection and recycling assessment of one hundred
dollars ($100) per dwelling unit per year is hereby levied for the purposes
of defraying the cost of waste collection and recycling in the city.



   (B)   The waste collection and recycling assessment levied by the
City Council shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer on or before
January 1. Anyone failing to pay the assessment by January 1 shall be deemed
delinquent and their bill shall have added thereto a penalty of ten percent
(10%) of the amount thereof, and shall bear interest at the rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum from January 1 until paid. The assessment shall
constitute a lien upon the property and be collectible in the same manner as
the tax levied against real estate.



(Ord. 1977-8-2, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 2018-08-02, passed 9-13-18)



TAX ON BANK SHARES



§ 95.30  TAX ON BANK SHARES.



   There is hereby levied for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1994 and
each year thereafter a tax of the maximum amount allowed by KRS 136.270 on
each one hundred dollars ($100) of the taxable fair cash value of the shares
of such banks subject to taxation for municipal purposes as provided by KRS
136.270(3), (4) and (5).



(Ord. 1993-5-4, passed 6-10-93)



§ 95.31  TAX ON BANK SHARES OF STOCK OF SHAREHOLDERS.



   (A)   For each fiscal year, there shall be imposed, levied and
collected, a tax by the city, pursuant to KRS 136.270, 136.280, 132.190(6)
and 132.200(7) on the valuation of shares of stock owned by shareholders in
banks of trust companies.



   (B)   The tax shall be imposed on each one hundred dollars ($100) of
the taxable fair cash value of the shares of bank stock whose principal
office is located in the city.  The amount of the tax shall be determined by
multiplying an amount determined by the City Council by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the fair cash value of shares of all banks or trust
companies within the city and the denominator of which is the taxable fair
cash value of shares of all banks or trust companies within the city.



   (C)   The fair cash value of shares of banks and taxable fair cash
value of shares of banks shall be determined in accordance with KRS 136.270.



(Ord. 1994-9-2, passed 10-13-94; Am. Ord. 1995-9-5, passed 10-12-95)



               



Cross-reference:



   See Table of Special Ordinances V for rates



CHAPTER 96:  ALARM DROPS



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALARM DROPS."  A warning or sound device that is put in operation to
indicate and inform police authorities that unauthorized activity is
transpiring on a particular parcel of land within the city limits.



   "FALSE ALARM DROPS."  An alarm drop that police authorities respond to
and in which there is no evidence that unauthorized activity has actually
transpired.



(Ord. 1983-12-1, passed 1-12-84)



§ 96.02  EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARM DROPS PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby and herewith determined that more than two (2) false alarm
drops per business establishment per home or multiple dwelling per calendar
month is a threat to the public safety and welfare of this city, and that any
false alarm drop in excess of two (2) false alarm drops per calendar month
shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 1983-12-1, passed 1-12-84)    



§ 96.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A citation shall be given to the offending person or entity
having control of the warning sound device by the Chief of Lakeside
Park-Crestview Hills Police Authority or his representative.  In the event
that the fine set out in the citation is not paid within ten (10) days, the
Chief or his representative shall take appropriate legal action.



   (B)   The Chief of Lakeside Park-Crestview Hills Police Authority or
his appointee from the Police Authority shall certify such excessive false
alarm drops and bill the offending business establishment or property
owner.  The person certifying the false alarm drops shall take into
consideration the prevailing weather conditions.  In the event the offending
party fails to pay said billing, cause shall be had to revoke any license in
effect as well as other appropriate civil and criminal remedies.



(Ord. 1983-12-1, passed 1-12-84)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   For each and every violation of this chapter a civil penalty shall be
levied in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) against the person or
entity in whose control the warning or sound device is under and said fine
shall be paid to the Crestview Hills General Fund.



(Ord. 1983-12-1, passed 1-12-84)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



         111.   PROHIBITED BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES



         112.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS, AND
CANVASSERS



         113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



         114.   AMUSEMENTS



         115.   GARAGE SALES



         116.   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRANCHISE  AND LOCAL
DEPOSIT TAX



         117.   RENTAL PROPERTIES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Purpose; enforcement



   110.03   License required; standards for issuance



   110.04   Fee imposed



   110.05   Exclusions and exemptions



   110.06   Apportionment of net profits



   110.07   Payment of license fee



   110.08   Collection



   110.09   Use of license fees



   110.10   Information to be confidential



   110.11   Credits under repealed ordinances



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ASSOCIATION."  A partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, or
any other form of unincorporated enterprise, owned or engaged in by two (2)
or more persons.



   "CITY."  The City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



   "CITY CLERK."  The City Clerk of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



   "CORPORATION."  A corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the State of Kentucky, or any other
state, territory, or foreign country or dependency.



   "EMPLOYEE."  Any person engaging in or following any trade,
occupation, profession or activity as defined below.



   "EMPLOYER."  Any individual, person, partnership, association,
corporation, governmental body or unit, or administration or agency, or any
other activity or any other entity who or that employs one (1) or more
persons on a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation basis.



   "LICENSEE."  Any person required to file a return or pay a license fee
under this chapter.



   "OCCUPATION," "TRADE," "PROFESSION," or "OTHER ACTIVITY."  The doing
of any kind of work, the rendering of any kind of personal service, or the
holding of any kind of position or job within the city by any clerk, laborer,
tradesman, manager, official or other employee, including any nonresident of
the city who is employed by an employer, as defined in this section where the
relationship between the individual performing the services and the person
for whom such services are rendered is, as to those services, the legal
relationship of employer and employee, including also a partner of a firm or
an officer who receives a salary for his personal services rendered in the
business of such firm or corporation.  The words "OCCUPATION," "TRADE,"
"PROFESSION," or "OTHER ACTIVITY" shall also include an officer or employee
employed, either by election or appointment by any federal, state, county, or
city, where the services of such official or employee are rendered within the
city.



   "OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE."  A tax for revenue, pursuant to the taxing
authority of the City of Crestview Hills, including, without limitation, the
authority established by KRS 82.082, KRS 92.280, KRS 92.281 and Section 181
of the Kentucky Constitution, wherein it is sometimes identified and referred
to as a power to impose and collect license fees on stock used for breeding
purposes; on franchises; trades: occupations: associations; and professions.



   "PERSON."  Any natural person, copartnership, fiduciary, association,
or corporation.  Whenever the word "person" is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment
the word, as applied to a partnership or other form of unincorporated
enterprise shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporations shall mean the officers and directors thereof.



   "TREASURER."  The Treasurer of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.02  PURPOSE; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and tax those
engaged in franchises, trades, occupations, associations, professions and
other businesses in the city.



   (B)   The City Treasurer is hereby charged with the enforcement of
provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, and
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to provisions for the re-examination and
correction of returns to which an underpayment or overpayment is claimed or
found to have been made, and the rules and regulations as promulgated by him
or her shall be binding upon the licensee and employers. Provided, however,
all such rules, regulations and decisions shall be subject to the consent and
approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The City Treasurer, by representatives appointed by him or her
in writing, may examine the books, papers, and records of any employee or
supposed employee of any licensee or supposed licensee in order to determine
the accuracy of any return made or if no return was made to ascertain the
amount of license fee imposed by the terms of this chapter, as he or she may
deem this reasonably necessary for purposes incident to the performance of
his or her duties hereunder. The City Treasurer may enforce this right by
application to the appropriate court having jurisdiction over these matters.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall assist the City Treasurer in the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (E)   The executive authority of the city may contract with the
Fiscal Court of Kenton County, Ky. for the performance of the duties imposed
by this chapter on the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.03  LICENSE REQUIRED; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, corporation,
or other entity to engage in any occupation, trade, profession, or other
activity in the city without first having paid the minimum license fees
herein required.  In addition to any penalties and fines imposed by this
chapter, there shall be a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of any
license fee herein imposed if the license fee is not paid on or before the
first day due (new business or activity commenced after the first day of
March in any year is not subject to the penalty.)  Any person who shall
fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the minimum fees as are set forth above when
same have become due and payable, shall be in addition to the penalties
herein prescribed, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provided in §
110.99.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the
applicant's business reputation and moral character shall be made.



   (C)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business
would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or
general welfare.  In particular, tangible evidence that the applicant:



      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or



      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application; or



      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining
to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like; or



      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or



      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts; or



      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character will constitute
valid reasons for disapproval of an application.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.04  FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Levy and imposition. For the purpose of providing funds for
the general operating expenses of the city and the municipal services and
functions provided thereby, and subject to the provisions of KRS 67.750
through 67.795, and except as provided in § 110.05 of this chapter, an
occupational license fee is hereby levied and imposed upon everybody engaged
in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other businesses in the
city, for the privilege of that engagement.



   (B)   Rate.



      (1)   The occupational license fee that is levied and imposed
by this chapter is at the rate of one and fifteen one-hundredths percent
(1.15%) of the gross annual salaries, wages or compensations earned by any
such person for work done or services performed or rendered within the city
beginning the first day of January, 2019.



      (2)   Payroll taxes levied on wages, earning, bonuses, and
money paid to employees by an employer or a self employer shall be limited to
the maximum amount on which social security taxes are paid by one employer or
employee.



   (C)   Employees. One and fifteen one-hundredths percent (1.15%) of
all of the gross compensation earned by an employee for labor, work or
services provided in the city.



   (D)   Those not an employee.



      (1)   Seventy-five hundredths percent (0.75%) of the net
profits of everybody, other than an employee, who is engaged in any
franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business in the city; but
no less than fifty dollars ($50) provided, however, that the Mayor or City
Administrative Officer may waive the fifty dollar ($50) minimum in the event
of either:



         (a)   The total gross receipts from activities in the
city during the tax period are less than five thousand dollars ($5,000): or



         (b)   Within 30 days after the close of the tax year of
the taxpayer, the city receives a written request for a refund of the balance
of the fifty dollar ($50) minimum that has been paid after deducting the tax
that is due based on a rate of seventy-five hundredths percent (0.75%) of the
net profits generated in the city.



      (2)   There is hereby reserved to the Mayor or the City
Administrative Officer the right to deny any request for a waiver of the
fifty dollar ($50) minimum that is incomplete or fails to follow the process
for that waiver described in this section.



   (E)   Administrative provisions. The provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the City Administrative Officer, who is
hereby authorized to promulgate any additional regulations in regard thereto
which are not inconsistent with any state statute, or any ordinance of the
city, or any executive order of the Mayor.



   (F)   Purpose of occupational license fee. The purpose of the
business regulatory license fees and the occupational license fees imposed
and levied by this chapter is to fund the general operating expenses of the
city, including, without limitation, police, fire, emergency medical, public
works and administrative services.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07; Am. Ord. 2018-08-03, passed 9-13-18) 
Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.05  EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Income from pensions, interests, and dividends is not subject
to this occupational license fee, within the meaning of this chapter.



   (B)   Cooperation associations and corporations, including savings
and loan associations are exempt hereunder, but shall be subject to an annual
business license fee set by the City Council.



   (C)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation earned for work
performed, services rendered, or income derived from investments or business
where such wages, salaries, compensation, services, investments, or business
are not within the city are not subject to this tax.



   (D)   Trust estates are not subject to the license fee imposed by
this chapter upon the income of the trust estate, except where the trust
operates a business which is subject to a license fee for doing business
within the city.  The remainder of the trust estate is hereby exempt from
any payment of annual occupational license fees.



   (E)   A fiduciary who holds in trust property, moneys, or properties
to which another has a beneficial interest, or who receives or controls
income for another person or persons is not subject to the license fee
imposed by this chapter, except where the fiduciary operates a business which
is subject to a license fee for doing business within the city.  The
remainder of the trust is hereby exempt from any payment of annual
occupational fees.



   (F)   The net income on the sale of stocks, bonds, and other
securities and the sales of personal property and real estate or any interest
therein, except in the case of brokers regularly engaged in such business,
shall be excluded from any payment of annual occupational license fees within
the meaning of this chapter.



   (G)   No license fee under this chapter shall be required of
domestic servants employed in private homes.



   (H)   Income on rentals of personal property, except by dealers
engaged in such business, and on real estate or the operation of rooming
houses and boardinghouses, except by brokers and persons engaged in
conducting a rental business and renting office buildings, warehouses,
apartment houses and dwelling units is not subject to tax within the meaning
of this chapter.



   (I)   The following money receipts are not deemed to be "salaries,
wages, commission, and other compensations and net profits", within the
meaning of this chapter.



      (1)   Old age or retirement payments.  Periodic payments,
commonly recognized as old age or retirement pensions made to persons retired
from service after reaching a specified age or a stated period of employment
are not subject to the license fee.



      (2)   Disability, sickness, accident benefits, and
unemployment compensation, and other insurance payments received from
personal injuries or property losses.  Payments made to employees by an
employer under a disability, sickness and accident plan are not subject to
the license fee.  Unemployment compensation payments by the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, or any other agent, are not subject to the license fee.  Payments
received for personal injuries and property losses are not subject to the
license fee.



      (3)   Death benefits.  Death benefits payable by an employee
to the beneficiary of an employee or to his estate, whether payable in a
single sum or otherwise, are not subject to the license fee.



      (4)   Workmen's compensation benefits.  Benefits arising
under the Workmen's Compensation Act as compensation for disabilities
sustained during the course of employment, together with any amount of
damages received by suit or agreement, on account of such disability are not
subject to the license fee.



   (J)   (1)   Independent contractors doing business with the city
are not exempted from paying license fees, annual net profit taxes, or from
withholding and paying taxes on the payroll earnings of employees actually
working within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   The exemption for the collection and payment of the
license fees shall be retroactive to July 1, 1988, and the payroll taxes
shall be exempt beginning January 1, 1989.



   (K)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
business, occupation or profession which is exempt from municipal licensing
or license taxes pursuant to state or federal law.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.06  APPORTIONMENT OF NET PROFITS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 67.753 (4), it is hereby
determined that the apportionment provisions of KRS 67.753 do not fairly
represent the extent of the engagement in the city of those, other than an
employee, who are engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or
other business both within and outside of the city; and, accordingly, the
following described property factor is hereby added to the payroll factor and
the sales factor provided in KRS 67.753 for the apportionment of the net
profits of those, other than an employee, who are engaged in any franchise,
trade, occupation, profession or other business both within and outside of
the city.  The property factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
average value of the taxpayer’s real and tangible personal property owned
or rented and used in the city during the computation period, and the
denominator of which is the average value of all of the taxpayer's real and
tangible personal property owned or rented and used anywhere during the
computation period. In the determination of the property factor:



      (1)   Property owned by the taxpayer is valued at its original
cost. Property rented by the taxpayer is valued at eight (8) times the net
annual rental rate which is the annual rental rate paid by the taxpayer less
any annual rental rate received by the taxpayer from subrentals.



      (2)   The average value of property shall be determined by
averaging the values at the beginning and ending of the computation period,
but the City Administrative Officer may require the averaging of monthly
values during the computation period if reasonably required to reflect
properly the average value of the taxpayer's property.



   (B)   The proportion of the total net profits everywhere of those,
other than an employee, who are engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business both within and outside of the city that are
subject to the occupational license fee established by this chapter, shall be
determined by multiplying the total net profits thereof everywhere by the
quotient of the total of the payroll factor and the sales factor described in
KRS 67.753 (2) and (3), and the property factor described in the previous
division (A) of this section, that the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business had in the city during the tax period, divided
bv the total number of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business had in the city during the tax period . The
total number of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business had in the city during the tax period will
always be either 1, 2 or 3. For example, if the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business:



      (1)   Had only the sales revenue factor in the city, during
the tax period, without either the property factor or the payroll factor in
the city, the total number of those factors that the franchise, trade,
occupation, profession or other business had in the city during the tax
period would be 1; or



      (2)   Had both the sales revenue factor and the payroll factor
in the city, during the tax period, without the property factor in the city,
the total number of those factors that that the franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business had in the city during the tax period would be
2; or



      (3)   Had the sales revenue factor, and the payroll factor,
and the property factor in the city, during the tax period, the total number
of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other
business had in the city during the tax period would be 3.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.07  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Each employer who employs one or more persons within the city
shall deduct monthly, or more often than monthly, at the time of the payment
thereof, the license fee due from each employee measured by the amount of
salaries, wages, commissions, or compensation due by the employer to the
employee and shall pay to the Treasurer the amount of license fee so
deducted.  The payment required to be made on account of deductions by
employers shall be made quarterly to the Treasurer for the quarterly periods
ending on the last day of March, June, September, December of each year, on
or before the last day of the month next following the quarter of the
deduction.  The employer shall annually during the month of July make a
return to the City Treasurer, in which return is set forth the name and
residence of each employee of the employer during the preceding calendar
year, giving the amount of salaries, wages, commission, or other
compensations earned during the preceding year by each such employee.  The
failure or omission of any employer to deduct the license fee shall not
relieve the employee from the payment of the license fee in compliance with
such regulation with respect to making returns and payment thereof, as may be
fixed in this chapter or established by the Finance Officer.



   (B)   Each person subject to a license fee imposed by this chapter
shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the close
of each year, make and file with the Finance Officer a return, in duplicate,
on a form furnished by or attainable from the Treasurer, setting forth the
aggregate amount of salaries, wages, commission, and other compensations, or
net profits, during the preceding year.  Where the entire license due under
this chapter has been withheld under the provisions hereof, the City
Treasurer may waive the filing of the return by the licensee; provided,
further, that where the fiscal year of the business, profession, or other
activity differs from the calendar year and licenses files state income tax
return for such other fiscal period, the license fee shall be measured by the
net profits of the fiscal year, and where the return is made for a fiscal
year, or any other period different from the calendar year, the return shall
be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the fiscal year or other period.  The license return shall also show the
amount of license fee imposed by this chapter.  The first return under this
chapter shall be required to show only compensation and net profits earned
from the effective date of this chapter to the close of the calendar or
fiscal period.  The person making the return shall, at the time of the
filing thereof, pay to the Treasurer the amount of license fees shown as due
therein; provided, however, that where any portion of the license fee so due
shall have been deducted at the source, credit for such amount shall be
deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance, if any, shall
be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance, if any,
shall be due and payable at the time of the filing of the return, as
hereinabove provided.  It shall be the duty of each employer who has
deducted the license fee from the wages, salaries, commission, or other
compensations referred to above, to furnish the employee a statement showing
the amount of salary earned and license fee deducted and paid by the employer
during the preceding calendar year, on or before the first day of January of
each year.



   (C)   The City Treasurer shall have the authority to extend the time
of filing of such returns in his discretion.  The extension shall be upon
the written request of the licensee.  Any terms of this chapter shall bear
interest at the rate allowed by law as may be amended from time to time until
paid in full.



   (D)   A copy of federal form 1040, schedule C, form 1065 or form
1120, as applicable, shall be attached to the annual license return filed
with the Finance Officer.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.08  COLLECTION.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer assisted by the
City Clerk to collect and receive the license fees imposed by this chapter.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall give a receipt and shall keep records
showing the amount paid by each license and employer and the date of such
receipt.



   (C)   The executive authority of the city may contract with the
Kenton County Fiscal Court for the performance of the duties imposed by this
chapter upon the City Clerk and the City Treasurer.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.09  USE OF LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   All moneys derived from license fees under the provisions of
this chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer and placed to the credit of
the general revenue fund of the city and shall be used and expended in
defraying current, general, and incidental expenses of the city.



   (B)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide revenue for the
general fund of the city and it is not the intention of the city (or make
use) of this chapter to impose and require an occupational license fee
prohibited by law. 



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.10  INFORMATION TO BE CONFIDENTIAL.



   Any information, including returns, documents, or payments made
pursuant thereto and any other information gained by the Treasurer, Clerk or
any other official, agent, or employee of the city as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing, or verification required or authorized by this
chapter shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial
order, and any person or agent divulging such information shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment not to exceed sixty
(60) days or both, at the discretion of the court, and upon conviction, shall
be dismissed from employment by the city.  Such person may disclose to the
Commissioner of Revenue of the state, or his duly authorized agent, all such
information and extend the right to inspect any of the books and records of
the city of said Commissioner of reciprocal right to obtain information from
the files and records of the Department of Revenue of the state and maintains
the privileged character of the information so furnished to him.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.11  CREDITS UNDER REPEALED ORDINANCES.



   Any licensee under former ordinances who, because of the enactment of
this chapter requiring license fee based upon a different measurement and
because of the repeal of said ordinances by the terms of this chapter, is, or
will be prevented from the use of the license for the term for which it was
issued, may apply in writing on forms furnished by the Finance Officer for an
offset or credit to that portion of the annual license fee to be paid which
is applicable proportionately to the unexpired portion of the license fee and
he or she may thereupon credit or offset against the amount due under this
chapter the amount of money representative to the unexpired portion of the
license fee.  Nothing in this section, however, is intended to relieve any
licensee of any fee, or portion of a fee, which he may have accrued under
existing ordinances prior to their repeal by the terms of this chapter
applies to or affects any franchise, permit or contract which has been
granted by the city for a period of longer than one year.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Each separate violation of this chapter is hereby classified as a civil
offense, for which:



   (A)   The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b) that may
be imposed for each separate violation of this chapter is hereby established
as five hundred dollars ($500.00); and



   (B)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(c) that
will be imposed for each separate offense and violation of this chapter if
the person who has committed the violation and offense does not contest a
citation therefore, is hereby established as one hundred dollars ($100.00);



   (C)   An enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately issuing a
civil citation, give notice that the violation of this chapter shall be
remedied within a specific period of time.



   (D)   Each violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for
which everybody convicted thereof in a court of compentent jurisdiction shall
be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the maximum amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as set forth in KRS 534.050(2)(a) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of twelve (12) months as set
forth in KRS 532.090(1) or both.



(Ord. 2007-12-1, passed 12-13-07)



CHAPTER 111:  PROHIBITED BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 

PENALTY CLASS





 


 


ADVERTISING
 


 


   Bait advertising
 

517.040

 
A misdemeanor


   False advertising
 

517.030

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


BRIBERY
 


 


   Commercial bribery
 

518.020

 
A misdemeanor


   Receiving commercial bribe
 

518.030

 
A misdemeanor


   Receiving sports bribe
 

518.050

 
D felony


   Sports bribery
 

518.040

 
D felony


 


 


DECEPTIVE BUSINESS PRACTICES
 

517.020

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


FALSIFYING BUSINESS RECORDS
 

517.050

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


FRAUD
 


 


   Defrauding judgment creditors
 

517.070

 
A misdemeanor


   Defrauding secured creditors
 

517.060

 
A misdemeanor

C or or D felony


   Fraud in insolvency
 

517.080

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


ISSUING FALSE FINANCIAL STATEMENT
 

517.090

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


MISAPPLICATION OF ENTRUSTED PROPERTY
 

517.110

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


RECEIVING DEPOSITS IN FAILING FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
 

517.100

 
D felony


 


 


TAMPERING WITH OR RIGGING SPORTS CONTEST
 

518.060

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


TICKET SCALPING
 

518.070

 
Violation




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS, AND CANVASSERS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License requirement



   112.03   Exemptions



   112.04   Application procedure and criteria



   112.05   Standards for approval/issuance of identification cards



   112.06   Revocation procedure



   112.07   Standards for revocation



   112.08   Service of process and notice



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BUSINESS.”  The business carried on by any person who is an
itinerant merchant,



peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.



   “CANVASSER.”  A person who engages in canvassing.



   “CANVASSING.”  The act of going upon property or approaching
people to discuss or explain issues, which shall include religious
proselytizing, exercising an individual's freedom of speech or campaigning
for political votes, or political petition drives, or any other such
political, religious, protected speech.



   “GOODS.”  Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes,
but is not restricted to wares and foodstuffs.



   “PEDDLER.”  Any person, whether a resident or not, who traveling
by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, conveying,
transporting, or carrying goods for sale, or making sales, or making
deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise.



   “SOLICITATION.”  The request for contributions, or the acts of
taking orders for the sales of goods or services or pledges, or
subscriptions, in conjunction with a commercial enterprise, or as part of or
in furtherance of a for-profit enterprise, venture, or business.



   “SOLICITOR.”  Any person who travels by any means from place to
place, or house to house, or street to street, taking or attempting to take
orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or for services to be
performed in the future, or who approaches people to ask for, request, or
seek monetary contributions, donations, or financial support for a commercial
enterprise, or in furtherance of a for- profit enterprise, venture, or
business.



   “TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT TRANSIENT VENDOR, ITINERANT
VENDOR.”  Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, whether a
resident or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city and who in the
furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building or
other structure, public rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments or a shop
or any street alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition and
and sales of such goods, wares and merchandise.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon residential
property within the City of Crestview Hills without being invited to do so by
the owners or occupants of the subject property in order to peddle and/or
solicit city residents by knocking upon residential doors, or by ringing
doorbells, or to otherwise, so as to cause or attempt to cause residents to
open their doors. UNLESS, the person doing the peddling and/or soliciting
activity has first registered with the City Clerk, and received a license to
solicit or peddle from the City Clerk.



   (B)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor
shall obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.



   (C)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00) per application.



   (D)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable or
assignable.



   (E)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall extend to the end
of the calendar year in which it is issued. Upon expiration of a license, the
peddler or solicitor shall cease and desist all such activities in the city
until and unless a new license is obtained.



   (F)   This chapter prohibits any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor from distributing any handbills,
advertisements, or commercially-related solicitation documents without first
having obtained a license from the City Clerk. This chapter is not intended
to prevent the lawful distribution of written materials other than commercial
solicitation and business advertising.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Individuals who are not engaged in for-profit, commercial
enterprises shall be exempt from the licensing requirements set forth in this
chapter. These include:



      (1)   Children under eighteen years of age soliciting or
peddling on behalf of a non-profit school, governmental organization, or
youth club or ministry, such as Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts;



      (2)   Persons soliciting on behalf of a non-profit or
neighborhood organization for either donations to or membership in such
organization;



      (3)   Persons peddling  donated merchandise  on behalf of a
non-profit organization where the proceeds of the sale are used for
charitable purposes;



      (4)   Persons peddling on behalf of a religious organization
where the proceeds of the sale are used to support such organization or for a
charitable purpose; and



      (5)   Persons engaged in canvassing for religious or political
purposes.



   (B)   Individuals who meet the exemptions listed above are not
required to register with the City Clerk and are not required to obtain any
license prior to engaging in solicitations, peddling, or canvassing.



   (C)   Individuals who meet the exemptions listed above may engage in
solicitation, peddling, or canvassing any day of the week from 10:00 a.m.
until sunset but in no event later than 7:30 p.m. local time.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



§ 112.04  APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
file a written, sworn application with the Clerk. This application shall be
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a
partnership, or by the president of a corporation. Applications should be
made on forms available in the office of the Clerk. The application shall
state:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, and each person
who will be doing the soliciting or peddling on behalf of the applicant.



      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management
authority or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it
is proposed to be carried on in the city;



         (b)   The local address of such individual;



         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;



         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;



      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose
purpose the business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of
incorporation;



      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed
to carry on applicant's business;



      (5)   Whether or not the applicant, and the individuals
identified above have been convicted of any felony offense(s) or misdemeanor
offense(s) involving crimes of fraud, violence, or moral turpitude, and, if
so, the nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense. The
City Clerk shall deny the issuance of a license if the applicant, or the
individuals identified as peddling or soliciting for or on behalf of the
applicant, have been convicted of any felony offense(s), or misdemeanor
offense(s) involving crimes of fraud, violence, or moral turpitude.



      (6)   If requested by the Clerk, copies of all printed
advertising proposed to be used in connection with the applicant's business;
and



      (7)   Applicants for licenses shall provide photographs of
each person who will be peddling or soliciting in the city.



   (B)   Applicants are responsible for securing, and maintaining in
good standing, all applicable state, and local business licenses necessary to
carry out business within the city, and must show compliance with all city
business and occupational licenses and fees. The City Clerk shall deny the
issuance of any license to an applicant who fails to comply with this
provision.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall deny the issuance of any license to an
applicant who fails to fully complete the application form, or provides
inaccurate, false, or incomplete responses on the written application form.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



§ 112.05  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL/ISSUANCE OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application which complies with all
requirements of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue identification cards,
identifying each solicitor, itinerant merchant, or peddler, by name, address,
and photograph. Peddlers, itinerant merchants, and solicitors shall carry
their identification card at all times while peddling or soliciting within
the city, and shall show their identification card to residents prior to or
simultaneous with any peddling and/or soliciting activities.



   (B)   The City Administrator, following the procedures set forth in
§ 112.06, may revoke any registration and/or identification card, or demand
its return from any solicitor, itinerant merchant, or peddler who violates
the terms of this chapter, or makes a misrepresentation, or provides false or
misleading information, on the application, or who ceases to satisfy any of
the criteria required in this chapter.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



§ 112.06  REVOCATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be
revoked by the City Administrator because of any violation of this chapter,
or other city ordinances, state or federal law, or whenever the licensee
ceases to meet the criteria required in this chapter for a license to solicit
or peddle. In the event that the City Administrator determines that
revocation of a license is warranted, the applicant shall be given notice of
the revocation and an opportunity to contest the revocation. Notice of the
revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds
for the complaint. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last
known address as listed on the application. The licensee may contest the
revocation by giving written notice to the City Administrator within five (5)
days of service of the intention to contest the revocation of license.
Licensee shall appear before the City Administrator on a date and time
specified by the City Administrator, and the licensee shall bear the burden
of proof to show that the license should not be revoked. All decisions to
revoke a license made by the City Administrator shall be final.



   (B)   Once the City Administrator has revoked a licensee's license,
he/she shall immediately cease and desist all soliciting, and peddling
activities in the city, and shall cause any peddlers or solicitors under
his/her direction, control, or supervision, to cease and desist all such
activity until and unless the license is re-instated by the City
Administrator.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



§ 112.07  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.



   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:



   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license
application;



   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the license;



   (C)   Any violation of this chapter, other city ordinances, state or
federal law;



   (D)   Conviction of the licensee, including all persons who are
peddling or soliciting



on behalf of licensee, of any felony offense, or of any misdemeanor offense
involving fraud, violence, or moral turpitude; or



   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or
general welfare of the public.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



§ 112.08  SERVICE OF PROCESS AND NOTICE.



   (A)  Requirements/duties of successful applicant.



      (1)    Upon receipt of notice of approval of his application,
the applicant shall file with Clerk an instrument appointing the Clerk as his
true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of
process for an on behalf of applicant in respect to any matter arising under
this chapter.



      (2)   Forms for the required statements are available at the
Clerk's office. Such form or instrument shall contain recitals to the effect
that the applicant consents and agrees that the service of any notice or
process may be made upon this agent, and when so made shall be taken and held
to be as valid as if personally served upon the applicant, according to the
law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by
reason of such acknowledgment.



   (B)   Duty of Clerk. Immediately upon service of any process upon
the Clerk under this chapter, the Clerk shall send, by registered mail, a
copy of the process to the licensee at his or her last known address or
residence. It shall be a violation of the chapter for any peddler, solicitor,
or itinerant merchant to go upon any property that the owner or resident has
posted a "No Soliciting or Peddling" sign.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall maintain a list of addresses of the
city residents who have notified the Chief of Police in writing that they do
not wish peddlers, itinerant merchants, and solicitors to enter upon their
property. A copy of this list shall be provided along with and as part of any
license or identification card issued under this chapter. It shall be a
violation of the chapter for a peddler, itinerant merchant, or solicitor to
go upon any property listed on the "No Soliciting or Peddling List".



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for
which everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction shall
be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the maximum amount of
$500.00 as set forth in KRS 534.050(2)(a) or a term of imprisonment not to
exceed the maximum period of twelve (12) months as set forth in KRS
532.090(1), or both.



   (B)   In addition to above, each separate violation of this chapter
is hereby classified as a civil offense, for which:



      (1)   The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b)
that may be imposed for each separate violation of this chapter, is hereby
established as $500.00; and



      (2)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(c)
that will be imposed for each separate offense and violation of this chapter
if the person who has committed the violation and offense does not contest a
citation therefor, is hereby established as $100.00;



      (3)   An enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately
issuing a civil citation for violation of this Chapter, give notice that the
violation of this chapter shall be remedied within a specific period of time.



(Ord. 2013-08-02, passed 10-10-13)



CHAPTER 113:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   License required



   113.03   Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator



   113.04   Types of licenses; fees



   113.05   Issuance of license



   113.06   Information required in application



   113.07   Terms of license



   113.08   Display of license; lost or destroyed license



   113.09   State license requirement



   113.10   Hours when sales permitted



   113.11   Violations of state or federal law



   113.12   Minors



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALCOHOL." Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirit of win,
from whatever source or by whatever process it is produced.



   "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE." Every liquid or solid, whether patented or not,
containing alcohol in an amount in excess of that permitted under KRS 242 and
capable of being consumed by a human being. It includes every spurious or
imitation liquor sold as, or under any name commonly used for, alcoholic
beverages, whether containing alcohol or not. It does not include the
following products if they are unfit for use for beverage purposes: medicinal
preparations manufactured in accordance with formulas prescribed by the
United States pharmacopoeia, national formulary, or the American Institute of
Homeopathy, patented, patent, and proprietary medicines, toilet, medicinal,
and antiseptic preparations solutions, and flavoring extracts and syrups.



   "BUILDING CONTAINING LICENSED PREMISES." The licensed premises
themselves and includes any part of any building in which the premises are
contained, and any part of any other building connected with the building by
direct access or by a common entrance.



   "CITY DISTILLED SPIRITS AND MALT BEVERAGE ADMINISTRATOR." The City
Administrator for the City of Crestview Hills.



   "CONVICTED" or "CONVICTION." A finding of guilt resulting from a plea
of guilty, the decision of a court, or the finding of a jury, irrespective of
a pronouncement of judgment or the suspension of the judgment.



   "DISTILLED SPIRITS" or "SPIRITS." Any product capable of being consumed
by a human being which contains alcohol in excess of the amount permitted by
distilling mixed with water or other substances in solution, except wine.



   "DISTRIBUTOR." Any person who distributes malt beverages for the
purpose of being sold at retail.



   "LICENSE." Any license issued pursuant to this chapter.



   "LICENSEE." Any person to whom a license has been issued, pursuant to
this chapter.



   "MALT BEVERAGE."  Any fermented undistilled alcoholic beverage of any
name or description, manufactured from malt wholly or in part, or from any
substitute for malt.



   "PREMISES." The land and building in and upon which any business
regulated by alcoholic beverage statutes is operated or carried on. It shall
not include as a single unit two separate businesses as a enterprise of one
owner on the same lot or tract of land, in the same or in different buildings.



   "RETAIL SALE." Any sale where delivery is made in Kentucky to any
person not holding a license.



   "RETAILER." Any person who sells at retail any alcoholic beverage for
the sale of which a license is required.



   "SALE." Any transfer, exchange or barter for consideration, including
all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant,
or employee of any alcoholic beverage.



   "SELL." Solicit or receive an order for keep or expose for sale, keep
with intent to sell, and the delivery of any alcoholic beverage.



   "WHOLESALE SALE." A sale to any person for the purpose of resale.



   "WHOLESALER." Any person who sells at wholesale any alcoholic beverage
for sale of which a license is required, except a distiller, rectifier,
brewer, or vintner.



   "WINE." The product of the normal alcoholic fermentation on the juices
of fruits, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary additions to correct
defects due to climatic, saccharine, and seasonal conditions. It includes
champagne and sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic content not to
exceed 24% by volume.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 2013-09-01, passed 10-10-13)



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall do any act authorized by any kind
of license provide for by this chapter with respect to the storage, sale,
purchase, transporting, or other traffic in alcoholic beverages or other
traffic in alcoholic beverages unless the person, firm or corporation holds
the kind of license from the city which authorizes such act. No person, firm,
or corporation which conducts a place of business patronized by the public
and which does not hold a license to sell distilled spirits, and wine or malt
beverages shall permit any person to sell, barter, loan, or give away, or
drink distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages on the premises of his place
of business.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.03  DISTILLED SPIRITS AND MALT BEVERAGE ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Council hereby creates the post of City Distilled
Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator.



   (B)   The duties of the Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage
Administrator shall be to see that all applications and licensees conform to
the duties, obligations, and qualifications imposed upon them by Kentucky
Revised Statutes.



   (C)   The fee for the services of the City Distilled Spirits and
Malt Beverages Administrator is fixed at one hundred dollars ($100) per annum.



(Ord. 1981-2-2, passed 3-12-81)



                             



Cross-reference:



   City Administrator as Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage
Administrator, see § 30.27



§ 113.04  TYPES OF LICENSES; FEES.



   (A)    The following kinds of distilled spirits and wine licenses and
malt beverage licenses may be issued by the city, and the fees for each
license shall be:



 



Wholesaler's Distilled Spirits and Wine License
 

$3.000.00



Quota Retail Package License
 

$300.00



Quota Retail Drink License
 

$300.00



Nonquota Type 2 Retail Drink License (includes distilled spirits, wine, and
malt beverages)
 

$300.00



Special Temporary License
 

$50.00



Distilled Spirits and Wine Special Temporary Auction License Per Event
 

$100.00



Nonquota Type 3 Retail Drink License (includes distilled spirits, wine, and
malt beverages)
 

$300.00



Special Sunday Retail Drink License
 

$100.00



Caterer's License
 

$400.00



Nonquota Type 1 Retail Drink License (includes distilled spirits, wine, and
malt beverages)
 

$1,000.00



Bottling House or Bottling House Storage License
 

$1,000.00



Limited Restaurant License (includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt
beverages)
 

$300.00



Limited Golf Course License (includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt
beverages)
 

$300.00



Malt Beverage Microbrewery License
 

$300.00



Malt Beverage Distributor's License
 

$400.00



Nonquota Type 4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink License, Nonquota Retail Malt
Beverage Package License
 

$100.00



 






 



   (B)   Issuance date for new licenses. The issuance date and due date
for fees for all annual licenses shall be as follows:



      (1)   All new licenses shall be issued when approved under the
provisions of this chapter and the fee shall be due at the time of issuance.



      (2)   The issuance date for all such licenses for which, as of
the effective date of  November 1, 2013, the licensee holds a valid
corresponding state license, shall be  November 1. The license fee shall be
due at the time of issuance and be effective for a 12 month period.



      (3)   Applications for renewal of annual licenses shall be
filed with the City's Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator not
later than 15 days prior to the issuance date.



   (C)   If the applicant for any city alcoholic beverage license is
indebted to the city for any reason such as unpaid taxes, assessments, fees
or fines, or similar obligations, the license applied for shall not be issued
until all such indebtedness, together with any penalty or interest associated
therewith, shall have been paid in full.



   (D)   If any section, paragraph or clause of this section is held by
a proper Court to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining
sections, paragraphs or clauses, it being hereby expressly declared that the
reminder of this section would have been passed despite such invalidity.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 2013-09-01, passed 10-10-13)



                             



Statutory reference:



   City licenses; fees, see KRS 243.070



§ 113.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Application for the issuance or renewal of all licenses provided for in
this chapter shall be made to the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage
Administrator on forms as may be prescribed by the City Distilled Spirits and
Malt Beverage Administrator. Licenses shall be issued or renewed and fees
collected by the Finance Department. No license shall be issued in such form
as may be prescribed by the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage
Administrator. All license fees collected pursuant hereto shall be placed in
the general fund of the city.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.06  INFORMATION REQUIRED IN APPLICATION.



   (A)   All applications for licenses shall be on forms furnished by
the city. They shall be verified and shall set forth in detail such
information concerning the applicant and the premises for which the license
is sought as the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator may
require. In addition to other information the City Distilled Spirits and Malt
Beverage Administrator may require, every application for the issuance of a
license shall contain the following information, given under oath.



      (1)   The name, age, address, and residence of each applicant,
and, if there is more than one and they are partners, the partnership name
and address.



      (2)   The name and address of each person interested or to
become interested in the business for which the license is sought, together
with the nature of that interest, and, if the applicant is a corporation, the
names, addresses, and ages of each officer, director, and managerial
employee, and the state under the laws of which the corporate applicant is
incorporated.



      (3)   The premises to be licensed, stating the street and
number, if the premises have a street number, and otherwise a description
that will reasonably indicate the location of the premises. The applicant
shall also state the nature of his interest in the premises, and the name,
age, and address of any other person, either as a principal or associate, who
is interested with the applicant either in the premises or in the business to
be licensed.



      (4)   A statement that neither the applicant nor any other
person referred to in this section has been convicted of any misdemeanor
directly or indirectly attributable to the use, manufacture, sale of, or
traffic in alcoholic beverages, or any felony within two (2) years preceding
the application, and that he has not had any license that has been issued to
him under any alcoholic beverage statute revoked for cause within two years
prior to the date of the application.



   (B)   If, after a license has been issued there is a change in any
of the facts required to be set forth in the application, a verified
supplemental statement in writing giving notice of the change shall be filed
with the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator within ten
(10) days after the change.



   (C)   In giving any notice or taking any action in reference to a
license, the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator may rely
upon the information furnished in the application or in the supplemental
statement connected with the application. This information, as against the
licenses or applicant, shall be conclusively presumed to be correct.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.07  TERMS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on November 30 of
each year. The renewal of any alcoholic beverage license shall not be
construed to be a waiver or condonation of any violation which occurred prior
to the renewal and shall not prevent subsequent proceedings against the
licensee therefore.



   (B)   When any person applies for a license authorized to be issued
hereunder after December 1 of any year, he or she shall be charged, if the
license is issued, an amount equal to as many twelfths of the annual license
fee as there are calendar months, including the month in which the license is
granted, until the following December 1, except that no license shall be
issued for a shorter period than six (6) months. No abatement of license fees
shall be permitted to any person who held a license of the same kind of the
same premises in the preceding license period and who was actually doing
business under the license during the last month of the preceding license
period.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 2013-09-01, passed 10-10-13; Am.
Ord. 2017-07-01, passed 8-11-16)



§ 113.08  DISPLAY OF LICENSE: LOST OR DESTROYED LICENSE.



   (A)   Before commencing or doing any business for the time for which
a license has been issued, the license shall be posted and at all times
displayed in the conspicuous place in the room or principal room where the
business is carried on, so that all persons visiting the place may readily
see the license.



   (B)   No licensee shall post the license or permit it to be posted
upon premises other than the licensed premises, or upon premises where
traffic in alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any person other than
the licensee, or knowingly deface, destroy, or alter the license in any
respect.



   (C)   Whenever a license is lost or destroyed without the fault of
the licensee or his or her agents or employees, a duplicate license shall be
issued upon proof of loss satisfactory to the City Distilled Spirits and Malt
Beverage Administrator and upon payment of a fee of one dollar ($1).



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.09  STATE LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No license provided for hereunder shall be issued, renewed, or
transferred to any person, firm or corporation until the person, firm or
corporation shall have obtained the issuance, renewal, or transfer of the
state license corresponding thereto. In each instance the licensed premises
covered by the city license must be the same as the licensed premises covered
by the corresponding state license.



   (B)   The city license issued to any person, firm, or corporation
shall remain valid only so long as the state license corresponding thereto,
issued to the person, firm, or corporation shall be valid. Any revocation,
suspension, nonrenewal, or other action which makes the state license null
and void shall operate to revoke, suspend, make nonrenewable or null and void
the city license corresponding thereto. Any city license which is revoked,
suspended, not renewed, or so made invalid shall be immediately surrendered
to the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.10  HOURS WHEN SALES PERMITTED.



   (A)   A licensee may sell alcoholic beverages, or do any act
authorized by the licensee's license with respect to the sale of alcoholic
beverages only during the hours hereinafter set out for each license.



      (1)   Distilled spirits and wine retail package license:
during the period between 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. Monday through Saturday of
each week. Pursuant to KRS 244.290(6)(b) limited Sunday sales of distilled
spirits and wine retail package beverages may be conducted on Sundays during
the hours between 11:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. if the holder of the distilled
spirits and wine retail drink licenses have applied to the state director and
meet all other legal requirements for obtaining a limited Sunday liquor by
the drink license.



      (2)   Distilled spirits and wine retail drink license: during
the period between 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. Monday through Saturday of each
week. Pursuant to KRS 244.290(6) limited Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages
may be conducted by hotels, motels or restaurants which meet the criteria of
KRS 244.290(6), stated as follows, during the hours from 11:00 a.m. to 2:30
a.m.:



         (a)   Licenses shall only be issued to hotels, motels ,
or inns containing no less than fifty (50) sleeping units; and



         (b)   Having dining facilities for not less than fifty
(50) persons; or



         (c)   To bona fide restaurants open to the general
public having dining facilities for not less than fifty (50) persons.



      (3)   Distilled spirits and wine wholesaler's license and malt
beverage distributor's license: during the period between 6:00 a.m. and 2:30
a.m. Monday through Saturday of each week. Sunday limited sales may occur
between 11:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m.



      (4)   Malt beverage retailer's license: during the period
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. Monday through Saturday of each
week. Sunday limited sales may occur between 11:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m.



   (B)   If a licensee provides a separate department within his or her
licensed premises capable of being locked and closed of, within which is kept
all stocks of alcoholic beverages and all fixtures and apparatus connected
with his or her business as a licensee, and this department is kept locked
during all times when his or her premises are open and he or she is not
authorized to sell alcoholic beverages hereunder, he or she shall be deemed
to have complied with this section.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 2013-09-01, passed 10-10-13)



                             



Statutory reference:



   See KRS 244.290(6)



§ 113.11  VIOLATIONS OF STATE OR FEDERAL LAW.



   Nothing herein shall be construed to condone the violation by any
person, firm or corporation within the city of any federal or state statute,
law, or regulation, now, heretofore or hereafter in effect applicable to any
person, firm or corporation relating to the storage, sale, purchase,
transporting, or other traffic in alcoholic beverages. Any violation of any
statute, law, or regulation shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. If
any clerk, agent, servant, or employee of any licensee shall violate any
provision of this chapter, or such statute, law, or regulation, the violation
shall be a violation by the licensee. Any license issued hereunder may be
revoked by the City Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator if the
licensee violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any
statute, law, or regulation.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.12  MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is the
owner, occupant or who is otherwise in possession of any property located in
the city to knowingly allow any other person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years, except members of the immediate family (spouse or children) of such
owner, occupant or possessor, to remain on such property while in the
possession of any alcoholic beverage or while consuming any alcoholic
beverage.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 83A.065(2) the offense of violating any
provision of this chapter is designated as a misdemeanor and a criminal fine
not to exceed the amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(a), or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed the periods set forth in KRS 532.090(1), or both,
may be imposed on any person, firm or corporation who, acting by himself or
through another, directly or indirectly, commits the offense.



   (B)   All ordinances, laws, or resolutions of the city relating to
alcoholic beverage control inconsistent with these provisions are repealed.
However, the repeal of any ordinance, law, or resolution shall not prevent
the prosecution, conviction, and imposition of penalties after the date of
passage thereof of any person, firm, or corporation which violated such
ordinance, law, or resolution prior to the date of passage thereof.



(Ord. 2009-4-1, passed 5-14-09)



CHAPTER 114:  AMUSEMENTS



§ 114.01  MINORS RESTRICTED FROM OPERATING AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



   The number of pinball machines, coin operated amusement devices, and
electro-mechanical pinball machines permitted at any one location within the
city limits shall not exceed the total number of five (5).  Of the total
number of five (5) such devices permitted, no more than two (2) of such
devices shall be of the electro-mechanical pinball machine type.



(Ord. 1981-12-2, passed 1-14-82)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.02  NUMBER OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   No owner, lessor, lessee, servant, agent, nor any person, firm,
corporation, or entity shall permit any person under sixteen (16) years of
age to play, operate, assist, manage or attempt to play, operate, assist, or
manage any coin-operated device or machine including electro-mechanical
pinball machines, commonly denominated pinball, or device or similar
contrivance, regardless of label or name there affixed within the confines of
the city.



(Ord. 1981-12-2, passed 1-14-82)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or entity who is found in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).  Each day of a
continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 1981-12-2, passed 1-14-82)



CHAPTER 115:  GARAGE SALES



§ 115.01  DEFINITION.



   "GARAGE SALE" as used in this chapter refers to a sale from a residence
or residential property of personal property.  A yard, patio, or driveway
sale is included within the definition of "GARAGE SALE."  The term "GARAGE
SALE" does not include the mere incidental sale of one or two items of
personal property when such sale is not part of a general sale of a number of
items of personal property.



(Ord. 1986-9-1, passed 12-11-86)



§ 115.02  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The conduct of general retail sales or commercial activities
in residential areas is, except as is otherwise expressly authorized under
this chapter, prohibited.  Garage sales are permitted only insofar as they
are conducted consistent with the limitations set forth herein.



   (B)   Garage sales shall be conducted in compliance with all laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations not in conflict herewith; however, no
occupational license shall be required therefor.



(Ord. 1986-9-1, passed 12-11-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; POSTING OF PERMIT.



   (A)   No garage sale may be conducted within the city without a
permit having been first issued for such sale by the City Clerk. 
Application for such permits shall be made at least two days prior to the
date of the sale.  No sales shall be permitted on Sunday.  The permit shall
set forth and restrict the time and location of the garage sale.  No more
than two such permits may be issued to one residence or family or household
during any calendar year.  Such permits shall be limited in time to no more
than the daylight hours of two consecutive days.



   (B)   Prior to issuance of any garage sale permit the person
conducting such sale shall file a written statement with the City Clerk
setting forth the following information:



      (1)   The person's interest in the residential property
(ownership, current lessee or such other control as the person may have).



      (2)   An affirmative statement that the property to be sold
was neither acquired or consigned for the purposes of resale.



   (C)   The permit required by this chapter shall be prominently
displayed at the sale.



(Ord. 1986-9-1, passed 12-11-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  SIGNS.



   One sign of not more than four (4) square feet shall be permitted to be
displayed on the property of the residence where a garage sale is being
conducted pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter.  Such signs shall
be displayed only during the times of the sales as delineated on the
permit.  In no case shall the sign be placed on any property other than the
property of the residence to which the permit has been issued or the public
right-of-way.



(Ord. 1986-9-1, passed 12-11-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who conducts or aids in conducting any garage sale not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be held in violation of
this Code of Ordinances and shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation
and shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100).  Each day that a violation continues or exists shall
constitute separate offense.



(Ord. 1986-9-1, passed 12-11-86)



CHAPTER 116:  FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRANCHISE  AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX



§ 116.01  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed on all "financial institutions", as defined in
KRS Chapter 136, located within the corporate limits of the city for the 1996
tax year and all subsequent years, a franchise tax at the rate of .017% on
all deposits, as defined in KRS Chapter 136, maintained by such financial
institutions.



(Ord. 1997-2-1, passed 2-13-97)



§ 116.02  TAX DUE.



   (A)   For transition purposes, the 1996 tax year will be treated
differently in terms of collection of taxes than for all subsequent years. 
For the 1996 year, the following timetable is hereby established.  The city
will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than May 1, 1997. 
Payment of the tax shall be due with a two percent (2%) discount by May 31,
1997, or without the discount by June 30, 1997.



   (B)   For all years subsequent to the 1996 tax year, the following
timetable is hereby established.  The city will issue tax bills to financial
institutions no later than December 1 of each year.  Payment of the tax
shall be due with a two percent (2%) discount by December 31st of each year,
or without the discount by January 31st of the next calendar year.



(Ord. 1997-2-1, passed 2-13-97)



§ 116.03  LIEN.



   The city shall have a lien for taxes on the property assessed for taxes
to the extent allowed under KRS 134.420.



(Ord. 1997-2-1, passed 2-13-97)



§ 116.04  USE OF TAX.



   All moneys collected pursuant to these sections shall be paid into the
general fund of the city to be used for the payment of proper expenditures as
determined by the City Council.



(Ord. 1997-2-1, passed 2-13-97)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not paid
before June 30, 1997, for tax year 1996, or which are not paid before January
31st, for all subsequent years' tax years, shall be deemed delinquent and
shall be subject to a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) and shall bear
interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum.



(Ord. 1997-2-1, passed 2-13-97)



CHAPTER 117:  RENTAL PROPERTIES



Section



   117.01   General Provisions



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   Rental property registration



   117.04   Licensing and licensing requirements



   117.05   Vacation of affected rental dwellings



   117.06   Civil action to enforce



   117.07   Appeals



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Effective January 1, 2017, this chapter shall apply to all
RENTAL PROPERTIES as defined herein, including single-family residential
dwellings and dwelling units in otherwise owner-occupied dwellings,
including, but not limited to, single-family residences, boarding houses,
condominiums, townhouses, and leasehold cooperatives, and any multi-family
dwelling that has less than three (3) separate rental dwelling units.



   (B)   The requirement to register rental properties shall not apply
to rental dwellings owned or operated by governmental agencies as public
housing.



   (C)   The provisions hereof shall not apply to licensed hotels or
motels, bed and breakfast establishments, jails, convents, monasteries,
nursing homes, board and care homes, parsonages. parish houses, rectories,
hospitals, or apartment buildings.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “APARTMENT or APARTMENTS.” Any units or structure(s) defined as
apartment or apartment building under the City of Crestview Hills’ Zoning
Code.



   “OWNER.” Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:



      (1)   Has legal title, to any premise, building, or building
unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



      (2)   Has charge/care, or control of any premise, building
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or any executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.



   “PERSON.” Any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability
company, association, partnership, cooperative, or similar entity.



   “RENTAL DWELLING.” Any residential structure or residential or
commercial building, including mobile homes, containing one or more units,
which the owner either actually rents or leases or intends to rent or lease
to the public for residential purposes, excluding those buildings not covered
by this chapter.



   “RENTAL DWELLING UNIT.” A room or group of rooms located within a
rental dwelling and forming a single habitable unit.



   “RENTAL PROPERTY.” A parcel of land located within the city that
contains one or more rental dwellings. For purposes of this chapter, what
constitutes a parcel of land shall be determined in the same manner as
parcels are determined for purposes of city property taxes.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.03  RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION.



   (A)   The city shall maintain a registry of rental properties
located within the city. No person shall rent, offer for rent, or receive
rental income from any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit unless the
owner has first registered the rental property where the rental dwelling's
located in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   The owner of each rental property located within the city
shall register the rental property with the City Clerk on a form provided by
the city. After initially registering a rental property, the owner of each
registered rental property shall re-register the rental property annually no
later than January 31 of each year. The owner of a registered property that
is no longer offered for rent shall request in writing that the property be
removed from the city’s rental property registry.



   (C)   Each rental property owner shall provide the following
information upon registration and re-registration:



      (1)   The street address of the rental property;



      (2)   The number of rental dwelling units at the rental
property;



      (3)   The name and address of the rental property owner(s);



      (4)   Contact information for a responsible party, who shall
be a natural person, which shall include:



         (a)   The responsible party’s name;



         (b)   The responsible party’s mailing address;



         (c)   The responsible party’s telephone number(s);



         (d)   The responsible party’s email address; and



         (e)   The responsible party’s fax number, if one
exists; and



      (5)   All contact information required by division (4) for a
person authorized to make or order repairs or service in order to remedy
violations of state or city codes at the rental property, if different from
the responsible party.



   (D)   The owner of each registered rental property shall update any
information provided to the city within thirty (30) days of any change.



   (E)   In order to compensate the city for its costs in administering
the rental property registration program, all rental properties shall be
subject to an annual registration fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00), which
shall be payable at the time of registration or re-registration. Any unpaid
registration fee shall be added to the city property tax bill for the rental
property. Any owner who fails to pay a fee added to the rental property’s
city tax bill by the due date for city property taxes shall be assessed a
late fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each month within the calendar year
that the registration fee remains unpaid. Any unpaid registration fees and/or
late fees shall be added to city property tax bills in subsequent years.



   (F)   Registration under this chapter is nontransferable. A new
owner of a rental property shall register the rental property within thirty
(30) days of acquiring title or other legal right of possession.



   (G)   Upon fulfillment of the registration application and payment
of registration fee, and compliance with licensing requirements set forth in
§ 117.04, the applicant shall be issued a license for the one (1) year
period, which is non-assignable and non-transferrable.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.04  LICENSING AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum standards and conditions shall be met in
order to obtain and maintain a rental dwelling license:



      (1)   The rental dwelling shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Kentucky Building Code, Kentucky Standards of Safety,
Nuisance Code, Property Code and Zoning Ordinance.



      (2)   The rental dwelling shall not exceed the maximum number
of units as permitted under the Zoning Code.



      (3)   The rental dwelling shall not within the preceding
twelve (12) month period have had four (4) or more Building Code, Zoning
Code, or Nuisance Code violations, or any combination thereof in the
preceding twelve (12) month period.



      (4)   The rental dwelling shall not be overcrowded or
illegally occupied in violation of any applicable code.



      (5)   The owner of the rental dwelling shall not be delinquent
in the payment of any financial obligation owed to the city, included, but
not limited to, occupational license taxes or other taxes, liens, and/or
inspection fees.



   (B)   Failure to comply with any of the city, state, or Federal
standards and conditions shall be adequate grounds for denial, refusal to
renew, revocation or suspension of any rental dwelling license following the
procedures established by this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.05  VACATION OF AFFECTED RENTAL DWELLINGS.



   When any rental dwelling license has been denied, suspended, revoked,
or the property owner has failed to apply for or renew, or register the
property, the City Administrator shall order the rental dwelling or rental
dwelling unit vacated, giving the tenants thereof a reasonable time to
arrange for new housing, not to exceed sixty (60) days. No rental dwelling
unit shall be rented again until the rental dwelling property owner/license
holder is properly licensed.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.06  CIVIL ACTION TO ENFORCE.



   (A)   Civil action may be commenced by the City Attorney to enforce
any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, injunctive
relief to compel the vacating of the premises and/or to prohibit the renting
out of a dwelling unit which has not been properly registered, damages for
past due rental fees, fines, penalties and interest. In addition to
injunction and/or damages, the city may also recover from the dwelling unit
owner all legal costs, fees, and attorney fees attendant with commencing
civil action to enforce this chapter.



   (B)   Any civil action to enforce this chapter shall be brought in
the Kenton Circuit Court.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.07  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any rental dwelling property owner/license holder who is
denied a license, or whose license has been suspended or revoked by the City
Administrator, may appeal that decision to the Mayor. The Mayor may affirm
the appealed action; reverse the appealed action; and/or modify the appealed
action by reversing with conditions or granting an extension of time for
performance of any act required where there is undue hardship connected with
the performance of any act required by this chapter.



   (B)   The decision of the Mayor shall be reduced to writing and
shall be final. The written decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the
appellant. Any aggrieved party to a final decision may appeal within thirty
(30) days of the date of the issuance thereof to the Kenton Circuit Court.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and imposition of a civil penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day the property is in violation of
the chapter. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   The city shall possess a lien on property for all fines,
penalties, charges, past-due amounts, fees, attorney fees, and all other
reasonable costs associated with enforcing this chapter, and the placing of a
lien on a parcel of real property pursuant to this code. The lien shall be
superior to and have priority over all other liens filed subsequently, except
state, county, school board and city taxes.



   (C)   Failure to register property and pay the registration fee in
accordance with this chapter, or revocation, suspension, or denial of said
registration license, may constitute grounds for denial of or revocation of
any and all other licenses and privileges to do business in the city,
including, but not limited to, the occupational license.



(Ord. 2016-03-01, passed 4-14-16)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against persons. 
These citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement
officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of
this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not
incorporated by reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


ASSAULT
 


 


   First degree
 

508.010

 
B felony


   Second degree
 

508.020

 
C felony


   Third degree
 

508.025

 
D felony


   Fourth degree
 

508.030

 
A misdemeanor


   Under emotional disturbance
 

508.040

 
B misdemeanor or D felony


 


 


CRIMINAL ABUSE
 


 


   First degree
 

508.100

 
C felony


   Second degree
 

508.110

 
D felony


   Third degree
 

508.120

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


CRIMINAL COERCION
 

509.080

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


CUSTODIAL INTERFERENCE
 

509.070

 
D felony


 


 


KIDNAPPING
 

509.040

 
A or B felony; capital offense


 


 


MANSLAUGHTER
 


 


   First degree
 

507.030

 
B felony


   Second degree
 

507.040

 
C felony


 


 


MENACING
 

508.050

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


MURDER
 

507.020

 
Capital offense


 


 


RECKLESS HOMICIDE
 

507.050

 
D felony


 


 


TERRORISTIC THREATENING
 


 


   First degree
 

508.075

 
C felony


   Second degree
 

508.078

 
D felony


   Third degree
 

508.080

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


UNLAWFUL IMPRISONMENT
 


 


   First degree
 

509.020

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

509.030

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


WANTON ENDANGERMENT
 


 


   First degree
 

508.060

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

508.070

 
A misdemeanor




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 131:  FAMILY OFFENSES



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   The following schedule contains references to those sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common family offenses. 
These citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement
officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of
the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


BIGAMY
 

530.010

 
D felony


 


 


CONCEALING BIRTH OF INFANT
 

530.030

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


INCEST
 

530.020

 
A, B, or C felony


 


 


INCOMPETENT PERSON, ENDANGERING
 


 


WELFARE OF
 

530.080

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


MINORS
 


 


   Abandonment of
 

530.040

 
D felony


   Endangering welfare of
 

530.060

 
A misdemeanor


   Unlawful transaction with
 


 


      First degree
 

530.064

 
A, B, or C felony


      Second degree
 

530.065

 
D felony


      Third degree
 

530.070

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


NONSUPPORT
 

530.050

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


NONSUPPORT, FLAGRANT
 

530.050

 
D felony




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against property.
These citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement
officers in citing offenders under state law. It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.



 




OFFENSE

 
KRS SECTION
 
PENALTY CLASS




 
 



ARSON

 
 



   Defrauding insurer

 
513.060
 
D felony



   First degree

 
513.020
 
A felony



   Second degree

 
513.030
 
B felony


   Third degree
 
513.040
 
D felony


 
 


BURGLARY
 
 



   First degree

 
511.020
 
B felony



   Second degree

 
511.030
 
C felony



   Third degree

 
511.040
 
D felony



   Possession of burglar’s tools

 
511.050
 
A misdemeanor


 
 


CRIMINAL MISCHIEF
 
 



   First degree

 
512.020
 
D felony



   Second degree

 
512.030
 
A misdemeanor



   Third degree

 
512.040
 
B misdemeanor


 
 


CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 
 



   First degree

 
511.060
 
A misdemeanor



   Second degree

 
511.070
 
B misdemeanor



   Third degree

 
511.080
 
Violation


 
 


FORGERY AND RELATED OFFENSES
 
 



   Criminal simulation

 
516.110
 
A misdemeanor



   Forgery

 
 



      First degree

 
516.020
 
C felony



      Second degree

 
516.030
 
D felony



      Third degree

 
516.040
 
A misdemeanor



   Possession of forged instrument

 
 



      First degree

 
516.050
 
C felony



      Second degree

 
516.060
 
D felony



      Third degree

 
516.070
 
A misdemeanor



   Possession of forgery device

 
516.090
 
D felony




 



 




OFFENSE

 
KRS SECTION
 
PENALTY CLASS


 
 


FORGERY AND RELATED OFFENSES
 
 


  (Cont’d)
 
 



   Using slugs

 
 



      First degree

 
516.120
 
D felony



      Second degree

 
516.130
 
B misdemeanor


 
 


LITTERING, CRIMINAL
 
512.070
 
A misdemeanor


 
 


NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES
 
 



   Criminal possession of

 
512.060
 
B misdemeanor



   Criminal use of

 
512.050
 
B misdemeanor


 
 


POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS
 
512.080
 
Violation


  UNLAWFULLY
 
 


 
 


ROBBERY
 
 



   First degree

 
512.020
 
B felony



   Second degree

 
512.030
 
C felony


 
 


THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
 
 



   Device for theft of telephone

 
514.065
 
A misdemeanor



      services

 
 
or D felony



   Obscuring identity of machine

 
514.120
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or C or D felony



   Receiving stolen property

 
514.110
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or A, B, C or D felony



   Possession of stolen mail

 
514.150
 
D felony



   Theft by deception

 
514.040
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or C or D felony



   Theft by extortion

 
514.080
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or C or D felony



   Theft by failure to make disposition

 
514.070
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or C or D felony



   Theft by unlawful taking

 
514.030
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or A, B, C or D felony



   Theft of labor

 
514.090
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
C or D felony



   Theft of mail matter

 
514.140
 
D felony



   Theft of property

 
514.050
 
A misdemeanor


 
 
or C or D felony



   Theft of services

 
514.060
 
A misdemeanor or C or D felony


   Unauthorized use of vehicle
 
514.100
 
A misdemeanor or D felony




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public
morals. These citations are intended only as convenient references for
enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law. It is not the
intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in
this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not
incorporated by reference.



 




OFFENSE

 
KRS SECTION
 
PENALTY CLASS




 
 


PORNOGRAPHY
 
 



   Advertising obscene material

 
531.050
 
B misdemeanor



   Distribution

 
 



      Distribution of obscene matter

 
531.020
 
A or B misdemeanor



      Distribution to minor

 
531.030
 
A misdemeanor or


 
 
D felony



      Using minors to distribute

 
531.040
 
A misdemeanor or


 
 
D felony



   Portrayal of sexual performance by

 
 



     minor

 
 



      Advertising material containing

 
531.360
 
C or D felony



      Distributing matter containing

 
531.340
 
C or D felony



      Promoting sale of matter

 
 



         containing

 
531.350
 
A misdemeanor;


 
 
C or D felony



      Using minors to distribute such

 
531.370
 
C or D felony



         matter

 
 



   Promoting sale of obscenity

 
531.060
 
A or B misdemeanor;


 
 
D felony



   Sexual performance by minor

 
 



      Promotion of

 
531.320
 
A, B, or C felony



      Use of minor

 
531.310
 
A, B, or C felony


 
 


PROSTITUTION OFFENSES
 
 



   Loitering for prostitution purposes

 
529.080
 
Violation or


 
 
B misdemeanor



   Permitting prostitution

 
529.070
 
B misdemeanor



      Second degree

 
529.040
 
D felony



   Prostitution

 
529.020
 
B misdemeanor




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 134:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



         



EDITOR'S NOTE: 



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common gambling offenses.  These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


CONSPIRACY TO PROMOTE GAMBLING
 

528.040

 
D felony


 


 


HORSE RACES, MESSENGER BETTING PROHIBITED
 

528.110

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


PARA-MUTUAL WAGERING
 

528.120

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


PERMITTING GAMBLING
 

528.070

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


POSSESSION OF GAMBLING DEVICE
 

528.080

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


POSSESSION OF GAMBLING RECORDS
 


 


   First degree
 

528.050

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

528.060

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


PROMOTING GAMBLING
 


 


   First degree
 

528.020

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

528.030

 
A misdemeanor




 



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND JUSTICE



             



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public
administration and justice.  These citations are intended only as convenient
references for enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law.  It
is not the intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory
provisions in this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically
not incorporated by reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


BRIBERY AND RELATED OFFENSES
 


 


   Bribery of public servant
 

521.020

 
C felony


   Receiving unlawful compensation
 

521.040

 
A misdemeanor


   Soliciting unlawful compensation
 

521.030

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


ESCAPE AND RELATED OFFENSES
 


 


   Bail jumping
 


 


      First degree
 

520.070

 
D felony


      Second degree
 

520.080

 
A misdemeanor


   Escape
 


 


      First degree
 

520.020

 
C felony


      Second degree
 

520.030

 
D felony


      Third degree
 

520.040

 
B misdemeanor


   Hindering prosecution or          apprehension
 


 


      First degree
 

520.120

 
D felony


      Second degree
 

520.130

 
A misdemeanor


   Promoting contraband
 


 


      First degree
 

520.050

 
D felony


      Second degree
 

520.060

 
A misdemeanor


   Resisting arrest
 

520.090

 
A misdemeanor


   Resisting order to stop motor vehicle
 

520.100

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION, INTERFERENCE WITH
 


 


   Bribe receiving by juror
 

524.070

 
D felony


   Bribe receiving by witness
 

524.030

 
D felony


   Bribing a juror
 

524.060

 
D felony


   Bribing a witness
 

524.020

 
D felony


   Harassing a witness
 

524.045

 
A misdemeanor


   Intimidating a particpant in the legal process
 

524.040

 
D felony


   Jury tampering
 

524.090

 
D felony


   Retaliating against a witness
 

524.055

 
D felony


   Simulating legal process
 

524.110

 
B misdemeanor


   Tampering with physical evidence
 

524.100

 
D felony


   Tampering with a witness
 

524.050

 
D felony


   Unlawful practice of law
 

524.130

 
B misdemeanor




 



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


PERJURY AND RELATED OFFENSES
 


 


   False swearing
 

523.040

 
B misdemeanor


   Perjury
 


 


      First degree
 

523.020

 
D felony


      Second degree
 

523.030

 
A misdemeanor


   Unsworn falsification to authorities
 

523.100

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, OBSTRUCTION OF
 


 


   Compounding a crime
 

519.030

 
A misdemeanor


   Falsely reporting an incident
 

519.040

 
A misdemeanor


   Impersonating a public servant
 

519.050

 
A misdemeanor


   Obstructing governmental operations
 

519.020

 
A misdemeanor


   Tampering with public records
 

519.060

 
D felony


 


 


PUBLIC OFFICE, ABUSE OF
 


 


   Misuse of confidential information
 

522.040

 
D felony


   Official misconduct
 


 


      First degree
 

522.020

 
A misdemeanor


      Second degree
 

522.030

 
B misdemeanor




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



Section



   136.01   Discharge of weapons



 



   136.99   Penalty



§ 136.01  DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   "WEAPON"  as used herein shall mean and include all firearms,
pistols, rifles, shotguns, BB guns, pellet guns, air rifles, toy guns, or
sling shot bows which project, launch, shoot, or otherwise discharge lead,
pellets, BBs, arrows, or any dangerous missiles.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms within the
corporate limits of the city except in a regularly established shooting
gallery.  However, this section shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his
duty.  Further, this section shall not be construed to prohibit any citizen
from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property.



(Ord 1979-7-1, passed 7-12-79)   Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty of a violation of § 136.01 shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



(Ord. 1979-7-1, passed 7-12-79)



                    



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   The following schedule contains references to those sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against
public order.  These citations are intended only as convenient references
for enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the
intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in
this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not
incorporated by reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


ABUSE OF CORPSE
 

525.120

 
D felony


 


 


CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
 


 


   First degree
 

525.125

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

525.130

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


DESECRATION OF VENERATED OBJECTS
 


 


   First degree
 

525.105

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

525.110

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


DISORDERLY CONDUCT
 


 


   First degree
 

525.055

 
A misdemeanor


   Second degree
 

525.060

 
B misdemeanor


DISRUPTING MEETINGS OR PROCESSIONS
 


 


   First degree
 

525.145

 
A misdemeanor


   Second degree
 

525.150

 
B misdemeanor




 



 



OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS


 


 


EAVESDROPPING AND RELATED OFFENSES
 


 


   Divulging illegally obtained information
 

526.060

 
A misdemeanor


   Eavesdropping
 

526.020

 
D felony


   Installing eavesdropping device
 

526.030

 
D felony


   Possessing eavesdropping device
 

526.040

 
A misdemeanor


   Tampering with private communications
 

526.050

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


FAILURE TO DISPERSE
 

525.160

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
 


 


(Editor's note:  Enactment of KRS 65.870 now prohibits any type of local
firearms control ordinance)


 


 


HARASSING COMMUNICATIONS
 

525.080

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


HARASSMENT
 

525.070

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


INCITING TO RIOT
 

525.040

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


LOITERING
 

525.090

 
Violation


 


 


OBSTRUCTING HIGHWAY OR PUBLIC PASSAGE
 

525.140

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


PUBLIC INTOXICATION
 

525.100

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


RIOT
 


 


   First degree
 

525.020

 
D felony


   Second degree
 

525.030

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY
 

525.050

 
B misdemeanor




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 137:  SEXUAL OFFENSES



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common sexual offenses.  These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


INDECENT EXPOSURE
 

510.150

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


RAPE
 


 


   First degree
 

510.040

 
A or B misdemeanor


   Second degree
 

510.050

 
C felony


   Third degree
 

510.060

 
D felony


 


 


SEXUAL ABUSE
 


 


   First degree
 

510.110

 
C or D felony


   Second degree
 

510.120

 
A misdemeanor


   Third degree
 

510.130

 
B misdemeanor


 


 


SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
 

510.140

 
A misdemeanor


 


 


SODOMY
 


 


   First degree
 

510.070

 
A or B felony


   Second degree
 

510.080

 
C felony


   Third degree
 

510.090

 
D felony


   Fourth degree
 

510.100

 
A misdemeanor




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 138:  INCHOATE OFFENSES



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common inchoate offenses.  these
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.



 

OFFENSE
 

KRS SECTION

 
PENALTY CLASS




 


 


CRIMINAL ATTEMPT
 

506.010

 
A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony


 


 


CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY
 

506.040

 
A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony


 


 


CRIMINAL FACILITATION
 

506.080

 
A or B misdemeanor; D felony


 


 


CRIMINAL SOLICITATION
 

506.030

 
A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony


 


 


CRIMINAL SYNDICATE
 

506.120

 
B or C felony




 



Penalty, see Ch. 139



CHAPTER 139:  GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII



Section



   139.01   Fines for misdemeanors and violations



   139.02   Sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor



   139.03   Fines for felonies



   139.04   Sentence of imprisonment for felony



______________



EDITOR'S NOTE:



   This chapter is intended for information purposes only.  The
provisions of this chapter are specifically not incorporated by reference.



§ 139.01  FINES FOR MISDEMEANORS AND VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Fines and imprisonment for misdemeanors shall not be mutually
exclusive.  In any case where imprisonment is authorized a fine may be
levied in addition to the imprisonment or a fine may be levied as an
alternative to imprisonment.  Similarly, a fine may be levied in lieu of
imprisonment.  Whether or not the fine is to be levied as the sole penalty
or as an additional or alternative penalty shall be in the discretion of the
judge or jury as the case may be.  If the trial is by jury, the jury shall
have the discretion.  This rule shall apply in all cases where a fine is not
the exclusive penalty authorized by law.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided for an offense defined outside
this title, a person who has been convicted of any offense other than a
felony shall be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not to exceed:



      (1)   For a Class A misdemeanor, $500; or



      (2)   For a Class B misdemeanor, $250; or



      (3)   For a violation, $250.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a corporation.



(KRS 534.040)



§ 139.02  SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR MISDEMEANOR.



   A sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall be a definite term
and shall be fixed within the following maximum limitations:



   (A)   For a Class A misdemeanor, the term shall not exceed 12
months; and



   (B)   For a Class B misdemeanor, the term shall not exceed 90 days.



(KRS 532.090)



§ 139.03  FINES FOR FELONIES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided for an offense defined outside
this title, a person who has been convicted of any felony and granted a
sentence of probation or conditional discharge shall be sentenced to pay a
fine in an amount not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and no greater
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or double his gain from commission of the
offense, whichever is the greater.



   (B)   In determining the amount and method of paying a fine for
commission of a felony, the court shall consider, among others, the following
factors:



      (1)   The defendant's ability to pay the amount of the fine;



      (2)   The hardship likely to be imposed on the defendant's
dependents by the amount of the fine and the time and method of paying it;



      (3)   The impact the amount of the fine will have on the
defendant's ability to make reparation or restitution to the victim; and



      (4)   The amount of the defendant's gain, if any, derived from
the commission of the offense.



   (C)   When a defendant is convicted of two or more felonies
committed through a single act and is sentenced to fines pursuant to division
(A) above, the aggregate amount of such fines shall not exceed $10,000 or
double the amount of the defendant's gain from commission of the offense,
whichever is greater.



   (D)   This section does not apply to a corporation.



(KRS 534.030)



§ 139.04  SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR FELONY.



   (A)   A sentence of imprisonment for a felony shall be an
indeterminate sentence, the maximum of which shall be fixed within the limits
provided by division (B) below, and subject to modification by the trial
judge pursuant to KRS 532.070.



   (B)   The authorized maximum terms of imprisonment for felonies are:



      (1)   For a Class A felony, not less than twenty (20) years
nor more than life imprisonment;



      (2)   For a Class B felony, not less than ten (10) years nor
more than twenty (20) years;



      (3)   For a Class C felony, not less than five (5) years nor
more than ten (10) years; and



      (4)   For a Class D felony, not less than one (1) year nor
more than five (5) years.



   (C)   For any felony specified in KRS Chapter 510, KRS 530.020,
530.064(1)(a), or 531.310, the sentence shall include an additional five (5)
year period of conditional discharge which shall be added to the maximum
sentence rendered for the offense.  During this period of conditional
discharge, if a defendant violates the provisions of conditional discharge,
the defendant may be incarcerated for:



      (1)   The remaining period of his initial sentence, if any is
remaining; and



      (2)   The entire period of conditional discharge, or if the
initial sentence has been served, for the remaining period of conditional
discharge.



   (D)   The actual time of release within the maximum established by
division (A) above, or as modified pursuant to KRS 532.070, shall be
determined under procedures established elsewhere by law.



(KRS 532.060)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING CODE





         151.   SWIMMING POOLS





         152.   ZONING





         153.   CITY DEVELOPMENT





         154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS





         155.   ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code



   150.02   Building and zoning permit schedule



   150.03   Proportioning fees for services provided



   150.04   Permit fees for local and state inspection



   150.05   Demolition of structures; permit required



Residential Code



   150.10   Adoption of Kentucky Residential Code



Property Maintenance Code



   150.15   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code



 



   150.99   Penalty




General Provisions




§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE.



   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Chapter 7, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained
in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the
Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in Chapter 10, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; together with any amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this code of ordinances. Copies
of the above codes and any amendments thereto shall be placed on file in the
office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during normal business hours.



§  150.02  BUILDING AND ZONING PERMIT SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Adoption of One Stop Service Level 2.  The city hereby adopts
by reference herein and attached at Appendix A to Ordinance 2005-04-02,
Unified "One Stop Shop" Service Level 2 offered by the Northern Kentucky Area
Planning Commission (NKAPC).



   (B)   Fees adopted by reference.  The city hereby adopts by
reference herein and attached as Appendix B to Ordinance 2005-04-02 as if
fully set forth herein the Schedule of Fees dated January 2005, as
recommended by the NKAPC for the processing and issuance of zoning permits,
building permits, electric permits, Board of Adjustment hearing fees, and
fines for violations of these life safety codes when a violation of them has
been classified as a civil offense.



(Ord. 1981-2-4, passed 3-12-81; Am. Ord. 1985-8-2, passed -  - ; Am. Ord.
1005-04-02, passed 5-12-05)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.03  PROPORTIONING FEES FOR SERVICES PROVIDED.



   For services rendered by employees of the city, each employee shall be
paid for his services from the building permit fee the following percentage
of the fee considering the type of structure for which the services are
required, and the balance of the building permit fee, if any, is reserved to
the city for its administrative costs.



 

Service
 
Percentage of Total Fee





RESIDENTIAL

 


   Plan and ordinance review (zoning)
 

30



   Building inspection (building)
 

55



   Administration
 

15



 





NONRESIDENTIAL

 




   Plan and ordinance review and on-site inspections (zoning)
 

30



   Building inspection
 

40



   Fire inspection
 

15



   Administration
 

15





 



(Ord. 1981-2-4, passed 3-12-81; Am. Ord. 1987-8-2, passed 9-10-87)



§ 150.04  PERMIT FEES FOR LOCAL AND STATE INSPECTION.



   (A)   Term explanation.



      (1)   For purposes of this section "local building" permit
fees apply to all buildings and structures that are not subject to review by
the State of Kentucky under Section 105 of the Kentucky Building Code as
amended.



      (2)   For purposes of this section "state building" permit
fees apply to buildings and structures that are subject to review by the
State of Kentucky under Section 105 of the Kentucky Building Code as amended.



   (B)   Responsibilities of the city and the state.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the city to review
plans and specifications, issue permits, and to determine the compliance with
law for the buildings described as "local buildings".



      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate
department of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the city to review plans and
specifications, issue permits, and to determine compliance with the Kentucky
Building Code and appropriate city codes for the buildings described as
"state buildings".



   (C)   Fees.



      (1)   Fees for the review of applications and inspection of
local buildings shall be at the rate of $ .08 per square foot of the actual
building size.



      (2)   Fees for the review of applications and inspection of
state buildings shall be at the rate of $ .04 per square foot of the actual
building size.  No reduction shall be made of areas not to be completed
described in § 150.02 (D)(1) above.



   (D)   That applications on file and fees paid at the time of the
passage of this section but incomplete shall consider the former rates with
the rates determined by this section.



(Ord. 1982-9-2, passed 1-13-83; Am. Ord. 1995-3-1, passed 3-9-95)



§ 150.05  DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
demolish any existing structure within the corporation limits of the city,
whether on private or public property, without obtaining a permit prior to
the commencement of the demolition of said structure.



   (B)   A permit shall issue from the City Clerk with the approval of
the Mayor, upon completion of an application furnished by the city.  The
application shall be written in the English language and shall require the
location, size, type of construction, age of the structure, present physical
condition of the structure, and the reason for the demolition request.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall issue the demolition permit upon the
receipt of the application, the payment of a permit fee of one hundred
dollars ($100), and a finding from the application and an inspection of the
structure by the Building Inspector that it is in a deteriorated condition to
the extent it is reasonably repairable, is in a condition of blight, that the
structure is not located in an historical zone or that the structure is
sought to be demolished for no apparent economic or social reason.  For a
violation of this section the property owner or occupant or agent for said
party shall be subject to a penalty as provided for in § 150.99.



   (D)   From any permit fee paid to the city for a demolition permit
as required by this section, the City Building Inspector shall be paid
seventy-five dollars ($75) for his services rendered, and the city shall
retain twenty-five dollars ($25) for administrative expenses.



(Ord. 1988-11-1, passed 12-8-88; Am. Ord. 1989-2-1, passed 3-9-89)  Penalty,
see § 150.99




RESIDENTIAL CODE




§ 150.10  ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 198B, certain documents, three copies
of which are on file on the office of the City Clerk and the Northern
Kentucky Area Planning Commission, being marked and designated as the 2002
Kentucky Residential Code, Chapters 1 through 43, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls
Church, Virginia, are hereby adopted as the code of the City of Crestview
Hills for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwelling
and townhouses not more than three stories in height in the city and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
2002 Kentucky Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part as if fully set forth in this section.



(Ord. 2005-04-1, passed 5-12-05)




PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE




§ 150.15  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Property Maintenance
Code (2006 edition), as published by the International Code Council, one (1)
copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of
Crestview Hills, Kenton County, Kentucky, is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Crestview Hills, Kenton County, Kentucky, for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings, and structures; for providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; for
providing the standards for the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing
structures; and for providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefore. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office
of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions,
and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Revisions and amendments. The following sections of the
International Property Maintenance Code (2006 edition) are hereby revised as
follows:



      (1)   Section 101.1   Insert: "City of Crestview Hills,
Kentucky"



      (2)   Section 102.3   Revised to read as follows:
Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure,
or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of the International Building Code Kentucky Building Code.
Kentucky Residential Code, Kentucky Plumbing Code, International Energy
Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code
and the ICC Electrical CodeNFPA 70 National Electrical Code, and any
applicable code adopted and enforced by the Commonwealth of Kentucky. Nothing
in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision
of the International Zoning CodeCity of Crestview Hills Zoning Regulations.



      (3)   Section 103.5   Delete in its entirety.



      (4)   Section 106.3   Insert: ". . . shall be deemed guilty
of a Class "B" misdemeanor"



      (5)   Section 106.4



         Delete: "Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws."



         Insert: "One Notice of Violation shall be sent to the owner
and/or occupant of a certain property regarding a specified violation or
violations per calendar year. All subsequent notices will be in the form of a
citation. The citation shall contain civil penalties as may be established by
the Kenton County, Kentucky Code Enforcement Board from time to time."



      (6)   Section 111.1



         Delete: "board of appeals"



         Insert: "Code Enforcement Board"



      (7)   Section 111.2.



         Delete: "board of appeals"



         Insert: "Code Enforcement Board"



         Delete: "chief appointing authority"



         Insert: "Mayor with approval from City Council"



      (8)   Section 111.2.1



         Delete: "chief appointing authority"



         Insert: "Mayor with approval from City Council"



      (9)   Section 111.7



         Delete: "appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to
correct errors of law"



         Insert: "Kenton County Circuit Court within thirty (30)
days of the final decision of the appeals board (Code Enforcement Board)"



      (10)   Section 201.3   Revised to read as follows: "Terms
defined in other codes.  Where terms are not defined in this code and are
defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code,
International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International
Mechanical Code or the ICC Electrical Code Kentucky Building Code, Kentucky
Residential Code, City of Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance, Kentucky Plumbing
Code, NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, or any other applicable code adopted
and enforced by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, such terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.



      (11)   Section 302.4   Insert: "eight (8) inches."



      (12)   Section 304.14   Insert: "April 1 to October 31"



      (13)   Section 401.3



         Delete: "International Building Code"



         Insert: "Kentucky Building Code, Kentucky Residential Code
or any applicable code adopted and enforced by the Commonwealth of Kentucky"



      (14)   Section 505.1



         Delete: "International Plumbing Code"



         Insert: "Kentucky Plumbing Code"



      (15)   Section 602.2



         Delete: "Appendix D of the International"



         Insert: "Kentucky"



      (16)   Section 602.3   Insert: "October 1 to April 1"



      (17)   Section 602.3(1)



         Delete: "Appendix D of the International"



         Insert: "Kentucky"



      (18)   Section 602.4   Insert "October 1 to April 1"



      (19)   Section 604.2



         Delete: "ICC Electrical Code"



         Insert: "NFPA 70 National Electrical Code"



      (20)   Section 702.1   Insert: "Means of egress shall
comply with the Kentucky Building Code and the International Fire Code."



      (21)   Section 702.2   Insert: "The required width of
aisles in accordance with the Kentucky Building Code and the International
Fire Code . . ."



      (22)   Section 702.3



         Delete: "International Building Code"



         Insert: "Kentucky Building Code"



      (23)   Section 704.1   Insert: " . . at all times in
accordance with the Kentucky Building Code and the International Fire Code."



(Ord. 2009-09-01, passed 10-8-09)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   For failure to apply for and pay the requisite building permit
fee as provided for in § 150.02 prior to commencement of construction or
zoning permit fee where necessary, a civil penalty shall be assessed by the
city through the City Building Inspector in an amount of two (2) times the
cost of the fee, had timely application for the permit been made by the
applicant.  However, in all instances where a building permit or zoning
permit is not timely obtained and the requisite fee paid a minimum civil
penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50) is hereby assessed.  No fee is
to be paid to the Building Inspector on the penalty amount.



(Ord. 1988-12-3, passed 1-12-89; Am. Ord. 1989-9-1, passed 10-12-89)



   (B)   Whoever violates the provisions of § 150.05 shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of $500, and each day of the
violation shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 1988-11-1, passed 12-8-88)



CHAPTER 151:  SWIMMING POOLS



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "OWNER."  An owner, occupant, user, tenant or lessee.



   "SWIMMING POOL."  Any structure or artificial body of water located on
private or public property, constructed or maintained for the purpose of
swimming or wading by adults or children and containing water in a depth of
more than two feet.



(Ord. 1972-7-1, passed 7-5-72)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.02  FENCE OR BARRIER REQUIRED.



   Every swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a protective
fence or barrier not less than four (4) feet in height, which shall be so
constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four (4)
inches in any dimension except for doors and gates.  All gates or doors
opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and
self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all
times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which
forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.  The requirements of
this chapter shall be applicable to all new and existing swimming pools. 
Owners of existing pools shall have sixty (60) days from the effective date
of this section to conform.



(Ord. 1972-7-1, passed 7-5-72)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.03  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING.



   All pools constructed after the passage and publication of this section
shall be constructed in accordance with existing zoning provisions.



(Ord. 1972-7-1, passed 7-5-72)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.04  EXCEPTION.



   Excepted from the requirements of this chapter are all owners or
keepers of swimming pools which as a regular course retain and use the
services of a lifeguard.



(Ord. 1972-7-1, passed 7-5-72)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation and shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100) and each day that the violation continues in
effect shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1972-7-1, passed 7-5-72)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING 



Section



Comprehensive Plan



   152.01   Comprehensive plan adopted



Zoning Code



   152.05   Zoning code adopted



   152.06   Exception



   152.07   Public inspection



   152.08   Establishment of RP-1 District



Administration



   152.20   Board of Adjustment; compensation



   152.21   Zoning Administrator's fees for matter heard by Board of
Adjustment



   152.22   Representative to County and Municipal Planning and Zoning
Commission; compensation



   152.23   Fee schedule for Board of Adjustment hearings



Cluster Mail Box Units



   152.35   Cluster Mail Box Units Prohibited in Single Family Detached
Dwelling Units



   152.36   Permitted in Other Areas



COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



§ 152.01  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.



   The City Council does hereby adopt and make a part of this code by
reference that portion of the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan as it applies
to the City of Crestview Hills.



(Ord. 82-12-1, passed 1-13-83; Am. Ord. 2013-08-03, passed 9-12-13)



ZONING CODE



§ 152.05  ZONING CODE ADOPTED.



   The "proposed zoning ordinance" attached hereto and made a part hereof
by reference and dated July 14, 1983, is adopted as the official zoning
ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 1983-6-1, passed 7-14-83; Am. Ord. 1987-4-1, passed 5-14-87; Am. Ord.
1987-5-5, passed 6-11-87; Am. Ord. 1987-8-1, passed 9-10-87; Am. Ord.
1987-10-1, passed 11-12-87; Am. Ord. 1987-12-2, passed 1-14-88; Am. Ord.
1987-12-3, passed 1-14-88; Am. Ord. 1988-4-1, passed 5-12-88; Am. Ord.
1989-3-2, passed 4-13-89; Am. Ord. 1989-7-1, passed 8-10-89; Am. Ord.
1989-7-2, passed 8-10-89; Am. Ord. 1989-11-1, passed 12-4-89; Am. Ord.
1990-7-3, passed 8-9-90; Am. Ord. 1990-9-2, passed 10-11-90; Am. Ord.
1990-9-3, passed 10-11-90; Am. Ord. 1990-9-4, passed 10-11-90; Am. Ord. 
1990-11-1, passed  12-13-90;  Am. Ord. 1990-12-1, passed 1-10-91; Am. Ord.
1991-1-1, passed 2-14-91; Am. Ord. 1991-11-2, passed 12-12-91; Am. Ord.
1992-9-1, passed 10-19-92; Am. Ord. 1993-1-1, passed 2-11-93; Am. Ord.
1993-1-2, passed 2-11-93; Am. Ord. 1993-1-3, passed 2-11-93; Am. Ord.
1994-2-1, passed  -  -94; Am. Ord. 1994-8-1, passed 8-11-94; Am. Ord.
1995-10-1, passed 11-9-95; Am. Ord. 1998-3-1, passed 7-9-98; Am. Ord.
1998-9-2, passed 10-8-98; Am. Ord. 1999-4-1, passed 5-13-99; Am. Ord.
2000-1-1, passed 2-10-00; Am. Ord. 2000-9-1, passed 10-12-00; Am. Ord.
2000-1-1, passed 2-8-01; Am. Ord. 2001-12-3, passed 1-10-02; Am. Ord.
2001-12-4, passed 1-10-02; Am. Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 12-12-02; Am. Ord.
2003-8-1, passed 9-11-2003; Am. Ord. 2003-12-1, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord.
2004-2-1, passed 3-11-04; Am. Ord. 2004-2-2, passed 3-11-04; Am. Ord.
2004-9-1, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 2006-6-1, passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord.
2008-2-1, passed 4-10-08; Am. Ord. 2008-10-1; Am. Ord. 2009-09-02, passed
10-8-09; Am. Ord. 2009-09-03, passed 10-8-09; Am. Ord. 2011-06-01, passed
7-14-11; Am. Ord. 2013-02-01, passed 3-14-13; Am. Ord. 2014-05-02, passed
6-12-14; Am. Ord. 2014-06-01, passed 7-10-14; Am. Ord. 2017-01-02, passed
2-9-17; Am. Ord. 2017-11-01, passed 12-14-17; Am. Ord. 2017-11-02, passed
12-14-17; Am. Ord. 2018-02-01, passed 3-8-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-04-01, passed
5-10-18; Am. Ord. 3028-10-01, passed 11-8-18; Am. Ord. 2018-10-02, passed
11-8-18)



_____________



Cross-reference



   Building and zoning permit fee schedule, see § 150.02



§ 152.06  EXCEPTION.



   There is an exception as follows:



   The city does not accept the recommendation of the Kenton County
Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission as pertains to 11.0, II because
necessary spacing for movement of vehicles, and egress and ingress thereto to
and from vehicles requires larger spacing, i.e. 10' x 20'.



(Ord. 1983-6-1, passed 7-14-83)



§ 152.07  PUBLIC INSPECTION.



   The official zoning ordinance of the city shall be available for public
inspection in the offices of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1983-6-1, passed 7-14-83)



§ 152.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF RP-1 DISTRICT.



   Ordinance 1985-2-1, passed 3-14-85, which amends the existing Zoning
Ordinance (Ord. 77-6-1) by establishing a new zone known as the Research Park
(RP-1) Zone, and enacts rules and regulations pertinent thereto, is adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in its entirety.  Copies
of this ordinance are available at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Am. Ord. 1996-11-1, passed 11-14-96)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.20  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; COMPENSATION.



   The fees payable to each member of the Board of Adjustment of the city
for their services as members is fixed at an amount as set by ordinance per
year plus an additional amount as set by ordinance per session for each
session held and attended in excess of four in any calendar year.



(Ord. 1989-12-1, passed 1-11-90)



§ 152.21  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR'S FEES FOR MATTERS HEARD BY BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT.



   In all matters submitted to the Board of Adjustment for the city
wherein the services of the City Zoning Administrator shall be required, the
said Administrator shall be paid 60% of the fee paid by the applicant for the
remedy sought and the city shall retain 40% for administration costs.



(Ord. 1989-6-1, passed 7-14-89)



§ 152.22  REPRESENTATIVE TO COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION; COMPENSATION.



   The fee payable by the city to its representative to the Kenton County
and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission for their services to such
Commission is fixed at an amount as set by ordinance per month.



(Ord. 1989-12-2, passed 11-11-90)



§ 152.23  FEE SCHEDULE FOR BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT HEARINGS.



   The following fees shall be paid to the city by applicants for the
hereafter set out matters to be heard and considered by the Board of
Adjustment:



 


Conditional use permit:

 

$500




Dimensional variance:

 

  500




Change from one nonconforming use to another:

 

  500




Appeal of Zoning Administrator, plus attendant recording fees, if any.

 

  500




 



(Ord. 1989-3-2, passed 4-13-89; Am. Ord. 210-12-01, passed 1-5-11)



CLUSTER MAIL BOX UNITS



§ 152.35  CLUSTER MAIL BOX UNITS PROHIBITED IN SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED
DWELLING UNITS.



   The construction and use of outside free-standing, independent cluster
mail boxes for the deposit or pickup of mail in the city is prohibited in all
residential zones of the city limited to Single Detached Single Family
Dwelling Units.



(Ord. 1993-5-2, passed 6-10-93)



§ 152.36  PERMITTED IN OTHER AREAS.



   The construction and use of outside free-standing independent cluster
mail boxes, for the deposit or pickup of mail is permitted in all other areas
of the city otherwise prohibited by § 152.35.



(Ord. 1993-5-2, passed 6-10-93)



CHAPTER 153:  CITY DEVELOPMENT



§ 153.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   The City Council finds and determines that it is proper and appropriate
that a certain tract or parcel of land situated within the corporate
boundaries of the city be designated as the downtown business district of the
city pursuant to the provisions of KRS 103.200(n).  Accordingly, it is
determined, declared, ordered, and ordained that the following tract or
parcel of land is hereby and shall henceforth be designated as the downtown
business district of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky:



   Crestview Hills, Kentucky



   Downtown Business District



A certain tract or parcel of land consisting of 240 acres of land, more or
less, located in the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky, and described by
metes and bounds as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection point of the south line of Highway I-275
and the southeast line of the Thomas More College Property; thence in a
southwesterly direction along the southeast line of Thomas More College and
the southeast line of the City of Crestview Hills 2,517 feet to a point in
the northeast line of William Lubrecht; thence with the lines of Lubrecht and
the City of Crestview Hills corporation line, N 43°-48'W 227 feet, S
47°-21'W 882 feet, S 44°-03'E 450 feet, and S 27°-24'E 215 feet to a
point; thence in a southwesterly direction through the Thomas More College
Property and the corporate line between the cities of Crestview Hills and
Edgewood, Kentucky, 1,720 feet more or less to a point in the southwest line
of Thomas More College; thence in a northwesterly direction along the common
line between Thomas More College and St. Elizabeth's Hospital N 43°-15'W
1,640 feet to a point corner to St. Elizabeth Hospital; thence through the
lands of Thomas More College N 33°-49'W 1,813 feet to a point in the center
of Thomas More Parkway; thence leaving same N 17°-22'W 417 feet to a point
in the south line of Highway I-275; thence in an easterly direction along the
south line of Highway I-275, a distance of 6,150 feet to the place of
beginning.



(Ord. 1985-4-1, passed 5-9-85; Am. Ord. 1998-9-3, passed 10-8-98)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



§ 154.01  USE OF MODEL HOMES LIMITED.



   (A)   In any subdivision model homes, newly constructed, shall be
limited to one in number.



   (B)   Model homes and the accompanying signs shall be permitted to
continue in use for the advertisement of the sale of other newly constructed
homes in the subdivision until the total remaining houses or lots remaining
to be sold within the subdivision are reduced to seven (7) in number or
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of units, whichever is lesser.



   (C)   As used in this section the term "model homes" shall mean
homes newly constructed and decorated for exhibition purposes to members of
the general public for sale. Said homes shall not generally be used for
office purposes.  A portion of said building, limited to fifteen percent
(15%) thereof, may be used to exhibit plans, specifications and declarations
for other homes that could be constructed by the developer for an interested
buyer.  In determining the total square footage of the model home the areas
of the garage and basement shall not be considered.  In no event shall the
home be used for the purpose of closing of other real estate owned by the
developer and held for sale to the general public.



(Ord. 1988-8-1, passed 9-8-88)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates the provisions of § 154.01 is guilty of a violation
and shall be subject to a fine of $100 per day that such section is violated,
and each day in which the section is violated shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 1988-11-2, passed 12-8-88)



CHAPTER 155:  ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS



Section



   155.01   Electrical permits



§ 155.01  ELECTRICAL PERMITS.



   (A)   Electrical permits shall be obtained prior to installation,
addition, alteration, repair, relocation, or removal of electrical wiring.



   (B)



      (1)   Adoption of One Stop Service Level 2.  The city hereby
adopts by reference herein and attached at Appendix A to Ordinance
2005-04-02, Unified "One Stop Shop" Service Level 2 offered by the Northern
Kentucky Area Planning Commission (NKAPC).



      (2)   Fees adopted by reference.  The city hereby adopts by
reference herein and attached as Appendix B to Ordinance 2005-04-02 as if
fully set forth herein the Schedule of Fees dated January 2005, as
recommended by the NKAPC for the processing and issuance of zoning permits,
building permits, electric permits, Board of Adjustment hearing fees, and
fines for violations of these life safety codes when a violation of them has
been classified as a civil offense.



   (C)   All electrical permits shall be obtained from the building
inspector of the city.



(Ord. 1991-11-1, passed 12-12-91; Am. Ord. 2005-04-02, passed 5-12-05) 
Penalty, see § 10.99.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES





         II.   ANNEXATIONS





         III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS





         IV.   FRANCHISES





         V.   AD VALOREM TAXATION RATES





         VI.   BONDS




TABLE I.  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




1985-2-2
 
3-14-85
 
Rezoning a parcel of land containing 240 acres, more or less, beginning at
the intersection point of the south line of Highway I-275 and the southeast
line of the Thomas More College Property, from R-2B, PO-2, and INST, to RP-1.


1990-3-1
 
4-12-90
 
Rezoning a parcel of land containing 46.6 acres located approximately 1,200
feet south of Interstate 275 and approximately 500 feet northwest of the
Horsebranch Road from CO and R-2b to RP-1.


 
 
 
 
Rezoning a parcel of land containing 64.4 acres located along the northwest
side of Horsebranch Road, south of the intersection of Horsebranch Road with
Orphanage Road (S.R. 371) from CO to R-2b.


1993-1-4
 
2-11-93
 
Rezoning 41 acres located at the terminus of College Park Drive from INST to
R-2b.


1993-4-1
 
5-13-93
 
Rezoning a .48 acre area located approximately 600 feet southeast of the
terminus of College Park Drive and a 7.8 acre area located approximately
1,500 feet southeast of the terminus of College Park Drive from INST to R-1Bc.


1995-5-1
 
6-8-95
 
Rezoning 49 acres of an approximate 84 acre area located along the northwest
side of Horsebranch Road, between Orphanage Road and Thomas More Parkway,
approximately 1,600 feet south of Orphanage Road from RP-1 to R-2b.


2004-6-2
 
7-8-04
 
Rezoning 24 acres located along the north side of Horsebranch Road between
Orphanage Road and Rhine Valley Drive from R-2b to RP-1.


2004-9-2
 
10-14-04
 
Rezoning approximately eight acres located along the north and south sides of
College Park Drive, east of Turkeyfoot Road from R-1Bc to R-1Bd.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II.  ANNEXATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION


1986-4-1
 
5-8-86
 
Annexing 115 acres of unincorporated contiguous land beginning at the
intersection point of the southerly right-of-way line of I-275 and the
easterly corporation line.


1995-9-1
 
10-12-95
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory near the intersection of
Horsebranch Road and Orphanage Road.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III.  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




1988-7-1
 
7-21-88
 
Authorizing the execution of the interlocal cooperation agreement to
establish the Kentucky Municipal Risk Management Association.


1988-7-2
 
7-20-88
 
Approving participation by the city in the Kentucky Municipal Risk Management
Association.


1991-12-2
 
12-12-91
 
Authorizing an interlocal compact between the city and the city of Edgewood,
Kentucky as pertains to the maintenance of the Horsebranch Road Extension.


1996-8-3
 
-  -
 
Authorizing an interlocal compact agreement with Kenton County to collect
municipal occupational taxes and license fees.


1996-8-5
 
9-12-96
 
Authorizing the execution of an amendment to the interlocal cooperation
agreement establishing the telecommunications Board of Northern Kentucky
extending the 90 day limit to 180 days for participation rights.


1997-3-1
 
4-10-97
 
Authorizing an interlocal compact between the city and the City of Ft.
Mitchell, Kentucky, to provide fire protection and life squad protection.


1997-9-3
 
9-11-97
 
Authorizing the execution of a second amendment to the interlocal cooperation
agreement establishing the telecommunications Board of Northern Kentucky.


2009-08-01
 
12-10-09
 
Approving the agreement for the transfer and assignment of ownership of the
Sanitation District No. 1 storm water drainage system.


2009-10-01
 
11-12-09
 
Approving an interlocal cooperation agreement between the city of Crestview
Hills and Kenton County, and several other cities, relating to the
consolidated collection and enforcement of certain county and municipal
occupational taxes and license fees, and authorizing the Mayor to execute the
same.


Res. 2011-04-01
 
4-14-11
 
Approving a memorandum of agreement with the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet
for repair of concrete median and curbing on U.S. 25 (Dixie Highway) and
State Route 1303 (Turkeyfoot Road).


Res. 2011-09-02
 
9-22-11
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Jarco Construction, Inc.
for the construction of a sidewalk on U.S. 25 (Dixie Highway).


2011-12-01
 
1-12-12
 
Approving an interlocal cooperation agreement between the city of Crestview
Hills and Kenton County Fiscal Court, and the Cities of Bromley, Covington,
Crescent Springs, Edgewood, Elsmere, Erlanger, Fairview, Fort Mitchell, Fort
Wright, Independence, Kenton Vale, Lakeside Park, Ludlow, Park Hills, Tayor
Mill, Ryland Heights and Villa Hills relating to enforcement of sate laws and
local ordinances for the regulation of animals and authorizing the Mayor to
execute the same.


Res. 2012-03-01
 
3-8-12   
 
Authorizing the Mayor to terminate the contract with Rural Metro for ALS
services and to execute an addendum to the existing fire/EMS contract with
the city of Fort Mitchell for ALS services.


Res. 2013-02-01
 
2-14-13
 
Amending the renewal terms of the agreement for the provision fo fire
services and life squad protection with the city of Fort Mitchell, and
approving the renewal of the agreement for an additional one year period.


Res. 2013-04-01
 
4-11-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement between the city and the
Kentucky Department of Transportation, allocating transportation enhancement
funds for median planting and enhancement on U.S. 25, Dixie Highway.


Res. 2013-04-02
 
4-11-13
 
Expressing intent to terminate an interlocal agreement with the City of
Erlanger for emergency dispatching services, and expressing an intent to join
the Kenton County Consolidated Communication System.


Res. 2013-05-01
 
5-9-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Studio Graphique for
consulting services for a wayfinding signage system.


Res. 2013-06-01
 
6-13-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with JPS Construction, Inc.,
for reconstruction of University Circle (South) in the College Park
Subdivision.


Res. 2013-06-02
 
6-13-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with CRU Cutters, LLC, for the
construction of a landscaped median on U.S. 25 (Dixie Highway).


Res. 2013-08-01
 
8-8-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with TMS Construction, Inc.,
for the installation of an eight inch stormwater drainage line on Woodspoint
Drive.


Res. 2013-10-01
 
10-10-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Paul Michels
Construction, Inc., for the paving of a portion of Vernon Drive in Old
Crestview Subdivision.


Res. 2013-10-02
 
10-10-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement between the city and the
Kentucky Department of Transportation, allocating to the city FHWA surface
transportation funds for engineering design for the construction of an
additional lane on eastbount Thomas More parkway.


Res. 2013-12-03
 
12-12-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with CDS Associates for
consulting engineering and project management services for the Thomas More
lane widening project.


Res. 2014-02-01
 
2-13-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an interlocal agreement with the City of
Fort Mitchell for fire protection and emergency medical services for certain
portions of the City of Crestview Hills.


Res. 2014-02-02
 
2-13-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an interlocal agreement with the City of
Edgewood for fire protection and emergency medical services for certain
portions of the City of Crestview Hills.


Res. 2014-04-01
 
4-10-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an interlocal agreement with five other
cities in Kenton County to form the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement
Board.


Res. 2014-04-02
 
4-10-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with American Pavements, Inc.,
for the pavement crack sealing of various city streets.


Res. 2014-05-01
 
5-8-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with JPS Construction, Inc.,
for the reconstruction of Campus Drive (South) from College Park Drive to
Dudley Road.


Res. 2014-07-01
 
7-10-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an interlocal agreement with the Northern
Kentucky Water District for joint projects.


Res. 2014-10-02
 
10-14-14
 
Approving Addendum A to the City Administrator employment agreement.


Res. 2014-11-01
 
11-13-14
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement with the Kentucky Department of
Transportation to provide funding for right-of-way acquisition for the
extension of the eastbound lane of Thomas More Parkway.


Res. 2014-12-01
 
1-8-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Harmon Signs, Inc. for
fabrication and installation of wayfinding signage in the Thomas More Office
Park.


Res. 2015-02-01
 
2-10-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Van Gorder, Walker &
Company Inc. for auditing services.


Res. 2015-03-01
 
4-9-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with BZAK Landscaping, Inc.


Res. 2015-04-01
 
4-9-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with CRU Cutters, LLC, for the
installation of a landscaped median on Turkeyfoot Road.


2015-03-01
 
5-14-15
 
Approving an interlocal cooperation agreement between the City of Crestview
Hills, Kentucky and Kenton County, and the Cities of Bromley, Covington,
Crescent Springs, Edgewood, Elsmere, Erlanger, Fort Mitchell, Fort Wright,
Independence, Lakeside Park, Ludlow, Park Hills, Ryland Heights, Taylor Mill
and Villa Hills relating to the consolidated collection and enforcement of
certain county and municipal occupational taxes and license fees.


Res. 2015-05-01
 
5-14-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Rumpke of Kentucky, Inc.
for residential curbside solid waste and recycling.


Res. 2015-05-02
 
5-14-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with M&W Excavation, Inc., for
the reconstruction of Campus Drive (North) from College Park Drive to the
cul- de-sac.


Res. 2015-07-01
 
7-9-15
 
Approving a memorandum of agreement with the Northern Kentucky Area
Development District and participating local governments to prepare the
Regional Hazard Mitigation Plan.


Res. 2015-07-03
 
7-9-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Paul Michels & Sons, Inc.
for the milling and paving overlay of portions of Shinkle, Summit, and
Chancellor Drives, as well as a portion of Town Center Boulevard.


Res. 2015-08-01
 
8-13-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with JPS Construction, Inc.
for the reconstruction of University Circle (North) from College Park Drive
to the cul-de-sac.


Res. 2015-09-01
 
9-10-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Northern Kentucky
Sanitation District approving a cost-share agreement for the installation of
new storm sewer lines on Campus Drive and University Circle.


Res. 2015-10-01
 
10-8-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Paul Michels & Sons
Construction, Inc. for the application of crack sealing material on various
city streets.


Res. 2015-10-02
 
10-8-15
 
Approving the transfer of control of Time Warner Cable, Inc. and Insight
Kentucky Partners II, LP to Charter Communications.


Res. 2015-11-01
 
11-12-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Northern Kentucky
Sanitation District #1 for joint participation in the repairs and restoration
of private sewer laterals within city right of way.


Res. 2015-11-02
 
11-12-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a Master interlocal cooperation agreement
with the Northern Kentucky Sanitation District #1 for joint development and
funding of sanitary sewer and stormwater projects.


2017-07-01
 
8-10-2017
 
Approving an amendment to the Lakeside Park/Crestview Hills Police Authority
inter-governmental cooperative agreement.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




1995-9-2
 
11-9-95
 
Granting and offering for sale a 20-year exclusive franchise to place
electric transmission and distribution facilities in public streets and
places.


1995-9-2A
 
5-9-96
 
Accepting the bid of the Union Light, Heat and Power Company as highest
bidder for exclusive franchise to place electric transmission and
distribution.


1997-9-2
 
9-11-97
 
Granting a non-exclusive 12-year franchise to TKR Cable of Northern Kentucky
for cable television services.


2009-2-2
 
3-12-09
 
Granting and issuing a competitive, non- exclusive franchise for a term of 12
years to and authorizing the execution of the franchise agreement with
Cincinnati Bell Extended Territories LLC for the provision of cable services
in the city.


Res. 2014-08-01
 
8-14-14
 
Approving the transfer of control of the cable franchise from Time Warner
Cable, Inc., to Comcast Corporation.


Res. 2014-10-01
 
10-14-14
 
Approving the transfer of control by Comcast Corporation of Insight Kentucky
Partners, II, L.P. (the franchisee) to Charter Communications.


Res. 2015-07-02
 
6-9-15
 
Supporting elements of the 2008 Cable Needs Assessment Report for Boone and
Kenton Counties in conjunction with renewal of the franchise agreement with
Time Warner Cable, Inc.


2017-01-03
 
2-9-17
 
Establishing a non-exclusive franchise for the use of the public streets,
alleys and other public transportation of the city for the transmission and
distribution of natural gas through and consumption within the city.


2017-01-04
 
2-9-17
 
Establishing a non-exclusive franchise for the use of the public streets,
alleys and other public transportation.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  AD VALOREM TAXATION RATES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
TYPE
 
RATE




1995-9-4
 
10-12-95
 
Real
 
.1586 per $100


1995-9-5
 
10-12-95
 
Bank Stock
 
.19 per fair cash value of shares


1996-9-2
 
10-10-96
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


1997-9-4
 
10-9-97
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


1998-9-1
 
10-8-98
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


1999-9-1
 
10-14-99
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2001-9-1
 
10-11-01
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2002-9-1
 
10-10-02
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2003-9-2
 
10-9-03
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2004-8-1
 
9-9-04
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2005-8-2
 
9-8-05
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2006-9-1
 
9-15-06
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2007-8-1
 
9-6-07
 
Real
 
.1525 per $100


2008-8-1
 
9-11-08
 
Real
 
.1415 per $100


2009-08-02
 
9-3-09
 
Real
 
.1455 per $100


2010-05-02
 
7-8-10
 
Rate variation in real tax rate
 
.025 per $100


2012-08-01
 
9-13-12
 
Real
 
.1545 per $100


2013-08-01
 
9-12-13
 
Real
 
.1570 per $100


2014-08-01
 
9-11-14
 
Real
 
.160 per $100


2015-08-01
 
9-10-15
 
Real
 
.161 per $100


2016-08-01
 
9-8-16
 
Real
 
.160 per $100


2017-08-02
 
9-14-17
 
Real
 
.160 per $100


2018-08-01
 
9-13-18
 
Real
 
.165 per $100


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description


1999-2-1
 
2-3-99
 
Issuing industrial building revenue bonds, Series 1999A (Thomas More College
Project)


2005-7-3
 
9-8-05
 
Issuing general obligation public project bonds, Series 2005 (Administration
Building)


2008-11-3
 
12-11-08
 
Issuing industrial building revenue bonds, Series 2008 (Thomas More College
Project)


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Kentucky Revised Statutes





References to Ordinances





References to Resolutions




REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES



 

KRS Section
 
Code Section




Sec. 181 Ky. Const.
 
110.01


Sec. 228 Ky. Const.
 
30.01, 30.20, 30.24 - 30.27


6.050
 
32.14


6.955 - 6.975
 
33.04


Ch. 13A
 
93.02


Ch. 13B
 
93.02


Ch. 39A - 39F
 
34.030


42.450 - 42.495
 
33.04


43.050
 
33.04


Ch. 45A
 
37.05


Ch. 56
 
37.05


Ch. 61
 
31.31


61.300
 
90.02


61.805 - 61.850
 
37.10


61.805(1)
 
37.01


61.805(2)
 
37.01


61.805(3)
 
37.01


61.805(4)
 
37.01


61.805(5)
 
37.01


61.810
 
37.05


61.810(1)(i)
 
37.05


61.815
 
37.06


61.820
 
37.07


61.823
 
37.08


61.826
 
37.09


61.840
 
37.09


61.846
 
37.10


61.848
 
37.10


61.870
 
36.01


61.870 et seq.
 
32.07


61.870 - 61.882
 
30.24


61.870 - 61.884
 
35.68


61.870(1)(h)
 
36.01


61.872(1)
 
36.05


61.872(2)
 
36.05


61.872(3)
 
36.05


61.872(4)
 
36.06


61.872(5)
 
36.07


61.872(6)
 
36.08


61.874(1)
 
36.05


61.874(2)(b)
 
36.05


61.874(4)
 
36.05


61.874(5)
 
36.05


61.874(6)
 
36.05


61.878
 
36.01, 36.12


61.880
 
36.09


61.882
 
36.09


61.884
 
36.11


62.060
 
30.01


65.003
 
35.02


65.120
 
72.01


65.870
 
Ch. 136


65.8801 - 65.8839
 
34.071, 34.075


65.8808(2)(b)
 
110.99, 112.99


65.8808(2)(c)
 
110.99, 112.99


65.8811
 
34.061


65.8811(1)(a)
 
34.061


65.8811(1)(b)
 
34.061


67.750 - 67.795
 
110.04


67.753
 
110.06


67.753(2), (3)
 
110.06


67.753(4)
 
110.06


82.082
 
110.01


Ch. 83A
 
30.10


83A.010
 
30.01


83A.010(5)
 
10.02


83A.010(6)
 
10.02


83A.010(7)
 
10.02


83A.010(8)
 
10.02


83A.010(9)
 
10.02


83A.010(10)
 
10.02


83A.010(11)
 
10.02


83A.030(1)
 
31.02(B)


83A.040(2), (3)
 
30.14


83A.040(5)
 
30.16


83A.040(6)
 
30.11 , 30.16


83A.040(7), (8)
 
30.14 , 30.16


83A.045
 
30.10


83A.045(2)(b)
 
30.10


83A.047
 
30.10


83A.050
 
30.10


83A.050(1)
 
30.10


83A.060(1)
 
32.02


83A.060(2)
 
32.03


83A.060(3)
 
32.04


83A.060(4), (7)
 
32.05


83A.060(5)
 
32.06, 150.15


83A.060(6)
 
32.01


83A.060(8)
 
32.07, 32.08


83A.060(9)
 
32.09


83A.060(10)
 
32.10


83A.060(11)
 
32.11


83A.060(12), (13)
 
32.12


83A.060(14)
 
32.13


83A.060(15)
 
32.14


83A.065
 
10.02, 10.99


83A.065(2)
 
113.99


83A.070
 
30.34


83A.070(1)
 
30.30


83A.070(2)
 
30.32


83A.070(3)
 
30.33


83A.070(4)
 
30.30


83A.075
 
30.34


83A.080(1)
 
30.20


83A.080(3)
 
30.21


83A.080(4)
 
30.12


83A.080(5)
 
30.13


83A.085(3)(d) - (f)
 
30.24


83A.090
 
30.22


83A.130(2)
 
31.02(A)


83A.130(3)
 
31.10


83A.130(4)
 
31.11


83A.130(5)
 
31.12


83A.130(6)
 
31.13


83A.130(7)
 
31.14


83A.130(8)
 
31.15


83A.130(9)
 
31.16


83A.130(10)
 
31.17


83A.130(11)
 
31.30, 31.31


83A.130(12)
 
31.32, 31.33


83A.130(13)
 
31.34


83A.170
 
30.10


83A.175
 
30.10


91A.010(6)
 
33.01


91A.010(7)
 
33.01


91A.010(8)
 
10.02


91A.020
 
33.02


91A.030
 
33.03


91A.040
 
33.04


91A.060
 
33.05


91A.200
 
33.11(A)


91A.210
 
33.10


91A.220
 
33.11


91A.230
 
33.12


91A.240
 
33.13


91A.260
 
33.15


91A.270
 
33.16


91A.280
 
33.17


91A.290
 
33.18


92.70 - 92.520
 
95.10


92.280
 
110.01


92.281
 
110.01


92.520
 
95.10


92.530
 
95.10


92.640
 
95.10


103.200(n)
 
153.01


Chs. 116-121
 
30.10


118
 
30.10


132.190(6)
 
95.31


132.200(7)
 
95.31


Ch. 136
 
116.01


136.270
 
95.31


136.270(3),(4),(5)
 
95.30


136.280
 
95.31


Ch. 154
 
36.12


174.100
 
91.01


174.100(1)
 
91.02


174.100(2),(3)
 
91.03


174.100(4)
 
91.04


174.100(5)
 
91.05


174.100(6),(7)
 
91.06


189.010
 
70.01


189.010(19)
 
70.01


189.290
 
71.25


189.338
 
70.15


189.378
 
71.30, 71.99(B)


189.378(1)
 
70.01


189.450(5),(6)
 
72.03


189.580
 
71.15


189.910
 
71.30


189.920
 
71.30


196.099
 
36.01


198B
 
150.10


227.700 - 227.750
 
93.01 , 93.05



227.700

 

93.01 , 93.08



227.702
 
93.01 - 93.03 , 93.08



227.704

 

93.01 , 93.08



227.706
 
93.01


227.708
 
93.01


227.710
 
93.01 , 93.02


227.715
 
93.02


227.715(7) - (9)
 
93.03


227.720
 
93.04


227.730
 
93.05


227.740
 
93.05


227.750
 
93.06


Ch. 242
 
113.01


243.070
 
113.04


244.290(6)
 
113.10


244.290(6)(b)
 
113.10


258.135
 
90.04


258.215
 
90.02


278
 
91.41


351.330
 
93.30


376.280
 
72.39


Ch. 424
 
32.09, 33.04, 33.14, 33.15


424.130
 
72.26


424.190(2)
 
33.04


424.220
 
33.04


446.010(1)
 
10.02


446.010(2)
 
10.02


446.010(9)
 
10.02


446.010(10)
 
10.02


446.010(12)
 
10.02


446.010(13)
 
10.02


446.010(14)
 
10.02


446.010(15)
 
10.02


446.010(17)
 
10.02


446.010(18)
 
10.02


446.010(23)
 
10.02


446.010(25)
 
10.02


446.010(26)
 
10.02


446.010(27)
 
10.02


446.010(28)
 
10.02


446.010(30)
 
10.02


446.010(31)
 
10.02


446.010(33)
 
10.02


446.010(37)
 
10.02


446.010(39)
 
10.02


446.010(43)
 
10.02


446.010(46)
 
10.02


446.010(47)
 
10.02


446.010(49)
 
10.02


446.010(55)
 
10.02


446.020(1)
 
10.03(A)


446.020(2)
 
10.03(B)


446.030
 
10.04


446.050
 
10.05


446.060
 
10.06


446.080(1)
 
10.03(C)


446.080(3)
 
10.03(D)


446.080(4)
 
10.03(E)


446.090
 
10.07


446.100
 
10.08


446.110
 
10.09


446.140
 
10.01


506.010
 
Ch. 138


506.030
 
Ch. 138


506.040
 
Ch. 138


506.080
 
Ch. 138


506.120
 
Ch. 138


507.020
 
Ch. 130


507.030
 
Ch. 130


507.040
 
Ch. 130


507.050
 
Ch. 130


508.010
 
Ch. 130


508.020
 
Ch. 130


508.025
 
Ch. 130


508.030
 
Ch. 130


508.040
 
Ch. 130


508.050
 
Ch. 130


508.060
 
Ch. 130


508.070
 
Ch. 130


508.075
 
Ch. 130


508.078
 
Ch. 130


508.080
 
Ch. 130


508.100
 
Ch. 130


508.110
 
Ch. 130


508.120
 
Ch. 130


509.020
 
Ch. 130


509.030
 
Ch. 130


509.040
 
Ch. 130


509.070
 
Ch. 137


509.080
 
Ch. 137


Ch. 510
 
139.04


510.040
 
Ch. 137


510.050
 
Ch. 137


510.060
 
Ch. 137


510.070
 
Ch. 137


510.080
 
Ch. 137


510.090
 
Ch. 137


510.100
 
Ch. 137


510.110
 
Ch. 137


510.120
 
Ch. 137


510.130
 
Ch. 137


510.140
 
Ch. 137


510.150
 
Ch. 137


511.020
 
Ch. 132


511.030
 
Ch. 132


511.040
 
Ch. 132


511.050
 
Ch. 132


511.060
 
Ch. 132


511.070
 
Ch. 132


511.080
 
Ch. 132


512.020
 
Ch. 132


512.030
 
Ch. 132


512.040
 
Ch. 132


512.050
 
Ch. 132


512.060
 
Ch. 132


512.070
 
Ch. 132


512.080
 
Ch. 132


513.020
 
Ch. 132


513.030
 
Ch. 132


513.040
 
Ch. 132


513.060
 
Ch. 132


514.030
 
Ch. 132


514.040
 
Ch. 132


514.050
 
Ch. 132


514.060
 
Ch. 132


514.065
 
Ch. 132


514.070
 
Ch. 132


514.080
 
Ch. 132


514.090
 
Ch. 132


514.100
 
Ch. 132


514.110
 
Ch. 132


514.120
 
Ch. 132


514.140
 
Ch. 132


514.150
 
Ch. 132


515.020
 
Ch. 132


515.030
 
Ch. 132


516.020
 
Ch. 132


516.030
 
Ch. 132


516.040
 
Ch. 132


516.050
 
Ch. 132


516.060
 
Ch. 132


516.070
 
Ch. 132


516.090
 
Ch. 132


516.110
 
Ch. 132


516.120
 
Ch. 132


516.130
 
Ch. 132


517.020
 
Ch. 111


517.030
 
Ch. 111


517.040
 
Ch. 111


517.050
 
Ch. 111


517.060
 
Ch. 111


517.070
 
Ch. 111


517.080
 
Ch. 111


517.090
 
Ch. 111


517.090
 
Ch. 111


517.100
 
Ch. 111


517.110
 
Ch. 111


518.020
 
Ch. 111


518.030
 
Ch. 111


518.040
 
Ch. 111


518.050
 
Ch. 111


518.060
 
Ch. 111


518.070
 
Ch. 111


519.020
 
Ch. 135


519.030
 
Ch. 135


519.040
 
Ch. 135


519.050
 
Ch. 135


519.060
 
Ch. 135


520.010
 
36.01


520.020
 
Ch. 135


520.030
 
Ch. 135


520.040
 
Ch. 135


520.050
 
Ch. 135


520.060
 
Ch. 135


520.070
 
Ch. 135


520.080
 
Ch. 135


520.090
 
Ch. 135


520.100
 
Ch. 135


520.120
 
Ch. 135


520.130
 
Ch. 135


521.020
 
Ch. 135


521.030
 
Ch. 135


521.040
 
Ch. 135


522.020
 
Ch. 135


522.030
 
Ch. 135


522.040
 
Ch. 135


523.020
 
Ch. 135


523.030
 
Ch. 135


523.040
 
Ch. 135


523.100
 
Ch. 135


524.020
 
Ch. 135


524.030
 
Ch. 135


524.040
 
Ch. 135


524.050
 
Ch. 135


524.060
 
Ch. 135


524.070
 
Ch. 135


524.090
 
Ch. 135


524.100
 
Ch. 135


524.110
 
Ch. 135


524.130
 
Ch. 135


525.020
 
Ch. 136


525.030
 
Ch. 136


525.040
 
Ch. 136


525.050
 
Ch. 136


525.055
 
Ch. 136


525.060
 
Ch. 136


525.070
 
Ch. 136


525.080
 
Ch. 136


525.090
 
Ch. 136


525.100
 
Ch. 136


525.110
 
Ch. 136


525.120
 
Ch. 136


525.125
 
90.02, Ch. 136


525.130
 
90.02, Ch. 136


525.140
 
Ch. 136


525.145
 
Ch. 136


525.150
 
Ch. 136


525.160
 
Ch. 136


526.020
 
Ch. 136


526.030
 
Ch. 136


526.040
 
Ch. 136


526.050
 
Ch. 136


526.060
 
Ch. 136


528.020
 
Ch. 134


528.030
 
Ch. 134


528.040
 
Ch. 134


528.050
 
Ch. 134


528.060
 
Ch. 134


528.070
 
Ch. 134


528.080
 
Ch. 134


528.110
 
Ch. 134


528.120
 
Ch. 134


529.020
 
Ch. 133


529.070
 
Ch. 133


529.080
 
Ch. 133


530.010
 
Ch. 131


530.020
 
Ch. 131 , 139.04


530.030
 
Ch. 131


530.040
 
Ch. 131


530.050
 
Ch. 131


530.060
 
Ch. 131


530.064
 
Ch. 131


530.064(1)(a)
 
139.04


530.065
 
Ch. 131


530.070
 
Ch. 131


530.080
 
Ch. 131


531.020
 
Ch. 133


531.030
 
Ch. 133


531.040
 
Ch. 133


531.050
 
Ch. 133


531.060
 
Ch. 133


531.310
 
Ch. 133 , 139.04


531.320
 
Ch. 133


531.340
 
Ch. 133


531.350
 
Ch. 133


531.360
 
Ch. 133


531.370
 
Ch. 133


532.060
 
139.04


532.090
 
139.02


532.090(1)
 
110.99 , 112.99 , 113.99


534.030
 
139.03


534.040
 
10.99, 139.01


534.040(2)(a)
 
113.99


534.050(2)(a)
 
110.99 , 112.99


535.040(2)(c)
 
10.02




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1956-1
 
7-3-56
 
93.15 - 93.17


1969-1-1
 
1-69
 
71.60


1970-8-1
 
8-5-70
 
92.07


1970-10-1
 
10-7-70
 
72.50


1971-3-1
 
3-3-71
 
112.02, 112.10


1972-7-1
 
7-5-72
 
151.01 - 151.04, 151.99


1972-7-2
 
7-5-72
 
92.07


1973-2-1
 
2-14-73
 
Ch. 51


1973-4-2
 
4-11-73
 
72.06


1973-9-4
 
9-12-73
 
50.01 - 50.03


1976-9-4
 
9-8-769
 
93.30 - 93.33, 93.99 (C)


1977-8-2
 
8-10-77
 
95.20, 95.21


1977-12-1
 
12-14-77
 
32.07


1978-12-1
 
12-14-78
 
72.35 - 72.40


1979-7-1
 
7-12-79
 
136.01, 136.99


1979-7-2
 
7-12-79
 
72.02


1979-12-3
 
12-13-79
 
72.13


1980-2-2
 
2-14-80
 
31.31


1980-8-1
 
9-11-80
 
30.23


1981-2-1
 
3-12-81
 
113.03


1981-2-3
 
3-12-81
 
72.12


1981-2-4
 
3-12-81
 
150.02 - 150.03


1981-5-1
 
5-14-81
 
72.14


1981-10-1
 
9-10-81
 
50.01


1981-12-2
 
1-14-82
 
114.01, 114.02, 114.99


1982-9-1
 
11-11-82
 
92.07


1982-9-2
 
1-13-83
 
150.04


1982-12-1
 
1-13-83
 
152.01


1983-6-1
 
7-14-83
 
152.05 - 152.07


1983-12-1
 
1-12-84
 
96.01 - 96.03 , 96.99


1984-4-1
 
5-10-84
 
72.99


1984-6-1
 
7-12-84
 
93.40 - 93.42, 93.99


1984-9-2
 
10-11-84
 
Adopting Ord.


1985-2-1
 
3-14-85
 
152.08


1985-2-2
 
3-14-85
 
T.S.O. I


1985-4-1
 
5-9-85
 
153.01


1985-8-1
 
-  -
 
72.99


1985-8-2
 
-  -
 
150.02


1986-2-1
 
3-13-86
 
30.22


1986-4-1
 
5-8-86
 
T.S.O. II


1986-6-1
 
3-12-87
 
70.07


1986-7-3
 
9-11-86
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


1986-7-4
 
9-11-86
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


1986-9-1
 
12-11-86
 
Ch. 115


1987-4-1
 
5-14-87
 
152.05


1987-5-4
 
6-11-87
 
Adopting Ord.


1987-5-5
 
6-11-87
 
152.05


1987-6-1
 
7-9-87
 
Ch. 74, Sched. I


1987-8-1
 
9-10-87
 
152.05


1987-8-2
 
9-10-87
 
150.03


1987-10-1
 
11-12-87
 
152.05


1987-12-2
 
1-14-88
 
152.05


1987-12-3
 
1-14-88
 
152.05


1988-1-1
 
2-11-88
 
94.02, 94.99


1988-4-1
 
5-12-88
 
152.05


1988-4-3
 
5-12-88
 
32.07


1988-4-4
 
5-12-88
 
71.28, 71.99


1988-6-2
 
7-14-88
 
Adopting Ord.


1988-7-1
 
7-20-88
 
T.S.O. III


1988-7-2
 
7-20-88
 
T.S.O. III


1988-7-3
 
8-11-88
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


1988-8-1
 
9-8-88
 
154.01


1988-11-1
 
12-8-88
 
150.05, 150.99


1988-11-2
 
12-8-88
 
154.99


1988-12-3
 
1-12-89
 
150.99


1989-3-2
 
4-13-89
 
152.05, 152.23


1989-6-1
 
7-14-89
 
152.21


1989-7-1
 
8-10-89
 
152.05


1989-7-2
 
8-10-89
 
152.05


1989-8-2
 
9-14-89
 
Adopting Ord.


1989-9-1
 
10-12-89
 
150.99


1989-11-1
 
12-14-89
 
152.05


1989-12-1
 
1-11-90
 
152.20


1989-12-2
 
1-11-90
 
152.22


1990-3-1
 
4-12-90
 
T.S.O. I


1990-7-1
 
7-12-90
 
90.17


1990-7-3
 
8-9-90
 
152.05


1990-7-4
 
8-9-90
 
Adopting Ord.


1990-8-1
 
9-13-90
 
93.08, 93.99


1990-9-1
 
11-8-90
 
Repealed


1990-9-2
 
10-11-90
 
152.05


1990-9-3
 
10-11-90
 
152.05


1990-9-4
 
10-11-90
 
152.05


1990-11-1
 
12-13-90
 
152.05


1990-12-1
 
1-10-91
 
152.05


1991-1-1
 
2-14-91
 
152.05


1991-4-1
 
5-9-91
 
112.11


1991-9-1
 
10-10-91
 
92.07


1991-10-1
 
11-11-91
 
Adopting Ord.


1991-11-1
 
12-12-91
 
Ch. 155


1991-11-2
 
12-12-91
 
152.05


1991-12-2
 
12-12-91
 
T.S.O. III


1992-8-1
 
9-10-92
 
Adopting Ordinance


1992-8-2
 
9-10-92
 
34.001 - 34.007


1992-9-1
 
10-19-92
 
152.05


1993-1-1
 
2-11-93
 
152.05


1993-1-2
 
2-11-93
 
152.05


1993-1-3
 
2-11-93
 
152.05


1993-1-4
 
2-11-93
 
T.S.O. I


1993-4-1
 
5-13-93
 
T.S.O. I


1993-5-2
 
6-10-93
 
152.35, 152.36


1993-5-4
 
6-10-93
 
95.30


1994-8-1
 
8-11-94
 
152.05


1994-9-2
 
10-13-94
 
95.31


1994-12-1
 
12-8-94
 
Ch. 35




 



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description
 
Code Section




1995-3-1
 
3-9-95
 
Amending portions of the building code regarding terms and fees
 
150.04


1995-5-1
 
6-8-95
 
Zoning map change
 
T.S.O. I


1995-5-2
 
- -
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 95-96
 
Not Included


1995-9-1
 
10-12-95
 
Proposing to annex certain territory
 
T.S.O. II


1995-9-2
 
11-9-95
 
Granting electric franchise
 
T.S.O. IV


1995-9-4
 
10-12-95
 
Ad valorem tax - real property
 
95.10, T.S.O. V


1995-9-5
 
10-12-95
 
Ad valorem tax - bank shares
 
95.31, T.S.O. V


1995-10-1
 
11-9-95
 
Amending zoning regulations
 
152.05


1995-9-2A
 
5-9-96
 
Accepting bid of Union Light Heat and Power Company
 
T.S.O. IV


1996-3-1
 
-  -
 
Restricting parking on city building parking lots
 
72.03 (B),72.99(D)


1996-4-1
 
5-15-96
 
Issuance of grant anticipation notes
 
Not Included


1996-5-1
 
7-1-96
 
FY Annual 1996-97 Budget
 
Not Included


1996-8-2
 
9-12-96
 
Issuance of Industrial Building Revenue Bonds, Series 1996
 
Not Included


1996-8-3
 
- -
 
Agreement with Kenton County to collect municipal occupation taxes and
license fees
 
T.S.O. III


1996-8-4
 
- -
 
Installing a stop sign at Centre View Blvd. and Chancellor Drive
 
Ch. 74, Sched. I


1996-8-5
 
9-12-96
 
Adopting Interlocal Cooperation Agreement establishing the Telecommunications
Board of N. Kentucky
 
T.S.O. III


1996-11-1
 
11-14-96
 
Amending zoning ordinance establishing RP-1 District
 
152.08


1997-1-1
 
2-13-97
 
Reducing the speed limit on Thomas More Parkway
 
71.60


1997-2-1
 
2-13-97
 
Imposing a bank franchise and local deposit tax
 
Ch. 116


1997-3-1
 
4-10-97
 
Providing for an Interlocal Compact for fire and life squad protection
 
T.S.O. III


1997-5-1
 
6-19-97
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 1997-1998
 
Not Included


1997-6-1
 
6-19-97
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 1996-1997
 
Not Included


1997-6-2
 
8-14-97
 
Providing for the collection and disposition of garbage
 
Ch. 52


1997-9-1
 
9-11-97
 
Creating the position of Vice-Mayor
 
30.15


1997-9-2
 
9-11-97
 
Granting a non-exclusive franchise agreement to TKR Cable of Northern Kentucky
 
T.S.O. IV


1997-9-3
 
9-11-97
 
Authorizing the execution of a second amendment to the Interlocal Cooperation
Agreement establishing the Telecommunications Board
 
T.S.O. III


1997-9-4
 
10-9-97
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


1996-9-2
 
10-10-96
 
Amending ad valorem taxes
 
95.13, T.S.O. V


1998-3-1
 
07-09-98
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


1998-5-1
 
06-11-98
 
Adopting annual budget FY 1998-1999
 
Not Included


1998-9-1
 
10-08-98
 
Amending ad valorem taxes
 
T.S.O. V


1998-9-2
 
10-08-98
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


1998-9-3
 
10-08-98
 
Amending Stage I Development Plan
 
152.01


1999-4-1
 
05-13-99
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


1999-5-1
 
6-10-99
 
Adopting annual budget FY 1999-2000
 
Not Included


1999-5-2
 
6-10-99
 
Amending annual budget FY 1998-1999
 
Not Included


1999-9-1
 
10-14-99
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


1999-12-1
 
1-13-00
 
Amending annual budget FY 1999-2000
 
Not Included


1999-12-2
 
1-13-00
 
Establishing compensation of mayor and city council members
 
31.18, 31.35


2000-1-1
 
2-10-00
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2000-9-1
 
10-12-00
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2000-12-1
 
12-14-00
 
Amending annual budget FY 2000-2001
 
Not Included


2000-12-2
 
12-13-01
 
Restricting the hours when dumpsters can be emptied
 
52.04, 52.99(B)


2000-12-3
 
1-11-01
 
Amending traffic schedules for stop intersections and fire lanes
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I, Ch. 75, Sch. I


2001-1-1
 
2-8-01
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2001-4-1
 
5-10-01
 
Regarding speed limits
 
71.60


2001-5-1
 
6-14-01
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2001-2002
 
Not Included


2001-5-2
 
6-14-01
 
Declaring a condition a nuisance
 
92.03(I)


2001-6-1
 
7-12-01
 
Amending stop intersections
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


2001-8-1
 
9-13-01
 
Designating a director of emergency management
 
Not Included


2001-9-1
 
10-11-01
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2001-12-1
 
12-13-01
 
Amending annual budget FY 2001-2002
 
Not Included


2001-12-3
 
1-10-02
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2001-12-4
 
1-10-02
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2002-5-1
 
7-1-2002
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2002-2003
 
Not Included


2002-9-1
 
10-10-2002
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2002-11-1
 
12-12-2002
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


—
 
2-13-2003
 
Credit of occupational license fee
 
Not Included


2003-5-1
 
7-1-2003
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2003-2004
 
Not Included


2003-5-2
 
6-19-03
 
Security cap devices for buildings with sprinkler systems
 
93.25


2003-8-1
 
9-11-2003
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2003-9-2
 
10-9-2003
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2003-11-1
 
12-11-2003
 
Establishing compensation of mayor and city council members
 
31.18, 31.35


2003-12-1
 
1-8-2004
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2004-2-1
 
3-11-2004
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2004-2-2
 
3-11-2004
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2004-5-1
 
7-1-04
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2004- 2005
 
Not Included


2004-6-2
 
7-8-04
 
Zoning map change
 
T.S.O. I


2004-8-1
 
9-9-04
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2004-9-1
 
10-14-04
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.05


2004-9-2
 
10-14-04
 
Zoning map change
 
T.S.O. I


2005-04-1
 
5-12-05
 
Adopting 2002 Residential Code
 
150.10


2005-04-02
 
5-12-05
 
"One Stop Shop" fees for building, zoning and electrical permits
 
150.02, 155.01


2005-5-1
 
7-1-05
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2005- 2006
 
Not Included


2005-5-2
 
7-1-04
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2004- 2005
 
Not Included


2005-7-3
 
9-8-05
 
Issuance of bonds
 
T.S.O. VI


2005-8-2
 
9-8-05
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2006-1-1
 
2-9-06
 
Amending provision on restoration of pavement
 
Repealed


2006-3-1
 
4-13-06
 
Amending animal provisions
 
90.01 - 90.09, 90.20 - 90.23, 90.99


2006-5-1
 
6-8-06
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2006 - 2007
 
Not Included


2006-6-1
 
7-13-06
 
Amending zoning code
 
152.05


2006-9-1
 
9-15-06
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2007-2-1
 
3-15-07
 
Joint Code Enforcement Board
 
Repealed


2007-5-1
 
- -07
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2007 - 2008
 
Not Included


2007-8-1
 
9-6-07
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2007-8-3
 
9-13-07
 
Distilled Spirits and Malt Beverage Administrator
 
30.27


2007-8-4
 
9-13-07
 
Code Enforcement Officer
 
30.25


2007-9-1
 
10-11-07
 
Stop intersections
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


2007-12-1
 
12-13-08
 
Occupational license
 
Ch. 110


2008-2-1
 
4-10-08
 
Zoning Code amendment
 
152.05


2008-2-2
 
4-10-08
 
Amending meetings
 
31.31


2008-2-3
 
4-10-08
 
Obstructional parking
 
72.01 , 72.99


2008-4-2
 
4-14-08
 
Easement
 
Not Included


2008-05-01
 
6-12-08
 
911 emergency telephone service
 
Repealed


2008-5-2
 
6-12-08
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2008 - 2009
 
Not Included


2008-8-1
 
9-11-08
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2008-10-1
 
11-13-08
 
Zoning Code amendment
 
152.05


2008-11-1
 

12-11-08

 
Zoning Administrator
 
30.26


2008-11-2
 
12-11-08
 
Business regulatory license amendment
 
Not Included


2008-11-3
 
12-11-08
 
Issuance of bonds
 
T.S.O. VI


2009-2-2
 
3-12-09
 
Franchise
 
T.S.O. IV


2009-4-1
 
5-14-09
 
Alcoholic Beverages
 
113.01 , 113.02 , 113.04 - 113.12 , 113.99


2009-5-1
 
5-21-09
 
Amending annual budget FY 2008 - 2009
 
Not Included


2009-5-2
 
6-11-09
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2009 - 2010
 
Not Included


2009-07-01
 
8-13-09
 
Personnel Policies
 
Repealed


2009-08-01
 
12-10-09
 
Agreement
 
T.S.O. III


2009-08-02
 
9-3-09
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2009-09-01
 
10-8-09
 
International Property Maintenance Code adoption; amendments
 
150.15


2009-09-02
 
10-8-09
 
Zoning Code amendment
 
152.05


2009-09-03
 
10-8-09
 
Zoning Code amendment
 
152.05


2009-10-01
 
11-12-09
 
Agreement
 
T.S.O. III


2009-12-1
 
1-14-10
 
Recreational fires, outdoor cooking fires
 
93.41 , 93.43


2010-05-01
 
6-10-10
 
Adopting annual budget FY 2010 - 2011
 
Not Included


2010-05-02
 
7-8-10
 
Rate variation reducing the ad valorem property tax rate for residential
properties
 
T.S.O. V


2010-06-01
 
7-8-10
 
Taxation
 
95.11 , 95.13 , 95.14


2010-08-01
 
9-9-10
 
Setting the fee payable by the city to its representative to the Planning and
Zoning Commission
 
Not Included


2010-08-02
 
8-12-10
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue of
the city for 2010
 
Not Included


2010-12-01
 
1-5-11
 
Amending fee schedule for Board of Adjustment Hearings
 
152.23


2011-05-01
 
6-9-11
 
Amending nuisance regulations for keeping animals
 
92.03


2011-05-02
 
6-6-11
 
Amending the annual budget FY 2010-2011
 
Not Included


2011-05-03
 
6-6-11
 
Adopting the annual budget FY 2010- 2011
 
Not Included


2011-06-01
 
7-14-11
 
Zoning Code amendment
 
152.05


2011-08-01
 
9-8-11
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue of
the city for 2011
 
Not Included


2011-12-01
 
1-12-12
 
Interlocal agreement regarding the enforcement of state laws and regulation
of animals
 
T.S.O. III


2012-05-01
 
6-14-12
 
Amending theannual budget for FY 2011-2012
 
Not Included


2012-05-02
 
6-14-12
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2012-2013
 
Not Included


2012-07-01
 
7-19-12
 
Street closure
 
Not Included


2012-08-01
 
9-13-12
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2012-10-01
 
12-13-12
 
Repealing telephone (911) service charge
 
Not Included


2012-11-01
 
12-13-12
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2012-2013
 
Not Included


2013-02-01
 
3-14-13
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2013-05-01
 
6-13-13
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2013-2014
 
Not Included


2013-05-02
 
6-13-13
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2013-2014
 
Not Included


2013-08-01
 
9-12-13
 
Providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes on real property
 
T.S.O. V


2013-08-02
 
10-10-13
 
Repealing and replacing, in its entirety, Chapter 112 regarding peddlers,
itinerant merchants, solicitors, and canvassers
 
112.01 - 112.08 , 112.99


2013-08-03
 
9-12-13
 
Amending the Comprehensive Plan
 
152.01


2013-09-01
 
10-10-13
 
Amending regulations regarding alcoholic beverage licenses
 
113.01 , 113.04 , 113.07 , 113.10


2014-04-01
 
5-8-14
 
Joint Code Enforcement Board
 
Repealed


2014-04-02
 
5-8-14
 
Adopting S-20 Supplement
 
Not Included


2014-05-01
 
6-12-14
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2014-2015
 
Not Included


2014-05-02
 
6-12-14
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2014-06-01
 
7-10-14
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2014-08-01
 
9-11-14
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue of
the city for 2014
 
T.S.O. V


2014-10-01
 
10-28-14
 
Establishing a special assessment district to fund the Thomas More Office
Park Wayfinding Signage Project
 
Not Included


2014-10-02
 
11-13-14
 
Personnel Policies
 
38.01


2014-12-01
 
1-8-15
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2014- 2015
 
Not Included


2015-03-01
 
5-14-15
 
Approving an interlocal agreement relating to collection of occupational
taxes and license fees
 
T.S.O. III


2015-05-01
 
6-11-15
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2015- 2016
 
Not Included


2015-05-02
 
6-11-15
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2014- 2015
 
Not Included


2015-06-01
 
7-9-15
 
Amending parking regulations
 
72.03 , 72.99


2015-06-02
 
7-9-15
 
Designating the Homeland Security and Emergency Management Director of Kenton
County to serve as the Director of Emergency Management for the city
 
34.030


2015-08-01
 
9-10-15
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue of
the city for 2015
 
T.S.O. V


2016-03-01
 
4-14-16
 
Providing for regulations on rental properties
 
117.01 - 117.07 , 117.99


2016-05-01
 
6-7-16
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2016-2017
 
Not Included


2016-05-02
 
6-7-16
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2015- 2016
 
Not Included


2016-05-03
 
6-7-16
 
Providing for a credit of its occupational license fee for an economic
development project
 
Not Included


2017-07-01
 
8-11-16
 
Amending dates for renewal of alcoholic licenses
 
113.07


2016-07-02
 
8-11-16
 
Street closure
 
Not Included


2016-08-01
 
9-8-16
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue for
2016
 
T.S.O. V


2017-01-01
 
2-9-17
 
Establishing the College Park Reinvestment Grant Program
 
Not Included


2017-01-02
 
2-9-17
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2017-01-03
 
2-9-17
 
Establishing a non-exclusive franchise for public streets, alleys and other
public transportation
 
T.S.O. IV


2017-01-04
 
2-9-17
 
Establishing a non-exclusive franchise for the use of the pubic streets,
alleys and other public transportation
 
T.S.O. IV


2017-05-01
 
6-8-17
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2017-2018
 
Not Included


2017-05-02
 
6-8-17
 
Establishing the College Park Reinvestment Grant Program
 
Not Included


2017-07-01
 
8-10-17
 
Amending the police authority intergovernmental cooperative agreement
 
T.S.O. III


2017-08-01
 
9-14-17
 
Establishing a Code Enforcement Board
 
34.060 - 34.075


2017-08-02
 
9-14-17
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue for
2016
 
T.S.O. V


2017-09-01
 
10-12-17
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2017-2018
 
Not Included


2017-09-02
 
10-12-18
 
Creating and establishing an Energy Project Assessment District (EPAD) and
efficient use of energy and water resource regulations
 
Not Included


2017-10-01
 
11-9-17
 
Amending election procedure standards
 
30.10


2017-11-01
 
12-14-17
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2017-11-02
 
12-14-17
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2018-02-01
 
3-8-18
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2018-04-01
 
5-10-18
 
Establishing an Architectural Review Board
 
34.040 - 34.046


2018-05-01
 
6-14-18
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2018-2019
 
Not Included


2018-05-02
 
6-14-18
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 2017-2018
 
Not Included


2018-08-01
 
9-13-18
 
Providing for the levy, apportionment and collection of taxes and revenue for
2018
 
T.S.O. V


2018-08-02
 
9-13-18
 
Amending the waste collection and recycling fee
 
95.21


2018-08-03
 
9-13-18
 
Increasing occupational license fee
 
110.04


2018-09-01
 
10-11-18
 
Amending parking on city streets
 
72.06


2018-10-01
 
11-8-18
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2018-10-02
 
11-8-18
 
Zoning Code amendments
 
152.05


2018-11-01
 
12-13-18
 
Repealing excavation and construction regulation and adopting public
right-of-way regulations
 
91.40 - 91.56 , 91.99


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description
 
Code Section




1999-2-1
 
2-3-99
 
Issuing industrial building revenue bonds, Series 1999A (Thomas More College
Project)
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-2-2
 
2-11-99
 
Appointing a representative to the Telecommunications Board of Northern
Kentucky
 
Not Included


2007-1-1
 
1-11-07
 
Requesting city reclassification
 
Not Included


2010-05-01
 
5-13-10
 
In opposition to the Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act of 2010
 
Not Included


2010-07-01
 
7-8-10
 
Federal disaster aid assistance, assurances and agreements
 
Not Included


2010-08-01
 
8-12-10
 
Approving the Mayor’s appointment of Mr. Wm. Wayne Clark to the City of
Crestview Hills Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2010-09-01
 
9-9-10
 
Expressing support for house Resolution 3765, the Reins Act
 
Not Included


2010-12-02
 
12-9-10
 
Approving the appointment of Mr. Frank Sommerkamp as the city representative
on the Northern Kentucky Area Planning Council for the Calendar Year 2011
 
Not Included


2011-02-01
 
2-10-2011
 
Supporting construction of interstate bridge
 
Not Included


2011-03-01
 
3-10-2011
 
Adopting purchasing policies and procedures
 
Not Included


2011-04-01
 
4-14-2011
 
Approving an agreement with the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet for repair of
a concrete median
 
T.S.O. III


2011-09-01
 
9-8-2011
 
Commemorating the tenth anniversary of September 11, 2011 terrorist attacks
 
Not Included


2011-09-02
 
9-22-2011
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Jarco Construction, Inc.,
for the construction of a sidewalk
 
T.S.O. III


2011-12-01
 
12-8-2011
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Northern Kentucky Area
Planning Council
 
Not Included


2011-12-02
 
12-8-2011
 
Reapproving appointments to the Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2011-12-03
 
 
 
Approving the transfer of control of Insight Communications, Inc., to Time
Warner Cable, Inc.
 
Not Included


2011-12-04
 
12-8-2011
 
Supporting proposed new subdivision regulations for Kenton County
 
Not Included


2012-03-01
 
3-8-2012
 
Authorizing the Mayor to terminate a contract for ALS services and to execute
an addendum to an existing fire/EMS contract
 
T.S.O. III


2012-08-01
 
8-9-2012
 
Adopting a regional hazard mitigation plan and appointing mitigation
committee to administer the plan
 
Not Included


2012-12-01
 
12-13-2012
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Northern Kentucky Area
Planning Council
 
Not Included


2012-12-02
 
12-13-2012
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2013-01-01
 
2-13-2013
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2013-02-01
 
2-14-2013
 
Amending the renewal terms of an agreement for fire service and life squad
protection
 
T.S.O. III


2013-02-03
 
2-14-2013
 
Supporting pension system reform to the county employees retirement system
 
Not Included


2013-04-01
 
4-11-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement for funds for highway repair
 
T.S.O. III


2013-04-02
 
4-11-2013
 
Expressing intent to terminate an interlocal agreement for emergency
dispatching services
 
T.S.O. III


2013-05-01
 
5-9-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for consulting services
 
T.S.O. III


2013-06-01
 
6-13-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for construction services
 
T.S.O. III


2013-06-02
 
6-13-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for construction services
 
T.S.O. III


2013-08-01
 
8-8-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for construction services
 
T.S.O. III


2013-10-01
 
10-10-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for the paving of a road
 
T.S.O. III


2013-10-02
 
10-10-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for the acquisition of construction
funds
 
T.S.O. III


2013-12-01
 
12-12-2013
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Northern Kentucky Area
Planning Council
 
Not Included


2013-12-02
 
12-12-2013
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2013-12-03
 
12-12-2013
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter a contract for engineering and project
management services
 
T.S.O. III


2014-01-01
 
1-9-2014
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Board of Ethics
 
Not Included


2014-02-01
 
2-13-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an interlocal agreement with the City of
Fort Mitchell for fire protection and emergency medical services for certain
portions of the City of Crestview Hills
 
T.S.O. III


2014-02-02
 
2-13-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an interlocal agreement with the City of
Edgewood for fire protection and emergency medical services for certain
portions of the City of Crestview Hills
 
T.S.O. III


2014-02-03
 
2-13-2014
 
Supporting the publication of local government legal advertisements on
city-maintained websites accessible to the public in lieu of publication in
newspapers
 
Not Included


2014-04-01
 
4-10-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an interlocal agreement for a Joint Code
Enforcement Board
 
T.S.O. III


2014-04-02
 
4-10-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the pavement crack sealing
of various city streets
 
T.S.O. III


2014-05-01
 
5-8-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for street reconstruction
 
T.S.O. III


2014-06-01
 
6-12-2014
 
Requesting that the Governor call a special session of the General Assembly
to consider and pass Senate Bill 5 to fight the growing heroin epidemic in
Kentucky
 
Not Included


2014-07-01
 
7-10-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an interlocal agreement with the Northern
Kentucky Water District for joint projects
 
T.S.O. III


2014-08-01
 
8-14-2014
 
Approving the transfer of control of the cable franchise from Time Warner
Cable, Inc., to Comcast Corporation
 
T.S.O. IV


2014-10-01
 
10-14-2014
 
Approving the transfer of control by Comcast Corporation of Insight Kentucky
Partners, II, L.P. (the franchisee) to Charter Communications
 
T.S.O. IV


2014-10-02
 
10-14-2014
 
Approving Addendum A to the City Administrator employment agreement
 
T.S.O. III


2014-11-01
 
11-13-2014
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to provide funding for highway
extension
 
T.S.O. III


2014-12-01
 
1-8-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for wayfinding signage
 
T.S.O. III


2014-12-02
 
12-11-14
 
Approving the appointment of a representative to the Kenton County Planning
Commission
 
Not Included


2014-12-03
 
12-11-14
 
Approving the appointment of a representative and an alternate representative
on the Planning and Development Services Council
 
Not Included


2014-12-04
 
12-24-14
 
Approving an appointment to the Crestview Hills Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2014-12-05
 
12-11-14
 
Approving an appointment to the Crestview Hills Board of Adjustment
 
Not Included


2015-01-01
 
1-9-15
 
Approving an appointment to the Telecommunications Board of Northern Kentucky
(TBNK)
 
Not Included


2015-02-01
 
2-10-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for auditing services
 
T.S.O. III


2015-03-01
 
4-9-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for lawn and landscaping
services
 
T.S.O. III


2015-04-01
 
4-9-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the installation of a
median
 
T.S.O. III


2015-05-01
 
5-14-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for curbside solid waste and
recycling
 
T.S.O. III


2015-05-02
 
5-14-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the reconstruction of
Campus Drive (North)
 
T.S.O. III


2015-05-03
 
5-14-15
 
Approving the Stage I Development Plan for the Crown Point Subdivision
 
Not Included


2015-05-04
 
5-14-15
 
Approving an appointment to the Board of Ethics
 
Not Included


2015-07-01
 
7-9-15
 
Approving a memorandum of agreement to prepare the Regional Hazard Mitigation
Plan
 
T.S.O. III


2015-07-02
 
6-9-15
 
Supporting elements of the 2008 Cable Needs Assessment Report in conjunction
with renewal of the franchise agreement with Time Warner Cable, Inc.
 
T.S.O. IV


2015-07-03
 
7-9-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for milling and paving overlay
 
T.S.O. III


2015-08-01
 
8-13-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the reconstruction of
University Circle (North)
 
T.S.O. III


2015-09-01
 
9-10-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement for installation of new
storm sewer lines
 
T.S.O. III


2015-10-01
 
10-8-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the pavement crack sealing
of various city streets
 
T.S.O. III


2015-10-02
 
10-8-15
 
Approving the transfer of control of cable communications
 
T.S.O. III


2015-11-01
 
11-12-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with Northern Kentucky
Sanitation District #1
 
T.S.O. III


2015-11-02
 
11-12-15
 
Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a master interlocal cooperation agreement
with Northern Kentucky Sanitation District #1
 
T.S.O. III

OFFICIAL ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF
CRESTVIEW HILLS,
KENTUCKY
Prepared by:
Planning and Development Services
of Kenton County
Table Of Contents i
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
ARTICLE I A ZONING ORDINANCE 1-1
ARTICLE II AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Section 2.0 Authority 2-1
Section 2.1 Purpose 2-1
ARTICLE III SHORT TITLE
Section 3.0 Short Title 3-1
ARTICLE IV INTERPRETATION
Section 4.0 Greater Restriction 4-1
Section 4.1 Permit Or License In Violation 4-1
ARTICLE V CONFLICT
Section 5.0 Conflict 5-1
ARTICLE VI SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
Section 6.0 Severability Clause 6-1
ARTICLE VII DEFINITIONS
Section 7.0 Words And Phrases 7-1
ARTICLE VIII ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 8.0 Zones 8-1
Section 8.1 Official Zoning Map 8-1
Section 8.2 Changes On Zoning Map Or Maps 8-1
Section 8.3 Replacement Of Official Zoning Map
Or Maps 8-2
Section 8.4 Rules For Interpretation Of Zone
Boundaries 8-2
Section 8.5 Areas Not Included Within Zones 8-3
ARTICLE IX GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 9.0 Purpose 9-1
Section 9.1 Reduction In Building Site Area 9-1
Section 9.2 Interference With Traffic Signals 9-1
Section 9.3 Vision Clearance At Corners, Curb
Cuts, And Railroad Crossings 9-1
Section 9.4 Frontage On Corner Lots And
Double Frontage Lots 9-1
Section 9.5 Utilities Location 9-1
Table Of Contents ii
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 9.6 Railroad Rights-Of-Way Location 9-2
Section 9.7 Excavation, Movement Of Soil,
Tree Removal, And Erosion And Sedimentation Control 9-2
Section 9.8 Unsightly Or Unsanitary Storage 9-2
Section 9.9 Junkyard Location 9-3 Section 9.10 Application Of Zoning Regulations 9-3
Section 9.11 Special Requirements Governing
Home Occupations 9-5
Section 9.12 Nonconforming Lots, Nonconforming
Uses, Nonconforming Structures,
Repairs And Maintenance, And
Nonconforming Signs 9-6
Section 9.13 Exceptions And Modifications 9-9
Section 9.14 Conditional Buildings And Uses 9-10
Section 9.15 Building Regulations 9-13
Section 9.16 Move And Set 9-14
Section 9.17 Landscape Regulations 9-15
Section 9.18 Swimming Pools and Outdoor
Entertainment Buildings 9-33
Section 9.19 Site Plan Requirements 9-37
Section 9.20 Regulations Concerning Air Rights 9-39
Section 9.21 Regulations Concerning Design
And Construction Of Improvements 9-39
Section 9.22 Regulations Pertaining To Parking
Or Storing Of Trailers, Mobile
Homes, Campers, Inoperable
Vehicles, And Other Such Type
Equipment 9-39
Section 9.23 Hillside Development Controls 9-40
Section 9.24 Land Used For Agricultural Purposes 9-42
Section 9.25 Filing Of Certificate Of Land
Use Restrictions 9-42
Section 9.26 Regulations Of Sexually Oriented Businesses 9-42
Section 9.27 Flood Protection Development Controls 9-65
ARTICLE X ZONES
Section 10.0 CO (Conservation) Zone 10-1
Section 10.1 R-1Bc (Residential One-Bc) Zone 10-3
Section 10.2 R-1C (Residential One-C) Zone 10-5
Section 10.3 R-1D (Residential One-D) Zone 10-7
Table Of Contents iii
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 10.4 R-1E (Residential One-E) Zone 10-9
Section 10.5 R-2a (Residential Two-a) Zone 10-11
Section 10.6 R-2b (Residential Two-b) Zone 10-13
Section 10.7 R-PUD (Residential Planned Unit
Development) Zone 10-20
Section 10.8 SC (Shopping Center) Zone 10-31
Section 10.9 PO-1 (Low Rise Office Park) Zone 10-34
Section 10.10 PO-2 (High Rise Office Park) Zone 10-37
Section 10.11 HLC (Historical Commercial) Zone 10-40
Section 10.12 IP (Industrial Park) Zone 10-49
Section 10.13 INST (Institutional) Zone 10-51
Section 10.14 RP-1 (Research Park) Zone 10-54
Section 10.15 R-1Bd (Residential One-Bd) Zone 10-62
Section 10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones 10-64
ARTICLE XI OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
Section 11.0 General Requirements 11-1
Section 11.1 Specific Off-Street Parking
Requirements 11-14
ARTICLE XII OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR
UNLOADING REGULATIONS
Section 12.0 Off-Street Loading And/Or
Unloading Regulations 12-1
Section 12.1 Off-Street Loading And/Or
Unloading - Use And Bulk
Regulations 12-1
ARTICLE XIII FENCES, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTION
TO VIEW REGULATIONS
Section 13.0 Vision Clearance At Corners And
Railroad Crossings 13-1
Section 13.1 Classification Of Fences And Walls 13-1
Section 13.2 Conservation Zones 13-1
Section 13.3 Residential Zones 13-1
Section 13.4 Commercial And Industrial Zones 13-2
Section 13.5 Structural Elements Of Fences 13-2
Section 13.6 Measurement Of All Fence And/Or
Wall Heights And/Or Locations 13-2
Section 13.7 Height Of Any Barbed Wire Or
Sharp Pointed Fences 13-3
Table Of Contents iv
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 13.8 Height Of Fences Atop Retaining
Walls 13-3
Section 13.9 Application For A Fence Permit 13-3
ARTICLE XIV SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 14.1 Short Title 14-1
Section 14.2 Purpose and Interests Served 14-1
Section 14.3 Temporary Signs 14-3
Section 14.4 Scope, Authority and Applicability 14-4
Section 14.5 Prohibited Sign Types 14-7
Section 14.6 Installation, Design and Construction
Standards 14-8
Section 14.7 Signs Allowed In Conservation, Agricultural
and Rural Districts 14-10
Section 14.8 Signs Allowed In Single-Family and
Two-Family Residential Districts 14-13
Section 14.9 Signs Allowed In Multi-Family Residential
Districts 14-16
Section 14.10 Signs Allowed In Institutional Districts 14-19
Section 14.11 Signs Allowed In Office Districts 14-21
Section 14.12 Signs Allowed In General Business and
Commercial Districts 14-23
Section 14.13 Signs Allowed In Industrial Districts 14-27
Section 14.14 Master Signage Plans 14-29
Section 14.15 Permit Requirements and Procedures 14-34
Section 14.16 Appeals 14-37
Section 14.17 Definitions and Measurements 14-38
Section 14.18 Policies and Rules of Construction 14-42
ARTICLE XV PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Section 15.0 Application Of Performance
Standards 15-1
Section 15.1 Time Schedule For Compliance
Of Performance Standards 15-1
Section 15.2 Effects Of Concurrent Operations 15-1
ARTICLE XVI ADMINISTRATION
Section 16.0 Enforcing Officer 16-1
Section 16.1 Zoning Permits 16-1
Section 16.2 Building Permits 16-4
Table Of Contents v
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 16.3 Certificate Of Occupancy 16-5
Section 16.4 Certificate Of Occupancy For
Existing Building 16-6
Section 16.5 Certificate Of Occupancy For
Lawful Nonconforming Uses
And Structures 16-6
Section 16.6 Denial Of Certificate Of Occupancy 16-6
Section 16.7 Certificate Of Occupancy Records 16-6
Section 16.8 Complaints Regarding Violations 16-6
Section 16.9 Penalties 16-7
Section 16.10 Intent Concerning Determinations
Involved In Administration And
Enforcement Of Performance
Standards 16-7
Section 16.11 Duties Of Zoning Administrator
Regarding Performance Standards 16-7
ARTICLE XVII AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
Section 17.0 Amendment Procedure 17-1
Section 17.1 Planning And Development Services Of
Kenton County Staff Review And
Recommendation Required Prior
To Or At The Scheduled Public
Hearing 17-7
Section 17.2 Actions Of Local Governmental
Units To Be Furnished To Planning And
Development Services Of Kenton County 17-7
ARTICLE XVIII BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 18.0 Establishment Of Board Of
Adjustment; Membership;
Appointment; Terms; Vacancies;
Oaths; Compensation; Removal;
Officers 18-1
Section 18.1 Meetings Of Boards; Quorum;
Minutes; By Laws; Finances;
Subpoena Power; Administration
Of Oaths 18-2
Section 18.2 Procedure For All Appeals To
Board 18-3
Table Of Contents vi
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 18.3 Appeals From Planning
Commission Or Board Of
Adjustment Or Legislative
Body 18-3
Section 18.4 Stay Of Proceedings 18-4
Section 18.5 Powers Of Board Of Adjustment 18-4
Section 18.6 Variances; Change From One
Nonconforming Use To Another;
Conditions Governing Applications;
Procedures 18-5
Section 18.7 Conditional Use Permits 18-8
Section 18.8 Decisions Of The Board Of
Adjustment 18-9
Section 18.9 Actions Of Board Of Adjustment To
Be Furnished To Planning Of Development
Services Of Kenton County 18-9
ARTICLE XIX FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
Section 19.0 Schedule Of Fees, Charges,
And Expenses 19-1
APPENDIX A TABLE A-1 AND A-2 A-1
APPENDIX B ZONES AS REGULATED BY THE
KENTON COUNTY FISCAL COURT B-1
APPENDIX C SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS C-1
Article I A Zoning Ordinance 1-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance May 1996 PDS
ARTICLE I
A ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1.0 AN ORDINANCE DIVIDING THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY, INTO ZONES. ZONES OF SUCH SHAPE AND AREA AS ARE DEEMED BEST SUITED TO CARRY OUT THESE REGULATIONS: REGULATING THE LOCATION, HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES; REGULATING THE SIZE OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES AND THE DENSITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION AND THE USES OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND USE AND OTHER PURPOSES; PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATIONS; PROVIDING FOR ENFORCEMENT; A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND REPEALING ALL REGULATIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, ORDINANCES AND/OR CODES IN CONFLICT WITH THIS ORDINANCE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS
COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY, AS FOLLOWS:
Article II Authority And Purpose 2-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE II
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
SECTION 2.0 AUTHORITY: The City Council of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky, in pursuance of the authority of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS 100.201 - 100.991) hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections.
SECTION 2.1 PURPOSE: The zoning regulations and districts, as herein set forth have been prepared in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission, as it pertains to the City of Crestview Hills, to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city, to facilitate orderly and harmonious development and the visual or historical character of the city, and to regulate the density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air. In addition, this ordinance has been prepared to provide for vehicle off - street parking and loading and/or unloading space, as well as to facilitate fire and police protection, and to prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger, and congestion in the circulation of people and commodities, and the loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, or other dangers. The zoning regulations and districts, as herein set forth, are also employed to protect highways, and other transportation facilities, public facilities, including schools and public grounds, natural resources and other specific areas of the city of Crestview Hills which need special protection by the city.
Article III Short Title 3-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE III
SHORT TITLE
SECTION 3.0 SHORT TITLE: This ordinance shall be effective throughout the city of Crestview Hills, Kentucky and shall be known, referred to, and recited to as the "OFFICIAL ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS".
Article IV Interpretation 4-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE IV
INTERPRETATION
SECTION 4.0 GREATER RESTRICTION: The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, and general welfare. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the buildings, structures, or premises, upon heights of buildings or structures, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by any other ordinances, rules, codes, permits or regulations, or by easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
SECTION 4.1 PERMIT OR LICENSE IN VIOLATION: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, or any other ordinances, rules, codes, permits, or regulations of the city, if any permit or license is issued in violation of any provision of this ordinance, or purports to authorize the doing of any act not permitted by any provision of the ordinance, said permit or license shall be void.
Article V Conflict 5-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE V
CONFLICT
SECTION 5.0 CONFLICT: All ordinances and parts of ordinances of the city in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, providing, however, that such repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any such ordinances and parts thereof hereby repealed prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
Article VI Severability Clause 6-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE VI
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
SECTION 6.0 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: That should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance, for any reason, be held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision or holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. It is the intent of the City Council of Crestview Hills, Kentucky, to enact each section, and portion thereof, individually, and each such section shall stand alone, if necessary, and be in force regardless of the determined invalidity of any other section or provision.
Article VII Definitions 7-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
ARTICLE VII
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 7.0 WORDS AND PHRASES: For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives are herewith defined as follows:
Words used in the future tense include the present;
Words used in the present tense include the future;
Words used in the singular include the plural;
Words used in the plural include the singular;
Words used in the masculine include the feminine;
Words used in the feminine include the masculine;
The word "shall" is mandatory;
The word "may" shall be deemed as permissive.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE, CUSTOMARY: A "customary accessory building or use" is one which:
a. Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or principal use;
b. Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
c. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served;
d. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off - street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served; and
e. Is limited to one building which has a maximum size of one hundred (100) square feet and is no more than ten (10) feet in height. This customary accessory building and use limitation applies only to single-family residential zones R-1Bc, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including agriculture, dairying, farming, floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
AIR RIGHTS: Air rights for the purpose hereof shall be defined to mean the ownership or control of all land, property, and that area of space at and above a horizontal plane over the ground surface of land. This horizontal plane shall be at a height above the existing or proposed development (depending on the individual property in question)
Article VII Definitions 7-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
which is reasonably necessary or legally required for the full and free use of the ground surface.
ALLEY: All public rights - of - way at the rear of the lot which normally affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF NURSERYMEN, INC. (STANDARDS): The Association's Horticultural Standards Committee maintains and revises horticultural standards (see American Standards for Nursery Stock) to comply with the standards procedures of the American National Standards Institute.
AMERICAN STANDARD FOR NURSERY STOCK (ANSI Z60.1 - 1990): An American National Standard implies a consensus of those substantially concerned with its scope and provisions. An American National Standard is intended as a guide to aid the manufacturer, the consumer, and the general public.
APARTMENT: A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms intended, designed, or used as a permanent residence by an individual or one (1) family.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See DWELLINGS, MULTI - FAMILY.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than two (2) automobiles, using production line methods with chain, conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices. The use of personnel for one or more phases of this operation in conjunction with or without complete automatic or mechanical devices does not alter its classification. For the purpose of this ordinance, coin operated devices, of the above nature, which are operated on a self - service basis shall be construed to be the same.
AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREAS: An open, partially open, or enclosed area, other than a street, used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold, or rented on or from the premises.
AWNING or CANOPY: A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal, or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door, or the like. May include a type that can be retracted, folded, or collapsed against the face of the supporting building.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above the average level of the adjoining grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average level of the adjoining grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from the average level of the adjoining grade to the ceiling.
Article VII Definitions 7-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
BASAL AREA: The total cross sectional area of a tree trunk measured at Diameter at Breast Height (DBH).
BILLBOARD: a sign, having an area greater than twenty-five (25) square feet, and which meets any one or more of the following criteria:
a. a permanent structure sign which is used for the display of offsite commercial messages;
b. a permanent structure sign which constitutes a principal, separate or secondary use, as opposed to an accessory use, of the parcel on which it is located; or
c. an outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, i.e., on which display space is made available to parties, other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel (not including those who rent space from the sign owner, when such space is on the same parcel as the sign), in exchange for a rent, fee or other consideration.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS: Board of Adjustments of the city.
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential building other than a hotel, motel, or tourist cabin where lodging and meals for four (4) or more persons are served for compensation, and by prearrangement for definite periods.
BORROW PIT: Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other material is removed by excavation or otherwise, below the grade of surrounding land, for any purpose other than mining operations such as gold, silver, coal, etc., and that necessary and incidental to grading or to building construction on the premises.
BUFFER AREA: Areas so planned and/or zoned which act as a buffering or separation area between two (2) or more uses or structures not compatible, due to design, function, use, or operation.
BUILDING: A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls for the shelter, housing, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ALTERATION OF: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, or girders) of a building, or any addition to a building, or movement of a building from one location to another.
BUILDING AREA OR LOT COVERAGE BY BUILDING: That portion of a lot or building site that can be legally occupied by the ground floor of the principal building or use and all permitted accessory uses excluding those portions of the lot or building site which shall be reserved for minimum required yard spaces.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof
Article VII Definitions 7-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot or tract of land.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from average elevation of the finished grade adjoining the building at the front building line to the highest point of the roof surfaces, if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the average height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official or officials appointed by the city for carrying out the building code.
BUILDING LINE: A line defining the minimum front, side, and rear yard requirements.
BUILDING MAIN: See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city's building inspector authorizing the construction or alteration of a specific building, structure, sign, or fence on a specific tract.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The building on a lot used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted.
BUILDING SITE: One contiguous piece of land that meets all of the provisions of the city's ordinances, regulations, and codes for building on said site. For the purpose of this ordinance, the entire amount of ground being called a building site shall be in one (1) specific zone category and this shall not be construed to mean merely a residential, commercial, industrial, etc., but specifically Residential R-1A, R-1B, R-2, CBD-1, CBD-2, etc.
CALIPER: The measurement of the tree trunk taken six (6) inches above the ground up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, or twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger trees.
CAMPING/VACATION MOBILE UNIT: Any coach, cabin, house trailer, house car or other vehicle or structure intended for, designed for, and used for temporary human habitation or sleeping purposes, mounted upon wheels or supports, or supported and/or capable of being moved by its own power or transported by another vehicle.
CANOPY COVER: The area that a tree or trees' canopy covers which generally corresponds to a percentage of ground surface area.
CARPORT: See GARAGE, PRIVATE.
Article VII Definitions 7-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
CELLAR: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below the average level of the adjoining grade and so located that the vertical distance from the average level of the adjoining grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from the average level of the adjoining grade to the ceiling.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, AUTOMATIC: “Automatic changeable copy sign” means a type of sign on which the copy changes automatically through the use of electronic or electro-mechanical technology. All changeable copy shall be included within the allotted face of sign square footage.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL: “Manual changeable copy sign” means any sign on which copy for all or a portion of the sign can be changed by a human being removing or rearranging letters, symbols or numerals. All changeable copy shall be included within the allotted face of sign square footage.
CITIZEN MEMBER: Any member of the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustment who is not an elected or appointed official or employee of the city.
CLINIC, ANIMAL: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing arts or treatment of small animals on an out - patient or non - boarding basis only, without animal runs.
CLINIC, PERSONS: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing arts or treatment of persons on an out - patient or non - boarding basis only.
CLUB: A building owned or rented by a non-profit association made up of bona fide members paying dues, the use of which is restricted to said members and their guests.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Words, symbols, logos, pictures or any combination thereof that identify which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered for sale or a fee.
COMMISSION (PLANNING COMMISSION OR PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION): The Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission, Kenton County, State of Kentucky.
COMPLEX (COMMERCIAL):Multiple sites that do not meet the definition of “Center, integrated) but that meet all of the following criteria: the sites are cumulatively contiguous; the sites form a defined geographic area, typically extending to public streets, highways, waterways or other natural or human-built geographic boundaries; the owners or agents for the owners of the sites have common interests in promoting business and other activity in the defined geographic area.
Article VII Definitions 7-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
COMPREHENSIVE (MASTER) PLAN: A guide for public and private actions and decisions to assure the development of public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. It shall contain, as a minimum, the following elements:
A. A statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies, and standards;
B. A land use plan element;
C. A transportation plan element;
D. A community facilities plan element;
E. May include any additional elements such as, without being limited to, community renewal, housing, flood control, pollution, conservation, natural resources, regional impact, historic preservation and others.
CONCEALED LIGHTING: An artificial light source intended to illuminate the face of a sign, the direct source of which is shielded from public view and surrounding properties.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which may be suitable, as determined by the Board of Adjustment, in zones herein defined, but which would impair the integrity and character of the zone in which it is located, or in adjoining zones, unless restrictions on location, size, extent, and character of performance are imposed.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued by the zoning administrator, pursuant to authorization by the board of adjustments, consisting of two parts:
a. A statement of the factual determination by the board of adjustments which justifies the issuance of the permit; and
b. A statement of the specific conditions which must be met in order for the use to be permitted.
CONFORMING USE: Any lawful use of a building, structure, lot, sign, or fence, which complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
CONSTRUCTION LIMITS: The area affected by the grade changes only.
COUNCILMEN: Members of the City Council of the city.
COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the building.
CURB CUT: Any interruption, or break in the line of a street curb in order to connect a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall
Article VII Definitions 7-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
authorize and approve the establishment of such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this ordinance.
DAY CARE CENTER: A service providing protection, optimal care and developmental experiences via a group center in a planned environment. Day care programs are oriented primarily towards two groups: (1) children during those periods when the parents are away from home; and (2) the physically frail, moderately handicapped and slightly confused or disoriented older person.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in "decibels".
DECIDUOUS TREE: Not persistent; annual shedding of leaves.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Written and graphic material for the provision of a development, including any or all of the following: location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development, streets, ways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, and all other conditions agreed to by the applicant.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter, in inches, of a tree trunk, measured four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the existing grade.
DISTRICT: For purposes of this ordinance, synonymous with "ZONE".
DISTURBED LIMITS: The site area affected by grading changes plus an additional twenty (20) foot area on the perimeter
DORMITORY: A building used to provide residences for a group of persons (including students, faculty, or staff) of whom all are exclusively associated with an institution for higher education.
DRIVE - IN, EATING OR DRINKING PLACE: See EATING ESTABLISHMENTS -- RESTAURANTS.
DRIVE-IN FACILITY: A facility which, by its design (e.g., window, counter, microphone/speaker, etc.), allows people to receive goods and/or services while remaining in their automobile, for consumption/use on the premises.
DRIVE-THRU FACILITY: A facility which, by its design (e.g., window, counter, microphone/speaker, etc.) allows people to receive goods and/or services while remaining in their automobile, for consumption/use elsewhere than on the premises.
Article VII Definitions 7-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
DUMPSTER: A container used for the temporary storage of rubbish or garbage, pending collection, and should be fitted with a secure lid.
DWELLING: Any building which is completely intended for, designed for, and used for residential purposes, but for the purposes of this ordinance, shall not include a hotel-motel, hotel, motel, nursing home, tourist cabins, college or university dormitories, or military barracks.
DWELLING, ATTACHED, SINGLE - FAMILY: A dwelling unit which is attached to one or more dwelling units, each of which has independent access to the outside of the building to ground level and which has no less than two (2) exterior walls fully exposed and not in common with the exterior walls of any other unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED, SINGLE - FAMILY: A dwelling standing by itself and containing only one (1) dwelling unit, separate from other dwellings by open space, but shall not include mobile homes.
DWELLING, DOUBLES: See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.
DWELLING, DUPLEXES: See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.
DWELLING, GROUP HOUSE: A building that has not less than three (3) one-family housekeeping units erected in a row as a single building on one lot or on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved masonry party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line, and each such building being completely separated from any other building by space on all sides and such space shall be at least the required minimum yard setbacks as so specified in this ordinance.
DWELLING, TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME.
DWELLING, TWO - FAMILY: A residential building designed, arranged, or used exclusively by two (2) families, living independently of each other.
DWELLING, MULTI - FAMILY: A residential building used and/or arranged for rental occupancy, owner occupancy, or cooperatively owned by occupants, having three (3) or more dwelling units, as separate housekeeping units. This type of dwelling shall be inclusive of apartment buildings and group house dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or portion thereof, providing complete housekeeping facilities for one (1) person or one (1) family.
EASEMENT: A right, distinct from the ownership of the land, to cross property with facilities such as, but not limited to, sewer lines, water lines, and transmission lines, or
Article VII Definitions 7-9
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
the right, distinct from the ownership of the land, to reserve and hold an area for drainage or access purposes.
EASEMENT, LANDSCAPING OR PLANTING: The area in which planting must be installed and the setback for buffering between land uses, zones, vehicular use areas, and public or private streets.
EATING ESTABLISHMENTS -- RESTAURANTS: A restaurant is an establishment selling food items ordered from a menu, prepared on the premises, and served in a ready to consume state.
A. Carry-out restaurant -- A fast service restaurant which does not have sit down eating arrangements and consumption of food on the premises is prohibited or discouraged.
B. Drive-in restaurant -- A restaurant where consumption of food on the premises is encouraged in the vehicle and where food is provided by "car - hop" or self - service.
C. Sit-down restaurant -- Those restaurants which provide seating arrangements for the consumption of food or beverages on the premises.
D. Drive-thru restaurant -- A restaurant where food or beverages are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle either by person or other means which eliminates the need for the customer to exit the vehicle.
E. Combination restaurant -- A restaurant which provides any combination of sit-down, carry-out, drive-in, and/or drive-thru services.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply, or disposal systems; including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories reasonably necessary for furnishing adequate service or for the public health, safety, or general welfare. This definition is not meant to include buildings.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, or group of not more than three (3) persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together in a single housekeeping unit as their common home for the time, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house.
Article VII Definitions 7-10
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
FENCE: A structure made of wire, wood, metal, masonry, or other material, including hedges., which is constructed or erected in a more or less permanent location in or on the ground and which constitutes an enclosure or barrier around or along a field, yard, etc., but not including decorative structures of less than twenty (20) feet in length.
FILLING STATION: See SERVICE STATION.
FLOOD - 100 YEAR FREQUENCY: The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year).
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: The relatively flat area or lowlands adjoining the channel of a river, stream, or watercourse or ocean, lake, or other body of standing water which has been, or may be, covered by flood water.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of a given magnitude.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES: The lines marking the limits of floodways on official Federal, State, and local floodplain maps.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a dwelling unit or units exclusive of porches, balconies, and garages, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls or partitions separating dwelling units.
For uses other than residential, the gross floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating such uses and shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements, and similar areas devoted to such uses.
The gross floor area shall not include floors used for parking space when such parking pertains to a residential, commercial, or office used in the same structure.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY: A club or social activity officially associated with and recognized and supervised by an institution for higher education whose membership is limited exclusively to students of the said institution.
FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE: A building used by a fraternity or sorority to provide living quarters for some or all members as well as to provide study, meeting, recreational and other facilities.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave. This is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
Article VII Definitions 7-11
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
FRONTAGE: All the property abutting one (1) side of the right-of-way of a street, measured along the right-of-way line of the street between the intersecting lot lines. In no case shall the line along an alley be considered as acceptable frontage. For purposes of this definition, frontage for a building wall shall be measured for the wall that is most nearly parallel to that street. In no case shall the same building wall be considered to have more than one frontage.
GARAGE, ATTACHED: A portion of a building, used as a private garage, that is attached by one or more common walls, to the principal use of the lot. Such structure shall be completely enclosed and have a complete roof.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A portion of a principal building not exceeding eight hundred (800) square feet in are, per dwelling unit, designed, intended, and used for the storage of not more than four (4) motor-driven vehicles, per dwelling unit, owned, used, and registered in the name of the occupants of the dwelling unit for which said private garage is intended. Not more than one (1) of the vehicles shall be a commercial vehicle and this vehicle shall not be more than two (2) ton capacity. This definition shall not include a public garage.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, or portion thereof, designed, intended, and used exclusively for the care, repair, or equipment of self-propelled motor vehicles or other vehicles. This definition shall not include private garage.
GROUP HOUSING: See DWELLING, GROUP HOUSE.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Decorative elements of a temporary nature intended for the acknowledgement of a holiday or holiday season, exclusive of decorations, which contain business, product sales, or service advertising content. Holiday decorations shall not be considered “signs.”
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling, as permitted herein, and carried on solely by the inhabitants thereof, and further meeting requirements specified in Section 9.11 of this ordinance.
HOSPITAL, PERSONS: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing arts or treatment of persons generally on an in - patient or boarding basis.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing arts or treatment of animals generally on an in-patient or boarding basis and shall have outside runs.
HOTEL: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place for travelers and transient guests who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are sleeping rooms usually occupied singly.
Article VII Definitions 7-12
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
HOUSE TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME.
IN-HOME DAYCARE: any child care business provided in a private residence for provision of full or part-time care of three or more children unrelated to the operator, that do not reside on the same street as the occupant, where this service is offered on a regular, recurring basis for a fee or other remuneration. In-Home Daycare does not include casual babysitting services that are offered on a non-recurring basis and are typically offered in the evening or weekends for friends and family.
INTERIOR LANDSCAPING: All landscaping surrounded by the perimeter landscaping, including all vehicular use landscaping.
JUNK: Scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap iron, scrap lead, scrap tin, scrap zinc, and all other scrap metals and the alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth, used rope, used rubber, used tin foil, used bottles, old or used machinery of any type, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or crates (fabricated of any material), used pipe or pipe fittings, used conduit or conduit fittings, inoperative motor vehicles, used tires, and other manufactures goods that are so worn, deteriorated, or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition or which are subject to being dismantled.
JUNK YARD: An open area where any waste, used or second hand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "Junk Yard" includes an auto wrecking yard or the storage or keeping of one (1) or more inoperative motor vehicles unless where otherwise specifically permitted but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed building.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any building, structure, or open space devoted in its entirety or in part to the raising, boarding, or harboring of four (4) or more dogs, at least four (4) months of age for commercial purposes.
KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL: A kennel at, in, or adjoining a private residence where hunting or other dogs are kept for the hobby of the householder in using them for hunting or practice tracking trails or for exhibiting them in dog shows or field or obedience trails or for guarding or protecting the householder's property. The occasional sale of pups by the keeper of a noncommercial kennel does not change the character or residential property.
LABORATORY: A building or a portion of a building devoted to the experimental study in science, or the testing and analysis of chemicals, drugs, explosives, minerals, etc.
LABORATORY, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or a portion of a building devoted in use of providing bacteriological, biological, medical, x-ray, pathological, and similar
Article VII Definitions 7-13
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists and where no fabrication is conducted on the premises, except the custom fabrication of dentures.
LAUNDROMAT: A business that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LEASABLE AREA, GROSS: The floor area occupied exclusively by tenant, including finished basement and mezzanine areas and excluding common areas as elevators, stairways, corridors, and lobbies.
LEGIBLE: A sign or message is “Legible” when it can be understood by a person with an eighth-grade education (or more). Where this Article requires a determination of “visibility” or “legibility,” the standard shall be based on the eyesight of an adult eligible to receive a Kentucky driver’s license (wearing any corrective lenses required by such license). Where the height of the person is material to the determination, the person shall be presumed to be more than five feet and less than six feet tall.
LIVESTOCK: Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for profit or other productive purposes.
LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: A surfaced space within the main building or on the same lot providing for the temporary standing, loading and/or unloading of trucks; said space having a minimum dimension of forty-eight (48) feet in length, twelve (12) feet in width, and fourteen (14) feet in height, except as herein provided; and connected with an accepted deeded public right-of-way which affords ingress and egress for vehicles.
LODGING HOUSE: A building, other than an apartment, hotel-motel, hotel, motel, or tourist court, where lodging for five (5) or more persons is provided for compensation.
LOT: A parcel of land or any combination of several lots of record, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a building group, as permitted herein, together with their accessory buildings or uses and such access, yards, and open spaces required under this ordinance.
LOT AREA: The total area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by rights - of - way, floodplains, the waters of any lake, river, creek, or major drainage ditch, and shall be in one (1) zone only. For the purposes of this ordinance, all of the area of a given lot shall be in the same specific zoning category.
LOT, CORNER: A "corner lot" is a lot situated at the intersection of two streets or on a curved street on which the interior angle of such intersection or curved streets does not exceed one hundred thirty - five (135) degrees.
Article VII Definitions 7-14
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
LOT, DEPTH OF: The distance measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines from the midpoint of the front lot lines to the midpoint of the rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage on more than one (1) street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a deeded and occupied public right - of - way.
LOT, ZONING: A "zoning lot or lots" is a single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developers as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The common boundary line of an interior lot (other than a double frontage lot) and a street right - of - way line or the common boundary line of a corner lot (other than a double frontage lot) and that street right-of-way line toward which the principal or usual entrance to the main building situated on such lot most nearly faces, or the common boundary line of a through lot and any adjacent road or street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary line of a lot which is most nearly opposite the front lot line of such lot. In the case of a triangular or wedge shaped lot, for measurement purposes only, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, providing that all requirements for yard space are complied with, the owner may choose either side not abutting a street as the rear lot line, even though it is not opposite the front lot line. Once the choice has been made, it cannot be changed unless all requirements for yard space can be complied with.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary line of a lot, other than a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A designated fractional part or subdivision of a block, according to a specific recorded plat or survey, the map of which has been officially accepted and recorded in the office of the appropriate county clerk, state of Kentucky.
LOT WIDTH: The width of the lot as measured along the building front setback line.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of a main story, used for a purpose accessory to the principal use. A mezzanine is usually just above the ground floor and extending only over part of the main floor.
Article VII Definitions 7-15
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the front, side, and/or rear lot line and set back from the lot line a sufficient distance as specified in this ordinance, to provide the required minimum yard space.
MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH: The minimum distance required by this ordinance to be maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the street right-of-way line and the front lot line, as defined herein.
MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH: The minimum distance required by this ordinance to be maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the rear lot line, as defined herein, and the rear lot line.
MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH: The minimum distance required by this ordinance to be maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the side lot line, as defined herein, and the side lot line.
MOBILE HOME: Any coach, cabin, mobile home or other mobile structure in a single unit which is intended, designed, and used for the fixed residence of a person, family, or a household, mounted upon wheels or supports, or supported and/or capable of being moved or transported by another vehicle. For the purpose of this ordinance, the removal of wheels and/or the permanent or semi-permanent attachment of a foundation to said mobile structure shall not change its classification.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any lot, parcel, or premises, subdivided, designed, maintained, intended, and/or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for mobile homes; or any lot, parcel, or premises on which is parked, standing, or located two (2) or more mobile homes for a longer period than twenty-four (24) hours; or one (1) or more mobile homes connected to either electrical lines, or water or sewer pipes; or any mobile home being utilized on the premises on which it is located. For the purpose of this ordinance, any lot or premises used for the wholesale or retail sale of mobile homes shall not be included within this definition.
MODULAR: Housing manufactured off - site, often mass - produced, and designed so that sections are interchangeable. This is a production technique which can be applied to low or high density type construction.
MOTEL: A group of attached or detached buildings but not house trailers containing individual sleeping or living units for travelers and transient guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located to each unit. The term includes tourist court when related to the context specified herein.
N/A: Where used in the sign regulations, the particular requirement is “not applicable.”
NEIGHBORHOOD: A geographical area containing residences or a combination of residences and businesses, which geographical area meets all of the following criteria:
Article VII Definitions 7-16
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
a. The area shall consist of at least 20 acres that are geographically contiguous;
b. The area shall have direct access from local streets to one or more collector and/or arterial streets;
c. The area shall not be part of another designated neighborhood for which permits for which permanent entrance signs have been issued; and
d. The area shall either have been developed as one planned complex, subdivision or center, or it shall have established its identity as a neighborhood through activities of a community association, neighborhood festivals or other continuing activities separate from the desire for an entrance sign.
NITA measure of luminance. One nit is equal to one candela per square meter (1cd/m2). Ten thousand nits are equal to one stilb. A candela, on which the definition is based, is a unit of measurement of the intensity of light. Part of the SI system of measurement, one candela (cd) is the monochromatic radiation of 540THz with a radiant intensity of 1/683 watt per steradian in the same direction. Another way of putting it is that an ordinary wax candle generates approximately one candela.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot which was lawfully created but which does not conform to the minimum area or dimensional requirements specified for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: An activity or a building, sign, fence, structure, or a portion thereof, which lawfully existed before the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but which does not conform to all of the regulations contained in this ordinance, or amendments thereto, which pertain to the zone in which it is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS: Matter or material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals as determined by the appropriate health department.
NURSERY: Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of plants and including all accessory buildings, but does not include the wholesale or retail sale of any items other than those incidental to the items raised or grown on said premises.
NURSERY SCHOOL: Any building used for the education of preschool age children with or without compensation, and including all accessory buildings and play areas, and shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, be considered a group activity.
NURSING HOME: A health establishment which provides nursing care under the direction of a Kentucky licensed physician to patients who, for reason of illness or physical infirmities, are unable to care for themselves properly.
Article VII Definitions 7-17
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive in any way to a person with reasonable sensitivity.
OFFICIAL THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The Transportation Element of the comprehensive plan, as adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission.
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT BUILDINGS. An accessory structure erected in a residentially zoned property primarily utilized for entertainment purposes for that property. The building may include restrooms, showers, limited kitchen/cooking facilities, fireplace, and covered entertainment seating. It may not be utilized to house boats or vehicles. The Outdoor Entertainment Building may or may not be associated with a swimming pool.
OWNER - OCCUPANT: The property owner who will occupy the residence.
PARKING AREA, OFF - STREET: An open, surfaced area, other than the right - of - way of a street, road, highway, alley, or place, used for temporary parking of self-propelled motor vehicles and available for public use either free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING BUILDING OR GARAGE: A building, or portion thereof, designed, intended, and used exclusively for the temporary parking of self-propelled motor vehicles and may be publicly or privately owned and/or operated and may be for remuneration, free, or privately utilized.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary parking of one (1) operative automobile and connected with a deeded and accepted public right-of-way by a surfaced driveway which affords ingress and egress for vehicles.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided, suspended form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Criteria established to control building enclosure, landscaping, noise, odorous matter, exterior lighting, vibration, smoke, particulate
Article VII Definitions 7-18
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
matter, gasses, radiation, storage, fire, and explosive hazards, and humidity, heat, or glare generated by or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
PERIMETER LANDSCAPING: The landscaping surrounding a land use or a vehicular use area.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A large scale, unified land development which preserves the natural features and foliage of the site. It permits a mixture of land uses, clustering of residential units of varying types, and common recreation/open spaces, through flexible regulations which encourage creative design.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building open to the general use, participation, or enjoyment of the public or operated for the public's benefit and owned and/or operated by a City, County, State, or Federal Government or by a public utility corporation or municipal district or authority.
RAILROAD RIGHTS - OF - WAY: A strip of land within which the railroad tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation are normally located, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL: Recreation facilities open to the general public for a fee or restricted to members when operated for profit as a business.
RECREATION, PRIVATE, NONCOMMERCIAL: Clubs or recreation facilities operated by a non-profit organization and open only to bona fide members of such non-profit organizations and their guests.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Reusable materials including, but not limited to metals, glass, plastic, wood and paper that are intended for remanufacturing or reconstitution. Recyclable materials do not include junk, rubbish, refuse, or hazardous waste.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: A container used for the temporary storage of recyclable materials pending collection fitted with a secure lid. The container must be clearly labeled as a recycling unit and identify accepted recycled materials. All recycling containers larger than two cubic yards are subject to the recycling regulations of Table 9-3.
REPLACEMENT TREE: Any tree planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, either for landscaping or tree density purposes.
REST HOME: Any building, institution, residence, or home used, for a consideration, as a place of abode for the reception and care of three (3) or more persons, who by reasons of age, mental, or physical infirmities, are not capable of properly caring for themselves.
Article VII Definitions 7-19
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SCHOOLS, PAROCHIAL: An institution or a place for instruction or education belonging to and maintained by a religious organization.
SCHOOLS, PRIVATE: An institution or a place for instruction or education belonging to and maintained by a private organization other than those types defined in this ordinance.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC: An institution or place for instruction or education belonging to the public and established and conducted under public authority in the various districts, counties, or cities and maintained at the public expense by taxation, and open with or without charge to the public for their attendance. This does not include schools owned and/or conducted by private parties though said schools may be open to the public generally and though tuition may be free. Schools in the aforementioned category of public schools shall include all public cottage or kindergarten, elementary, junior high, high school, junior colleges, college and universities, but no others.
SCHOOLS, BUSINESS: An institution or place for instruction or education, specifically in courses of bookkeeping, business administration, operation of business machines, shorthand and typing, and related courses, operated for an intended profit. For the purpose of this ordinance, business colleges shall be included in this definition.
SCHOOLS, TRADE: An institution or place for instruction or education, specifically in one or more of the general trades such as: welding, carpentry, electrical, etc.
SCREENING AREA: An area set aside to remain vacant or buildings and to be planted and landscaped to reduce the blighting effect of certain land uses on adjacent property.
SEPARATE (LIGHTING OR ILLUMINATION: A prohibition on separate illumination for a sign does not prohibit indirect, incidental illumination that spills over from a light serving another lawful purpose.
SERVICE FACILITIES, PUBLIC UTILITIES: Service facilities include all facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, or the Department of Motor Transportation, or Federal Power Commission, and common carriers by rail, other than office space, garage and warehouse space and include office space, garage space and warehouse space when such place is incidental to a service facility.
SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, or land, used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale, at retail, of any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing other than body work.
Article VII Definitions 7-20
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SHOPPING CENTER: Means a group of four or more separately operated commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit with common off-street parking provided on the property and designed to serve multi-purpose shoppers.
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard or structure, including its component parts, which by display of a visual image draws attention to an object, product, place, activity, opinion, idea, person, institution, organization or place of business, or which identifies or promotes the interests of any person, and which is visible from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or parking area.
SIGN, ANIMATED: a sign which uses movement or change of lighting to simulate action or motion.
SIGN, BANNER: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to cloth, flexible plastic, or fabric of any kind with only such material for backing. Permitted materials for a banner do not include paper or cardboard.
SIGN, DETACHED: Any sign erected on a freestanding frame, foundation, mast or pole and not attached in any way to any building. Every face of a freestanding sign shall be considered as a separate sign for purposes of computing the sign area.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: Any sign providing way-finding information by identifying occupants of specific buildings or units within a building and, where necessary, providing directions for finding such building or unit
SIGN, PRINCIPAL: The main freestanding sign on a site. The term is used to distinguish such a sign from other freestanding signs that may be allowed on multi-tenant or large sites.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign which is not permanently affixed. This definition is intended to include all devices such as banners, pennants, flags, searchlights, twirling or sandwich type signs, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or other air or gas filled figures. This type of sign is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, no more than 30 days.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign affixed to or installed inside a window and clearly legible to persons outside the building. Note that signs that are installed behind windows but that are legible from other private property or from driving lanes of adjacent streets will be subject to limitations on window signs but will also be regulated as wall signs.
SITE: One or more lots or parcels of land that, for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, are used as a single unit. As an example, but not by way of limitation, a site may include more than one “lot” as shown on a subdivision plat, but, for zoning purposes, the
Article VII Definitions 7-21
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
permissible use, setbacks and yard requirements are determined for the larger “site” and not for the individual “lots.”
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of intensity of sound.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A separate accessory building with a capacity for not more than one (1) horse or one (1) pony for each six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area whereon such stable is located and where such horses or ponies are owned by the owners or occupants of the premises and not kept for compensation, hire, or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A main building with a capacity for not more than one (1) horse or one (1) pony for each six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area whereon such stable is located and where such horses or ponies are owned by the owners, occupants of the premises or other and are kept for compensation, hire, or sale.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. For purposes of this ordinance, a basement shall be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF: A story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story.
STREET, ARTERIAL: Public thoroughfares which serve the major movements of traffic within and through the community, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan for the city.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Public thoroughfares which serve to collect and distribute the major movements of traffic within and through the community, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan for the city.
STREET, EXPRESSWAY: A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access in general with grade separations at major intersections.
STREET, FREEWAY: A divided multi - lane highway for through traffic with all crossroads separated in grades and with full control of access.
STREET, LOCAL: Facilities which are designed to be used primarily for direct access to abutting properties and leading into the collector street system.
STREET, PRIVATE: A paved private thoroughfare which affords access to abutting property for private users of such property. For the purposes of density calculation, a private street shall constitute the areas of its paved surface and sidewalks.
Article VII Definitions 7-22
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare, constructed within the boundaries of an officially deeded and accepted public right - of - way, which affords principal means of access to abutting property. For purposes of density calculations, a public street shall constitute all of the area within the public right - of - way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION (SIGNS): As it applies to signs, any change in supporting members of a building or structure, such as foundation, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. For a sign, any change in or replacement of supporting members of a sign structure, such as foundation, columns, beams or girders shall be considered a structural alteration.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location in or on the ground, including such buildings, mobile homes, signs, and fences, but not including earthworks, ditches, canals, dams, reservoirs, pipelines, telephone or telegraph or electric power lines, driveways, or curbs.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; providing that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITY, INPATIENT: A facility for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse where one or more patients are provided with meals and/or lodging for overnights stays and care.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITY, OUTPATIENT: A facility uses for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse where neither meals nor lodging is provided, and overnight stays do not occur.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR: Any structure or device of any kind that is intended for swimming purposes, including but not limited to: any pool or tank of any material or type of construction, or any depression or excavation in any natural or constructed material, or any dike or berm of any material or type of construction; including all appurtenances to such structure or device and all appliances used in connection therewith; which structure or device is intended to cause, or would cause, if completely filled, the retaining of water to a greater depth than eighteen (18) inches at any point. Any such structure or device shall be deemed to be included within the meaning of the term "structure" as used in this ordinance.
Article VII Definitions 7-23
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
Outdoor swimming pools shall be deemed to consist of the following classes: private, semi - public, public, and commercial, as follows:
a. Private: when consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to a one - family or a two - family dwelling and used only as such by persons residing on the same lot and their private guests (as distinguished from groups of any kind) with no payment of any kind or in any form charged or received for such use.
b. Semi - public: when consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to a multiple dwelling, hotel, motel, church, school, or private club, or country club, and used only as such by persons who reside or are housed on the same lot or who are regular members of such church, club, country club, or regular attendants at such school and by individual guests (as distinguished from groups of any kind) of the foregoing with no payment of any kind or in any form being charged or being received for such use.
c. Public: a swimming pool operated by a unit of government for the general public.
d. Commercial: a swimming pool operated for profit, open to the public upon payment of an hourly, a daily, weekly, monthly, annual, or other fee.
TAVERN: Any establishment selling, by the drink, fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof of which and/or one-half (1/2) or more of the sides are constructed of silk, cotton canvas, fabric, or a similar light material.
TOURIST COURT: See MOTELS.
TOURIST HOME: A building designed for or used by a single family or two-family dwelling in which sleeping rooms are provided or offered to transient guests for compensation, but for not more than four (4) transient guests.
TRAILER: See CAMPING/VACATION MOBILE UNIT.
VARIANCE: A departure from dimensional terms of this ordinance pertaining to the height, width, or location of structures, and the size of yards and open spaces where such departure meets the requirements of KRS 100.241 to 100.247.
VEHICLE: Any device meeting the definition of “motor vehicle” under KRS. §186.010.
VEHICULAR USE AREA: Any area containing more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and used by two or more vehicles for parking, sales, or service, exclusive of driveways.
Article VII Definitions 7-24
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
YARD: An open space on the same lot or building site with a main building occupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees, plants, shrubberies, ornaments, utility poles and wires, dog houses, outdoor furniture, and except as otherwise permitted in Section 9.20, G., "Permitted Obstructions In Minimum Required Yards".
YARD DEPTH, FRONT: An open space extending the full width of the lot or building site measured between a line parallel to the street right - of - way line intersecting the foremost point of any building excluding steps and unenclosed porches and the front lot line, as defined herein.
YARD DEPTH, REAR: An open space extending across the full width of the lot and measured between a line parallel to the rear lot line, as defined herein, which intersects the rearmost point of any building excluding steps and unenclosed porches and the rear lot line.
YARD WIDTH, SIDE: An open area between any building and the side lot line, as defined herein, extending from the front to the rear yard, or on through lots or building sites, from one front lot line to the other front lot line.
ZONE: An established area within the city for which the provisions of this ordinance are applicable. (Synonymous with the word "DISTRICT".)
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official or officials appointed by the city for carrying out the provisions and enforcement of this ordinance.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
ARTICLE VIII
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
SECTION 8.0 ZONES: For the purpose and intent of this ordinance, the city may be divided into the following zones:
CO CONSERVATION ZONE
R-1Bc RESIDENTIAL ONE-Bc ZONE
R-!Bd RESIDENTIAL ONE – Bd ZONE
R-1C RESIDENTIAL ONE - C ZONE
R-1D RESIDENTIAL ONE - D ZONE
R-1E RESIDENTIAL ONE - E ZONE
R-2a RESIDENTIAL TWO-a ZONE
R-2b RESIDENTIAL TWO-b ZONE
R-PUD RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE
SC SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
PO-1 LOW RISE OFFICE PARK ZONE
PO-2 HIGH RISE OFFICE PARK ZONE
HLC HISTORICAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
IP INDUSTRIAL PARK ZONE
MX-1 MIXED-USE ZONE 1
MX-2 MIXED-USE ZONE 2
SECTION 8.1 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: The zones are bounded and defined as shown on the map (or maps) entitled "OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS, KENTUCKY" and shall so remain on file in the city building of the city, or with the city clerk or the city engineer.
SECTION 8.2 CHANGES ON ZONING MAP OR MAPS: If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and Kentucky Revised Statutes, changes are made in zone boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map (or maps), such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map (or maps) by Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff promptly after the amendment to this ordinance has been approved by the city council; and the Planning Commission and Planning and Development Services of Kenton County is officially notified by a certified copy of said amendment in ordinance form. Such changes shall not become effective until said changes have been made on said map. In addition, no building, structure, sign, or fence permit shall be approved or issued until the Official Zoning Map (or maps) indicate the proper zoning for the use intended as indicated upon the application for a permit.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map (or maps) or matter shown thereon which are not in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning map (or maps), the Official Zoning map, which shall be located in the office designated by law, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings, and other structures in the city.
SECTION 8.3 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OR MAPS: In the event that the Official Zoning Map (or maps) become damaged, destroyed, lost, or are deemed necessary to be replaced due to the age of the map or major corrections in location of rights - of - way or subdivisions, the city may, by ordinance, cause to have prepared and by ordinance, adopt a new Official Zoning Map (or maps) which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map (or maps), but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto.
SECTION 8.4 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES: Rules for interpretation of zone boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map (or maps) are as follows:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the rights - of - way of a street, alley, or other public way, shall be construed to follow such rights - of - way lines and when said rights - of - way are officially vacated, the zones bordering such rights - of - way shall be extended out to the centerline of said vacated rights - of - way.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundary lines shall be construed as following such boundary lines.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the rights - of - ways of railroad lines shall be construed as following such lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, streams, rivers, ditches, gullies, ravines, or other bodies of water, shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
F. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a topographic elevation, determined by the scale of the map (or maps), shall be construed as following such ground elevation lines.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
G. Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to features indicated in Rules A through F of this section, shall be construed as parallel to such features. Boundaries indicated as approximate extensions of features indicated in Rules A through F of this section, shall be construed as being extensions of such features. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map (or maps) shall be determined by the scale of the map (or maps), if an accurate legal description cannot be determined from the original zoning case.
SECTION 8.5 AREAS NOT INCLUDED WITHIN ZONES: When an area is annexed or proposed to be annexed by the legislative body, the zoning to be applied to the area shall meet the requirements of KRS 100.209 and KRS 81A.420 (1), as amended.
Article IX General Regulations 9-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
ARTICLE IX
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 9.0 PURPOSE: General regulations apply to all districts. Where requirements of a general regulation and a district regulation differ, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail.
SECTION 9.1 REDUCTION IN BUILDING SITE AREA: Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, no lot, in any zone, may be reduced in area below the minimum lot area as specified herein for the zone within which said lot is located.
SECTION 9.2 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNALS: Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, in any zone, no sign, structure, tree, planting, or vegetation, or any portion thereof, shall protrude over or into any street, road, or highway, so as to create confusion around, or otherwise interfere with, traffic signals of any kind.
SECTION 9.3 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS, CURB CUTS, AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS: Notwithstanding any part of this ordinance, or any permit granted, or any variance granted by the board of adjustment, no type of structure, vehicle, tree, planting, vegetation, sign, or fence, or any type of obstacle, or any portion thereof, shall be placed or retained in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct the vision clearance at corners, curb cuts, or railroad crossings in any zone.
SECTION 9.4 FRONTAGE ON CORNER LOTS AND DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS: On lots having frontage on more than one street, in any zone except the MX zones, the minimum front yard depth shall be provided for each street, road, or highway, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.5 UTILITIES LOCATION: Electrical transformer stations, gas regulator stations, sewage and water treatment plants, pumping stations, standpipes for public water supply, and other similar utility uses, may be located in any zone subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance. The location of such facilities shall be in accordance with Kentucky State Law, and the following requirements shall be complied with:
A. Such facilities shall be essential for the immediate area or for the proper functioning of the total utility system of which the above element is a part.
B. A building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
C. Such facilities shall be enclosed by a protective fence as regulated by Article XIII.
Article IX General Regulations 9-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
D. Open spaces on the premises shall be suitably landscaped and maintained and a screening area according to Section 9.17 of this ordinance may be required in and along any yard.
E. The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises, unless enclosed or screened, shall be prohibited.
F. The surrounding area shall not be adversely affected by, and shall be protected from, noise, odor, glare, dust, gas, smoke, and vibration, by such suitable means and conditions as the board of adjustment may specify.
SECTION 9.6 RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY LOCATION: Railroad rights-of-way, exclusive of such uses as marshaling yards, passenger and freight terminals, maintenance shops, fueling facilities, and round houses, may be located in any zone of this ordinance providing said railroad rights-of-way meet the requirements of those sections of the Kentucky State law which regulate such uses.
SECTION 9.7 EXCAVATION, MOVEMENT OF SOIL, TREE REMOVAL, AND EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Notwithstanding other provisions of the ordinance, no governmental entity or other person or entity shall strip, excavate, fill, or otherwise move soil, trees, or other vegetation for sale, or any other purpose, except for minor changes such as the filling of small pockets in lots, removal of vegetation which is dead, diseased, or endangering to the public safety, and other similar operations, in any zone set forth in this ordinance without first insuring that all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the city, if applicable, have been fulfilled and then obtaining a permit from the city for such stripping, excavating, filling, or other means of soil movement including wholesale removal of trees and other vegetation. City shall issue the required permit only after being informed by letter from the city engineer that the resulting change in grade or removal of trees and other vegetation in the affected area will not be against the best interests of the local area. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit normal excavation or grading incidental to the construction or alteration of a building on the premises for which a building permit has been granted as required otherwise in this ordinance, but shall include all road cuts thereto.
SECTION 9.8 UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY STORAGE: No rubbish, salvage materials, junk, or miscellaneous refuse shall be openly stored or kept in the open, at any time. Said rubbish, salvage materials, junk, or miscellaneous refuse shall be removed by the owner, occupant, user, tenant, or lessee, on whose property the same appears. Regular salvage and junk yards, where permitted herein, shall be adequately enclosed with a solid fence or wall as required by Article XIII of this ordinance and an approved permanent planting screen shall be required as regulated in Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
Article IX General Regulations 9-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
No weeds shall be allowed to go uncut within any zones when the same may be construed to be a menace to public health and safety by the appropriate health department, or have a depressing influence upon property values in the neighborhood, in the opinion of the zoning administrator. Furthermore, all weeds on lots located and platted within the corporate limits of the city shall be cut at least twice per year; once between June 1 and June 15, and also between August 1 and August 15. When a violation of this section of this ordinance occurs, the city council shall delegate some suitable person to cut the whole lot or remove any rubbish, salvage materials, junk, or miscellaneous refuse that is unsightly. The city council shall inform its selected delegate to cut weeds, within ten (10) days from June 15 and August 15, and all other items which violate this section of this ordinance shall be removed by the 15th day of each calendar month or the city's delegate will remove same within ten (10) days thereafter. All property owners, occupants, users, tenants, or lessees who use the city's delegate to complete their work as required in this section of this ordinance shall be billed directly for their proportionate cost of labor, or in the alternative, have the cost of such labor attached and made part of their respective annual tax bills in the discretion of the city council.
SECTION 9.9 JUNKYARD LOCATION: No person shall operate, or cause to operate, any junkyard which is situated closer than two thousand (2,000) feet from the centerline of any county, state, federal, or limited access highway or turnpike, including bridges and bridge approaches, unless a permit for such operation shall have been obtained from the Kentucky Bureau of Highways, in accordance with KRS 177.905 to 177.950.
SECTION 9.10 APPLICATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS
A. Except as herein provided, no public or private structure, except the service facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission or the Department of Motor Transportation or Federal Power Commission and common carrier by rail, shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any public or private structures or land, except the service facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission or the Department of Motor Transportation or Federal Power Commission and common carriers by rail, be used for any purpose other than that permitted in the zone in which such structures or land is to be located or is located. All of the required lot area shall be in one (1) zone.
B. Except as herein provided, no public or private structures, except the service facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission or the department of Motor Transportation or Federal Power Commission and common carriers by rail, shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height or bulk limit herein established for the zone in which such structures is to be located or is located.
Article IX General Regulations 9-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
C. Except as herein provided, no lot area shall hereafter be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than described by this ordinance and no building shall be occupied by more families than prescribed for such building, structure, or premises for the zone in which it is located.
D. Except as herein provided, no part of any yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading and/or unloading space about or in connection with any building, structure, or use permitted by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, for any other building, structure, or use.
E. Except as herein provided, every structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot, as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building on one (1) lot, nor shall any building be erected on any lot which does not abut a public right-of-way. In the case of a newly subdivided lot, the requirement to abut a public street is further regulated by the subdivision regulations for incorporated and unincorporated Kenton County.
F. Accessory structures and uses, including off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas, shall not be permitted within any front yard or side yard, except as herein provided. Accessory structures and uses, including off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas shall be permitted to extend into the minimum rear yard area, as defined herein, in all zones, but never closer than ten (10) feet to the rear property line and minimum side yard widths are maintained.
G. Permitted Obstructions in Minimum Required Yards or Courts: Except as herein provided, the following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards or courts specified:
1. In All Minimum Required Yards Or Courts - Awnings and canopies; driveways, providing they are not closer than three (3) feet to the property line to which they run approximately parallel to; common driveways may abut or extend over a property line to serve two (2) or more lots as provided for in accordance with the subdivision regulations for incorporated and unincorporated Kenton County; steps, four (4) feet or less above grade and projecting not more than four (4) feet into the minimum required yards which are necessary for access to a lot from a street or alley; fire escapes; arbors and trellises; flag poles; bird baths; fences and walls, subject to the requirements in Article XIII of this ordinance.
2. In Minimum Front Yard Depths - One story bay windows, projecting three (3) feet or less into the minimum required yard; overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting three (3) feet or less into the minimum required yard.
Article IX General Regulations 9-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
3. In Minimum Rear Yard Depths - One story bay windows, projecting three (3) feet or less into the minimum required rear yard; overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting three (3) feet or less into the minimum required rear yard; air conditioning equipment, projecting eighteen (18) inches or less into the minimum required rear yard.
4. In Minimum Side Yard Widths - Awnings, canopies, overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting eighteen (18) inches or less into the minimum required side yard.
SECTION 9.11 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING HOME OCCUPATIONS: The following requirements shall apply to home occupations when permitted herein:
A. No persons other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such operation in connection with which there is no group instruction, assembly, or activities.
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of any one floor of the dwelling unit (including the basement or cellar) shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, such as utilization of trucks, that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized, in part, for any purpose other than that of a dwelling unit, except that a name plate, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance, shall be permitted.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building, nor shall there be any exterior storage of any materials on the premises.
E. There shall be no commodity sold upon the premises in connection with such home occupation.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and not located in any required yard, except as herein provided.
G. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference, detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
Article IX General Regulations 9-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
Home occupations shall include the use of the premises for services rendered other than by direct contact with customers at that location (for example, where the bulk of the business is by telephone - actual work is performed in home and customer is contacted in other than that location).
SECTION 9.12 NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES, NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE, AND NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
1. Any lot of record which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance shall be considered a nonconforming lot of record.
2. If two (2) or more unimproved lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area, as established by this ordinance, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be sold for purposes of building which does not meet lot width and area development requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance.
B. NONCONFORMING USES
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein provided, the lawful use of any public or private structure or land existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance. However, no nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended unless and until the use is brought into conformance with all provisions of this ordinance.
2. CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER: Any nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use, providing the new nonconforming use is in the same or a more restrictive classification (i.e., providing that, in the opinion of the board of adjustment, the new nonconforming use will be more in conformance with the intent of the regulations of the zone affected, than the old nonconforming use).
Article IX General Regulations 9-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
3. TERMINATION: Except for Section 9.12, B., 3., c., any one of the following activities or conditions shall terminate, immediately, the right to operate a public or private nonconforming use. In the case of section 9.12, B., 3., c., the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 18.2 of this ordinance, prior to termination of the nonconforming use.
Following their hearing, the board may allow the continuation of a nonconforming use provided it is determined that conditions exist that are not the result of actions taken by the operator of the nonconforming use.
a. Changing to a conforming use.
b. Abandonment.
c. Nonoperative or nonused for a period of twelve (12) or more consecutive calendar months.
d. Whenever the structure, in which the nonconforming use is operated, is damaged in any manner whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure as of the date of such damage of the structure in which the nonconforming use is operated.
e. Whenever the structure, in which the nonconforming use is operated, becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city and the cost of placing such structure exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure as of the date of the official order under the applicable ordinance.
f. Whenever said nonconforming use becomes illegal, a nuisance, or a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare.
g. Whenever said nonconforming use becomes the property of the city, or any other governmental entity.
4. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall apply to uses which become nonconforming due to zone changes which take place hereafter.
C. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein specified, any public or private nonconforming structure may be occupied, operated, and maintained in a state of good repair, but no nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or
Article IX General Regulations 9-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
extended unless the enlargement or extension can be, and is, made in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
2. TERMINATION: Any one of the following acts or conditions shall terminate, immediately, the right to operate a public or private nonconforming structure.
a. Changing to a conforming structure.
b. Abandonment.
c. Whenever the nonconforming structure is damaged in any manner whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure as of the date of such damage of the nonconforming structure.
d. Whenever the nonconforming structure becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city and the cost of placing such nonconforming structure in lawful compliance with the applicable ordinance exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such nonconforming structure as of the date of the official order under the applicable ordinance.
e. Whenever said nonconforming structure becomes a nuisance or a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare.
f. Whenever the city, or any other governmental entity, acquires title to said nonconforming structure or the land upon which it is located.
3. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall apply to uses which become nonconforming due to zone changes which take place hereafter.
D. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE: On any building devoted in whole, or in part, to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring, to a safe condition, of any building, structure, or part thereof, declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official, except for the conditions as stated in Section 9.12, B., 3., e.
E. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Article IX General Regulations 9-9
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein specified, any nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the effective date of this ordinance, provided, however, that no such sign shall be changed in any manner that increases the noncompliance of such sign with the provisions of this ordinance for the zone in which it is located.
2. TERMINATION: Any one of the following acts or conditions shall terminate, immediately, the right to operate or maintain a nonconforming sign.
a. Not meeting the time compliance requirement for sign regulations, as regulated in Section 14.1 of this ordinance.
b. Changing to a conforming sign.
c. Abandonment per Section 14.15, A., 9.
d. Nonoperative or nonuse of said nonconforming sign.
3. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall also apply to signs which become nonconforming due to zone changes which take place hereafter.
SECTION 9.13 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
A. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS
1. The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, flag poles, and aerials, stand pipes, other related structures, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, provided their construction is in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city, and is acceptable to the Federal Aviation Agency and the Federal Communication Commission.
B. AREA EXCEPTIONS: For the purpose of side yard regulations, the following dwellings with common party walls shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot: Two-family and Multi-family dwellings.
C. FRONT YARD VARIANCE
1. In any zone except the MX zones where the average depth of existing front yards within three hundred (300) feet of the lot in question and within the same block front, is greater than the minimum front yard depth prescribed elsewhere in this ordinance, the required minimum front yard depth on such lot shall be modified to be the average depth of said
Article IX General Regulations 9-10
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
existing front yards, provided, however, that the minimum depth of the front yard on any such lot shall not be greater than seventy-five (75) feet.
D. EXCEPTION TO AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS
1. Where existing or proposed developments within any multi - family (R-2a and R-2b) or commercial (SC, PO-1, PO-2, RP-1, HLC, and INST) Zone is to be subdivided, the minimum area and yard requirements may be less than required by this ordinance provided that:
a. The maximum density of the zone is not exceeded and/or the minimum site for the total development must not be less than that required by the respective zone;
b. A community association or other responsible entity is established prior to the approval by the planning commission of any subdivision of land. The "association" shall be obligated and empowered to own, operate, and maintain all common areas (as specifically identified on the submitted site plan required by item c. of this section) including such items as open space, recreational facilities, access drives, parking areas, pedestrian walkways, etc., and all facilities constructed thereon.
c. A site plan, as regulated by the applicable requirements of Section 9.19 of this ordinance, including the proposed area and yard requirements for the development, is submitted for review and approval by the planning commission.
2. In addition, the planning commission may waive the requirement that all lots abut a minimum frontage along a dedicated right-of-way provided that those lots that do not abut a dedicated right-of-way are assured an unencumbered and maintained accessway by the association to a dedicated right-of-way in accordance with Subsection 9.13, D., paragraph 1., b., above, of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.14 CONDITIONAL BUILDINGS AND USES
A. DETERMINATION: Subject to the requirements of Section 18.7, the board of adjustment may authorize a conditional building and use to be located within any zone in which the particular conditional use is permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance, if the evidence presented by the applicant is such as to establish, beyond any reasonable doubt:
Article IX General Regulations 9-11
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. That the proposed building and use at the particular location is necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general well-being of the neighborhood or the community;
2. That such building and use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity; and
3. That the proposed building and use will comply with any regulations and conditions specified in this ordinance for such building and use.
B. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS: In accordance with KRS 100.237, the board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide applications for conditional use permits to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which are specifically named herein which may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain conditions are met:
1. The board of adjustment may approve, modify, or deny any application for a conditional use permit. If it approves such permit, it may attach necessary conditions such as time limitations, requirements that one or more things be done before the request can be initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such conditions shall be recorded in the board's minutes and on the conditional use permit, along with a reference to the specific section in the zoning regulation listing the conditional use under consideration. In addition, a certificate of Land Use Restriction shall be filed pursuant to Section 9.31 of this ordinance. The board shall have the power to revoke conditional use permits, or variances for noncompliance with the condition thereof. Furthermore, the board shall have the right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at the cost of the violator and may have judgment in personam for such cost.
2. Granting of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with all of the requirements of this ordinance, the building code, housing code, and other regulations of the city.
3. In any case, where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within the limit set by the board, or within twelve (12) consecutive calendar months from date of issuance, such conditional use permit shall not revert to its original designation, unless there has been a public hearing. Exercised as set forth in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main building or other improvement has been let; or in the absence of contracts that the main building or other improvement is under construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment shall be under contract, in development,
Article IX General Regulations 9-12
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
or completed. When construction is not a part of the use, exercised shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions as set forth in the permit.
4. The zoning administrator shall review all conditional use permits, except those for which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at least once annually and shall have the power to inspect the land or structure where the conditional use is located in order to ascertain that the landowner is complying with all of the conditions which are listed on the conditional use permits.
If the landowner is not complying with all of the conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the zoning administrator shall report the fact in writing to the chairman of the board of adjustment. The report shall state specifically the manner in which the landowner is not complying with the conditions on the conditional use permit, and a copy of the report shall be furnished to the landowner at the same time it is furnished to the chairman of the board of adjustment.
The board shall hold a hearing on the report within a reasonable time, and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be furnished to the landowner at least one week prior to the hearing. If the board of adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report of the zoning administrator are true and that the landowner has taken no steps to comply with them between the date of the report and the date of the hearing, the board of adjustment may authorize the zoning administrator to revoke the conditional use permit and take the necessary legal action to cause the termination of the activity on the land which the conditional use permit authorizes.
5. Once the board of adjustment has completed a conditional use permit, and all the conditions required are of such type that they can be completely and permanently satisfied, the zoning administrator, upon request of the applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a determination that the conditions have been satisfied, and enter the facts which indicate that the conditions have been satisfied and the conclusion in the margin of the copy of the conditional use permit which is on file. Thereafter said use, if it continues to meet the other requirements of this ordinance, will be treated as a permitted use.
6. When an application is made for a conditional use permit for land located within or abutting any residential zoning district, written notice shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing on the application to the applicant, administrative official, an owner of every parcel of property adjoining the property to which the application applies,
Article IX General Regulations 9-13
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
and such other persons as this ordinance or board of adjustment bylaws shall direct. Written notice shall be by first class mail with certification by the board's secretary or other officer that the notice was mailed. It shall be the duty of the applicant to furnish to the board the name and address of an owner of each parcel of property as described in this subsection. Records maintained by the property valuation administrator may be relied upon conclusively to determine the identity and address of said owner. In the event such property is in condominium or cooperative forms of ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or chairperson of the owner group which administers property commonly owned by the condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be mailed to two or more co-owners of an adjoining property who are listed in the property valuation administrator's records as having the same address.
7. When any property within the required notification area for a public hearing upon a conditional use permit application is located within an adjoining city, county, or planning unit, notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, to certain public officials, as follows:
a. If the adjoining property is part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to that unit's commission; or
b. If the adjoining property is not part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to the mayor of the city in which the property is located or, if the property is in an unincorporated area, notice shall be given to the judge/executive of the county in which the property is located.
SECTION 9.15 BUILDING REGULATIONS: No structure shall be designed, erected, or altered except in accordance with the following regulations:
A. ALL ZONES
1. MINIMUM GROSS FLOOR AREA: No dwelling unit shall have a gross floor area as defined in Section 7.0 herein, of less than that required on table A-1, except minimum gross floor areas for dwelling units in the MX zones are defined in 10.16.3.I. Uses.
2. PUBLIC WATER AND SANITARY SEWERS: No building may be constructed in any zone unless such building is connected to a public water and centralized sanitary sewer system of adequate capacity and design, and approved by the proper authorities. Where existing buildings are presently unserved by a public sewer system, and are located within a reasonable distance, as determined by the city and/or the Northern
Article IX General Regulations 9-14
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Kentucky District Health Department, of an existing or newly extended sewer line, said building shall be required to connect with the public sewer system and the private sewer disposal system shall be prohibited.
SECTION 9.16 MOVE AND SET
A. No building, structure, or improvement shall be moved or set from or upon land located in any area or transported upon any public street, road, or highway in the city, until and unless both: (1) a building permit to move and set; and (2) a transport permit, have been obtained, and said building, structure, or improvement complies with the provisions of this section.
B. All buildings, structures, and improvements shall comply with the city's building code.
C. PROCEDURE:
PERMITS:
1. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit to move and set shall apply at the office of the building inspector requesting: (a) an inspection of the building, structure, or improvement to be moved and set; and (b) that an application for such permit be filed with the building inspector.
2. The applicant shall submit, with his application for said building permit, a plot plan, footing and foundation plan, and construction plans for any new construction. Said plans shall comply with the city's building code.
3. If the building, structure, or improvement is located in the city, all outstanding property taxes shall be paid and the applicant shall submit with his application a statement from the city treasurer, showing that all past and current taxes have been paid before any permit shall be issued.
4. Upon receipt of the foregoing items, the building inspector shall inspect said building, structure, or improvements, and the proposed location where same will be set within the city and determine if the proposed development complies with the building code.
5. The move and set shall be referred to the zoning administrator for approval or denial of compliance with this ordinance. No transport or building permit to move and set shall be issued for any building, structure, or improvement exceeding the dimensions as approved by the zoning administrator and building inspector.
Article IX General Regulations 9-15
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
6. Upon approval by the zoning administrator and building inspector, a building permit to move and set shall be issued. The city engineer shall then be notified of same and shall issue a transport permit. The city engineer or his agent will designate the route to be traveled. The transport permit is good only for the date specified on permits, except Saturday, Sunday, or holidays. The transport permit will not be issued if ninety (90) consecutive calendar days or more have lapsed from the date of inspection by the building inspector. The transport permit provided for in this section shall not be in lieu of any other permits which may be required by the city.
SECTION 9.17 LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of these regulations is to promote and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community through reduction of noise, air, and visual pollution, air temperature and headlight glare and to improve the aesthetic character of the community by improving the appearance of vehicular use areas and property adjoining public/private road rights-of-way and driveways, preserving existing trees, and requiring screening between land uses.
B. WHO PROVIDES LANDSCAPING: Landscaping required to fulfill these regulations shall be provided by the property owner. If an adjacent property has landscaping fulfilling perimeter landscaping requirements, the requirement for perimeter landscaping along the common boundary may be waived if deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
C. TYPES OF LANDSCAPING REQUIRED: Landscaping required per these regulations includes perimeter landscaping, vehicular use area (parking lot) or interior landscaping, and landscaping for screening of dumpsters.
D. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS TABLE: The Landscape Requirements Table (Table 9-1) contains landscape requirements for perimeter, vehicular use or interior landscaping per these regulations. Refer to 10.16 for additional landscaping required in the MX zones.
E. SITES AFFECTED: Landscaping as required in the Landscape Requirements Table (Table 9-1 ), shall be required as follows:
1. All new building development and construction or development requiring a zoning map amendment, except for single and two-family residential.
2. EXISTING DEVELOPED SITES:
a. New parking lot construction, including the expansion, moving or relocation of existing parking. This requirement shall only affect
Article IX General Regulations 9-16
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
those newly paved areas of five (5) spaces or larger, or any paved area larger than 1500 square feet. The number of parking spaces added shall also include any spaces added within one (1) calendar year prior to the building permit application for the new spaces. This requirement shall, in no instance, be deemed as retroactively affecting sites prior to the adoption of this amendment.
b. Substantial additions to an existing building - Substantial building additions will be defined per the criteria established below:
Where Existing Substantial Increase
Structure Is An Addition Of
0 - 1,000 sq. ft. 101% or greater
1,001 - 10,000 sq. ft. 40% or greater
10,001 - 25,000 sq. ft. 30% or greater
25,001 - 50,000 sq. ft. 20% or greater
50,001 sq. ft. and above 10% or greater
Perimeter landscaping is required between addition and adjoining land use or public/private street, per the landscape requirements table. See Figure 9-1 for additional information. If this does not involve new parking lot construction, interior (Vehicular Use Area) landscaping is not required.
c. When a land use changes to a different land use requiring the construction of additional parking.
F. PLANTING MANUAL AND LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS GUIDELINES: The legislative body shall have on file a manual that outlines recommended plant materials, illustrations of the landscape ordinance applications and minimum requirements for other landscape materials. This manual shall be used as a guideline to anyone preparing a landscape plan in order to meet the requirements of this Landscape Ordinance.
The Planting Manual and Landscape Regulation Guidelines include plant lists which can be used for reference purposes when selecting trees and shrubs to meet the requirements of these regulations. The lists are as follows:
PLANT LIST A: SHADE TREES (Mature height greater than 30 ft.)
PLANT LIST B: FLOWERING AND NON - FLOWERING TREES
(Mature height less than 30 ft. for use under power lines.)
PLANT LIST C: EVERGREEN/BROADLEAF TREES
Article IX General Regulations 9-17
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
PLANT LIST D: DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
PLANT LIST E: EVERGREEN/BROADLEAF SHRUBS
PLANT LIST F: STREET TREES
PLANT LIST G: UNACCEPTABLE SHRUBS AND TREES
Please note that with the exception of Plant List G, Unacceptable Plants, the Plant Lists included in the manual are only suggestions of use groups that have been successful in this region for urban landscaping. The choice of plant materials is not limited to those of the lists, but all plants and trees specified on landscape plans that are not included must have proven acceptability in this region. No shrubs and trees on Plant List G will be permitted.
G. MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
1. EASEMENTS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND SETBACKS: Landscaping must be placed in the required area between the property line and the front, rear and side yard setbacks, except as permitted herein. Required landscaping may be placed wholly or partially in utility or other easements providing all requirements can be fulfilled and approval is granted by the holder of the easements. Trees placed under overhead utility wires must be from List B. The rights-of-way of any public street may also be utilized for the required landscaping provided that approval is granted by the appropriate government. It must be noted that an Encroachment Permit shall be required from the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet to plant within state right-of-way. When rights-of-ways are used for required landscaping it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain said landscaping and to replace any required landscaping subsequently removed by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet or local legislative bodies.
2. SIGHT TRIANGLE: That area at street or drive intersections where all landscaping is prohibited, except ground covers and trees that are without limbs, with a ground clearance seven feet (see Figure 9-2).
3. JOINT DRIVEWAYS: If two properties share a driveway or vehicular use area and have a written reciprocal access agreement, no vehicular use area screening shall be required along the paved portion of the common boundary. Interior landscape shall be required on the property submitting plans.
Article IX General Regulations 9-18
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
4. DUMPSTERS: Shall be screened on at least three (3) sides according to Table 9-2.
When dumpsters located less than ten (10) feet from an unwindowed portion of a building on the same property, landscape screening may be waived by the Zoning Administrator for the side of the dumpster facing that building wall. Fencing shall be required on that side.
5. CONFLICTS IN REQUIREMENTS: When an activity or land use falls under more than one of the categories listed in the table, the most stringent of the requirements shall be applied.
H. LANDSCAPE MATERIALS
1. WALLS AND FENCES: When walls or fences are used to fulfill screening requirements, they shall be indicated on the landscape plan. They are to be of weather-proof materials. This includes the use of synthetic or other construction materials or pressure treated lumber or painting of lumber if it is not redwood or cedar and using aluminum or galvanized hardware. Chain link fences with wood or synthetic slat material shall not be used to meet the requirements of these regulations.
2. PLANTS AND TREES: All plants are to be healthy and part of the acceptable plants listed in the Planting Manual. All plants must be replaced if they die. A plant manual should be obtained from the legislative body that outlines recommended plant material.
a. Quality: Plant materials used in conformance with provision of this ordinance shall comply with the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60. 1-1990, or most current edition) as prepared and published by the American Association of Nurserymen which is on file at the City Hall. In addition all plant materials shall have passed any inspection required under state and/or local regulations.
b. Deciduous Trees (trees which normally shed their leaves in the fall): Shall be species having an average mature crown spread of greater than fifteen (15) feet in Kenton County and having trunk(s) which can be maintained with a minimum of seven (7) feet of clear wood in areas which have visibility requirements. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by a grouping of the same so as to create the equivalent of a fifteen (15) foot crown spread. A minimum of six to eight (6-8) feet overall height or a minimum caliper (trunk diameter, measured by 6 inches above ground for trees up to 4 inches caliper) of at least 1 1/2 inch immediately after planting shall be
Article IX General Regulations 9-19
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
required. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than fifteen (15) feet from such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior container dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep and for which the construction requirements shall be four (4) inches thick reinforced concrete.
c. Evergreen Trees: Shall be a minimum of five (5) feet high with a minimum caliper of 1-1/2 inches immediately after planting.
d. Shrubs and Hedges: Shall be at least 15" - 20" in average height when installed. All plants shall conform to opacity, mature height, and other requirements within four (4) years after the date of the final approval of each planting or replanting. Privet, Ligustrum species cannot meet the opacity requirements and may not be used to satisfy the requirements of this Article. The height of the planting shall be measured from the level of the surface of the vehicular use area at the edge closest to the screening.
e. Grass or Ground Cover: Grass of the fescus (Gramineak) or Bluegrass (Poaceae) family shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Kenton County, and may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, where solid sod, erosion reducing net, or suitable mulch shall be used, nurse-grass seed shall be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage otherwise is achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Ground cover shall be planted not more than 15 inches on center and in such a manner as to present and have 75% of complete coverage after two complete growing seasons.
3. EARTH MOUNDS: Earth mounds shall be constructed with slopes which allow easy maintenance of grass or other ground cover. Differences in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute an earth mound.
4. MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION: All landscaping materials shall be installed according to accepted planting procedures (see Planting Manual). The Owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued property maintenance of all landscaping materials, including existing trees, and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one year, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first; while other defective landscape material shall be replaced or repaired
Article IX General Regulations 9-20
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
within three months. Topping trees or cutting of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy shall not be considered proper for the maintenance of trees as required by this Article. Tree pruning cuts shall be made sufficiently close to the trunk or parent limb without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub so that closure can readily start under normal conditions. All branches that are so heavy as to cause bark splitting or peeling are to be precut. Violation of these installation and maintenance provisions shall be grounds for the legislative body to refuse a building occupancy permit, require replacement of the landscape material or institute legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this Article.
I. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. LANDSCAPE PLAN CONTENT: The landscape plan shall be drawn to a scale no smaller than 1" = 100'-0" and shall include: all property lines; a north arrow; a scale; all easements; all existing and proposed structures and their uses; dumpsters; all vehicular use areas, labeled as to size and number of parking spaces; the names and addresses of the owners and plan preparers; and either topographic contour or spot elevations where elevation changes occur in areas to be landscaped.
2. TREE PROTECTION PLAN: Identify all trees within the disturbed limits that are to be preserved and are to be part of the required landscaping. Such trees shall be protected during the construction phase, per guidelines in the Planting Manual and Landscape Ordinance Guidelines, Section ll, C.
3. BUILDING OR ZONING PERMIT: A building or zoning permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plans have been approved.
4. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued even though the required landscaping has not yet been installed. A final Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless either:
a. All landscaping has been installed and accepted by the Building or Zoning Inspector, or
b. A full cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit (on an approved bank), or other form of acceptable surety has been posted in an amount equal to the cost of contracting the purchase and installation of the landscaping, plus 10%.
Article IX General Regulations 9-21
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
The owner shall have up to six (6) months, as determined by the Zoning Administrator to install the required landscaping. If, after the established time frame, the landscaping is not installed, the legislative body will contract the landscaping using the posted bond. Two one month extensions of the bond may be allowed beyond the established time if it is determined that planting will be detrimental to the plant material.
J. PLANTING ADJUSTMENTS
1. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant a waiver of any of the requirements in this section upon receipt of a written request which outlines the rationale for the planting adjustment. The Zoning Administrator shall review each written request and grant a waiver only: (1) under unusual or extreme circumstances which cause an unreasonable hardship such as the size of the lot; (2) when an innovative or alternative approach can be made which still meets the intent and purpose of this section; or (3) when the requirements of this section are impractical or unreasonable because of the existence of conditions specified in subsection J., 4. Of this section. All decisions made by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to this ordinance and Kentucky Revised Statutes.
2. PLANTING ADJUSTMENTS: If the property owner wishes to request a planting adjustment of the Landscape Requirements of this article, an application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
3. REVIEWING ADJUSTMENT REQUESTS: The Zoning Administrator or the planning commission, in its review of requests for adjustments, shall in making its decision consider all of the following criteria:
a. The need for the adjustment is due to circumstances typical of the land in the general vicinity of the site or in the same zone.
b. The strict application of the Landscape Ordinance would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land or create an unnecessary hardship.
c. Circumstances necessitating an adjustment are not the result of an action by the applicant subsequent to the passage of the Landscape Ordinance.
d. Adherence to the Landscape Ordinance will adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the public or will adversely alter the general character of the general vicinity.
Article IX General Regulations 9-22
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
e. When an innovative or alternative approach can be made which still meets the intent and purpose of this section.
f. The existence of significant grade separations between adjoining developments or properties.
g. The horizontal distance between the proposed development and the adjoining property.
h. The existence of natural features (water bodies, tree lines, creeks or streams) that are proposed to be maintained.
i. The different land use intensities that can be found within the same land use categories (i.e., a small single tenant office use or a 24 hour gasoline/convenience store can both be developed in a commercial zone).
Article IX General Regulations 9-23
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-24
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-25
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-26
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-27
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-28
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-29
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-30
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-31
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
* Includes dumpsters, compactors, and all other solid or other waste containers, excluding recycling containers.
** If a dumpster is oriented towards a street or toward the nearest perimeter of the site, and can be seen from the street or adjoining property, that side must also be screened.
Article IX General Regulations 9-32
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE 9-3
RECYCLING CONTAINER SCREENING TABLE*
CLASS 1
CLASS 2
CLASS 3
CONTENTS
Paper and cardboard
Paper, cardboard, plastic and glass
Metal containers
ENCLOSURE
None required, but container must be painted similar color as adjoining wall
Same as dumpster enclosure requirements
Same as dumpster enclosure requirements
LABELING
Two prominent recycle logos and description of acceptable recycling material
Two prominent recycle logos and description of acceptable recycling material
Two prominent recycle logos and description of acceptable recycling material
LOCATION
Only in rear of building adjacent to and within five feet of the structure, and structure must be two times the height of top of container, not visible from public street and meet all building setback requirements. Must not occupy any required parking spaces.
Only in rear of building adjacent to and within five feet of the structure, and structure must be two times the height of top of container, not visible from public street and meet all building setback requirements. Must not occupy any required parking spaces.
Only in rear of building adjacent to and within five feet of the structure, and structure must be two times the height of top of container, not visible from public street and meet all building setback requirements. Must not occupy any required parking spaces.
MULTIPLE UNITS
Containers within 150 feet should be grouped together, one container per 35,000 gross square feet of primary use
Grouped within same enclosure or separately enclosed
Grouped within same enclosure or separately enclosed
SIZE
Each container cannot exceed 8 cubic yards and must have a secure lid. Larger containers must meet the dumpster screening requirements found in Table 9-2.
Each container cannot exceed 8 cubic yards and must have a secure lid. Larger containers must meet the dumpster screening requirements found in Table 9-2.
Each container cannot exceed 8 cubic yards and must have a secure lid. Larger containers must meet the dumpster screening requirements found in Table 9-2.
PERMIT
Required for all new recycling containers
Required for all new recycling containers
Required for all new recycling containers
SCREENING
None required individually, however, a maximum of 8 total non-screened units allowed per property.
Same as dumpster or effectively screen sides of container with plants from Plant List C,D, or E.
Same as dumpster screening requirements
ZONE
PO-1, PO-2, SC, IP, INST, RP-1
PO-1, PO-2, SC, IP, INST, RP-1, and R-2b
PO-1, PO-2, SC, IP, INST, RP-1, and R-2b
* Excludes single family recycling bins.
Article IX General Regulations 9-33
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
SECTION 9.18 SWIMMING POOLS AND OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT BUILDINGS
A. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS: All private swimming pools shall be regulated according to the following requirements:
1. Swimming pools shall be permitted to be located only to the rear of the principal permitted dwelling or dwellings
2. Except as herein provided, no swimming pool, including the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool shall be permitted within the limits of any public utility right-of-way easement..
3. Swimming pools which are constructed in-ground shall be required to have a fence or wall, including a self-closing or self-latching door or gate around the pool or the property on which the pool is located, of at least four (4) feet in height, but not exceeding six (6) feet (only classes 1, 3, 4, or 5 are permitted, as regulated in Article XIII of this ordinance) and of such construction that a small child may not reach the pool from the street or any adjacent property without climbing a fence or wall or opening a gate or door.
4. Swimming pools which are located above-ground shall be required to have a fence or wall, including a self-closing or self-latching door or gate around the pool or property upon which the pool is located of at least four (4) feet in height, but not exceeding six (6) feet (only classes 1, 3, 4, and 5 are permitted, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance) and of such construction that a small child may not reach the pool from the street or any adjacent property without scaling a fence or wall or opening a gate or door. Said wall may be the wall of the above-ground pool, providing, however, that said wall is at least four (4) feet in height above the surrounding ground level.
In addition, any access to above ground pools by means of a ladder or stairway, said ladder or stairway shall be provided with a self-closing or self-latching door or gate, or some other device that would prevent a small child from gaining access to the pool by means of a ladder or stairway.
5. Glare from flood lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area for night bathing shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
6. All swimming pools, including apparatus and equipment pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool, shall be constructed and erected in accordance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations of the
Article IX General Regulations 9-34
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
City. Any water used in the operation of a swimming pool, other than from a public source, shall be approved by the appropriate Health Department.
7. All swimming pools existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance which are unprotected by a surrounding fence or wall, including gates or doors, as regulated by Subsection A., 3., A., 4., A., 5., and A., 6., of this Section of the Ordinance, shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Section on the effective date of this Ordinance.
8. Where an in - ground or above - ground pool is constructed, fences at a maximum height of 6 feet may be erected within the rear yard by an adjoining property owner, provided the fence is erected in such a manner that it extends along the fence of the pool side only.
B. PUBLIC, SEMI - PUBLIC, AND COMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOLS: All public, semi - public, and commercial swimming pools shall be regulated according to the following requirements:
1. Except as herein provided, no swimming pool, including the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool shall be permitted within any required yards of the lot or within the limits of any public utility right - of - way easement.
2. The swimming pool, or the property on which the pool is located, shall be surrounded by a fence or wall (only classes 1, 3, 4, and 5 are permitted, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance) at least five (5) feet in height, but not exceeding the height as permitted herein, and of such construction that a small child may not reach the pool from the street or from adjacent property without opening a door or gate or scaling a wall or fence.
3. Glare from flood lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area for night bathing shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
4. All swimming pools including the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool shall be constructed and erected in accordance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations of the city. Any water used in the operation of the swimming pool, other than from a public source, shall be approved by the appropriate health department.
5. No mechanical and/or electrical device for the reproduction or amplification of sounds used in connection with swimming pools shall create a nuisance to adjacent residential properties through the emission of noises, voices, or music.
Article IX General Regulations 9-35
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
6. This section and its subsections shall not apply to swimming pools which are located more than two hundred (200) feet from an existing property line.
C. OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT BUILDINGS
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for an unobtrusive rear-yard accessory structures providing outdoor entertainment space for the primary building in residential zones. Permitted Outdoor Entertainment Buildings shall be subordinate to and not detracting from the main structure, and be harmonious with the architecture of the principal building. Outdoor Entertainment Buildings are not intended as separate living quarters.
2. Limitations/Standards. Outdoor Entertainment Buildings which are incidental to other uses permitted in the residential zone may be placed or constructed in the following residential zones, R-1Bc, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E, and R-PUD, provided that all requirements for such buildings as set below are met.
a. Application. An application must be submitted to the City prior to construction or installation of an Outdoor Entertainment Building. Building and zoning application processes are applicable per Section 16.1 and 16.2. Each application for approval of an accessory building shall be accompanied by:
i. Building plans, elevations and cross section drawings in an accurate scale, with detail sufficient to determine height, dimensions, and materials and colors for exterior walls and roofs.
ii. A site plan, showing property location, lot setbacks and proposed location of the accessory building, and identify neighboring properties.
iii. Any other information that may be needed to show compliance with this section.
b. Approval. Approval for installation of an Outdoor Entertainment Building must be obtained by:
i. Review by the Crestview Hills Architectural Review Board for all structures greater than two hundred (200) square feet to ensure proposed structure is compatible with the principal structure on the property.
ii. Review by the Crestview Hills Zoning Administrator for all structures not requiring approval by the Architectural Review
Article IX General Regulations 9-36
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Board to ensure all setback and other restrictions are met for accessory structures.
iii. Review by the Building and Zoning Departments for all structures per Section 16.1 and 16.2.
3. Number of Buildings Allowed. Only one Outdoor Entertainment Building shall be allowed on each individual parcel, except when the parcel exceeds ten acres in size. On parcels larger than ten acres, two accessory structures shall be allowed, provided the size of the two structures does not exceed the maximum allowable size either individually or collectively.
4. Maximize Size of Building. An Outdoor Entertainment Building may occupy a footprint up to ten percent of the total size of the rear yard (see Article VII, Section 7.0) of the property, not to exceed six hundred (600) square feet or gross floor area of the principal structure.
5. Maximize Height of Building. No Outdoor Entertainment Building shall exceed a height of fourteen (14) feet, measured from the lowest ground level of the structure to the highest point of the roof; notwithstanding the height of the principal structure.
6. Location of Building. No Outdoor Entertainment Building shall be erected in any front yard. For parcels of less than ten acres, structures may only be erected in rear yards. For parcels over ten acres, building(s) may be located in the side and rear yards. All buildings shall be setback at least 25 feet from the side property line and 10 feet from the rear property line. This distance includes all eaves, overhangs, and attachments to the structure. No building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the primary structure.
7. Exterior Materials, Colors, and Roof Pitch. As a condition of approval of an Outdoor Entertainment Building, the Crestview Hills Architectural Review Board shall consider whether the proposed building’s exterior color, type of building materials, and roof pitch are compatible with the principal structure.
8. Landscaping. The Zoning Administrator may establish reasonable requirements for the installation and maintenance of landscaping improvements as a condition of approval for an Outdoor Entertainment Building in order to protect the existing character of the surrounding neighborhood. The owner of the property who fails to install or maintain the required landscaping improvements established, as a condition of approval of an Outdoor Entertainment Building shall be in violation of this section.
Article IX General Regulations 9-37
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
9. Construction or Installation Without Prior Approval. Any property owner who initiates construction or installation of an Outdoor Entertainment Building without required approvals and permits shall be subject to all penalties and costs under applicable building codes and penalties set forth in this Section.
10. Lawful Non-Conforming Outdoor Entertainment Buildings. An Outdoor Entertainment Building which pre-dates the adoption of this section shall be considered lawful if it complied with all laws and regulations in effect at the time of construction.
11. Penalties. Outdoor Entertainment Buildings that are initiated or expanded, or are used as separate living quarters without approvals required in this Section are in violation of this ordinance and are subject to the enforcement procedures in Article XVI.
SECTION 9.19 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel in zones where a site plan is required, except in accordance with the regulations of this section and an approved site plan as hereinafter required. Before a permit is issued for construction, one (1) copy of the site plan of the area at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet, shall be filed with the building inspector and the zoning administrator. The site plan shall identify and locate, where applicable, the following.
A. Total area in development project including legal description.
B. Present zoning of property in question and adjacent properties.
C. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on and adjacent to the property which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated, or abandoned.
D. Existing topography with a maximum of two foot contour intervals. Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2) percent, either one foot contours or spot elevations, where necessary, but not more than fifty (50) feet apart in both directions.
E. The proposed finished grade of the development area, shown by contours with intervals not larger than two (2) feet, supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
F. The location of every existing and proposed building in the described parcel or parcels, the use or uses to be contained therein, the number of buildings including dimensions and height, the gross floor area and number of floors.
Article IX General Regulations 9-38
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
G. Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas including number of spaces, angle of stalls, grades, and illumination facilities.
H. All walks, malls, and other open areas.
I. Location of all walls, fences, and screen plantings.
J. Location, size, height, and orientation of all signs.
K. Types of surfacing proposed on the various off-street parking and driveways including cross sections and drainage plans.
L. Location of all existing and proposed streets, highways, and alleys.
M. All existing and proposed water, storm, and sanitary sewer lines, indicating pipe sizes, types, and grades.
N. A drainage plan of the area showing size and location of each existing and proposed structure. The approximate volume of water generated by development of the subject area and the proposed method of disposing of said water. Provisions shall be included for adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction.
O. Identification of soil types on the subject property indicating soil problems and proposed method of handling soil problems.
P. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
1. Residential areas, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit.
2. Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority.
3. Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership with a preliminary statement indicating how maintenance of the latter will be handled.
4. The construction of non-residential buildings, in order of priority.
Q. Such other information with regard to the development area as may be required by the city, or its duly authorized representative, to determine conformance with this ordinance.
Article IX General Regulations 9-39
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Where development is proposed on a parcel of land that is a part of a larger tract of land which is under one ownership, the developer shall be required to submit a site plan for the entire property under said ownership, unless specifically waived by the city. The site plan shall also indicate, however applicable, how the proposed development will tie into adjacent properties not under said ownership.
All such site plans shall be reviewed by the city, or its duly authorized representative, and the factual determination approving or rejecting such plans shall be made in accordance with requirements of this or other applicable sections of this ordinance, and the comprehensive plan for the city.
All site plans approved shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors, and assigns, and shall limit the development to all conditions and limitations established in such plans.
Amendments to plans may be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approve.
After final approval, the subject area may be developed in stages, provided all of the procedures required by the city, or its duly authorized representative, have been complied with.
SECTION 9.20 REGULATIONS CONCERNING AIR RIGHTS: Any proposed use of air rights, as defined herein, shall be in the form of a site plan (as regulated in Section 9.19 of this ordinance) submitted to the city, or its duly authorized representative, for its review.
SECTION 9.21 REGULATIONS CONCERNING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS: Any proposed development or modifications to existing development requiring the construction or reconstruction of streets (including curb and gutters), sidewalks, sewers (sanitary and storm), water lines, or other improvements, which does not constitute a subdivision, as herein defined, shall be required to be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable articles and sections of the city's Subdivision Regulations.
SECTION 9.22 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO PARKING OR STORING OF TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, CAMPERS, INOPERABLE VEHICLES, AND OTHER SUCH TYPE EQUIPMENT
A. No motor vehicle which is inoperable shall be stored on any lot in any zone or parcel of ground unless it is in a completely enclosed building. Parking shall be
Article IX General Regulations 9-40
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
limited to the number of operable vehicles regularly used by members of a resident family and their guests.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to live in any boat, automobile, camper, mobile home, or truck, within the limits of the city, except mobile homes may be permitted when located in a RMHP Zone (mobile home park).
C. Outside storage of any trailer, R-V, mobile home, camper, boat, or other such type equipment, within any place or location in the city, shall be regulated as follows. In no case shall more than one of the previously mentioned vehicles or similar type equipment be permitted outside of an enclosed building on any lot.
1. Such equipment of 18 feet or less in length may be stored outside in the rear yards of residential districts with side and rear yard setbacks being maintained. In cases which do not allow use of the rear yard, such as: (a) special circumstances which do not generally apply to land in the general vicinity; and (b) the strict application of the zoning regulation would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land or would create an unnecessary hardship on the applicant, the zoning administrator may permit such storage in another part of the lot excluding the front yard.
2. The storing of said equipment outside must be on a hard surface, such as asphalt or concrete.
3. Such equipment greater than 18 feet in length may be stored within an enclosed garage, or in the rear yard as approved by the zoning administrator for appropriate location and screening from adjacent properties.
4. Storage of a trailer, R-V, mobile home, camper, boat or other such recreational type equipment may be permitted on hard surfaced driveways during the period from June 1 through the following September 1 for no more than 14 days, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The required off-street parking spaces are available in addition to the space used for the recreational equipment.
b. The stored recreational vehicles shall not extend over any property or right-of-way line.
5. No storage of recreational vehicles, campers, and/or boats on trailers is permitted within driveways in the front or side yards during the period from September 2 through the following May 31 of the next year.
SECTION 9.23 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
Article IX General Regulations 9-41
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
A. This section is designed to ensure, when development is proposed in those areas of the community which have physical characteristics limiting development (hillside slopes of 20 percent or greater), that said development shall occur in a manner harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of drainage, erosion, earth movement, and other natural hazards.
B. Areas of land on which development is physically restricted due to excessive hillside slopes shall be limited according to the following requirements, notwithstanding any other section of this or any other ordinance adopted by the city:
1. All land areas located within the city and identified on that portion of the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan, as it pertains to the city of Crestview Hills, as "Developmentally Sensitive Areas", and any other areas which have slopes of 20 percent or greater, shall require approval before development may occur. In those areas which are identified in the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan as "Developmentally Sensitive Areas", and containing slopes less than 20 percent, the requirements contained herein may be waived; if, after review of the proposed site plan by the city engineer, it is determined that said development will not result in any significant hillside slippage or soil erosion.
2. No excavation, removal, or placement of any soil, foundation placement, or construction of buildings or structures of any nature within the area identified as a Developmentally Sensitive Area in (1) above, may occur until plans and specifications for such work have been submitted in the form of a site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance. In addition to site plan requirements, the following shall also be submitted:
a. Plan(s) which show existing topography and the proposed physical changes necessary for construction, indicating grading (cutting and filling), compaction, erosion ponds, areas to be defoliated, and any other pertinent information which will change the natural physical features of the site or general area.
b. Subsurface investigation of the area under consideration, including test borings, laboratory tests, and engineering analysis should be made by a qualified, registered professional engineer, indicating that the building and physical changes proposed in the area will be completed in a manner which will minimize hillside slippage and/or soil erosion.
3. The site plan and other information required in Section 9.23, B., 2., of this section of the ordinance, shall be reviewed by the city engineer who will
Article IX General Regulations 9-42
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
recommend to the city, or its duly authorized representative, what effect the proposed development will have on hillside slippage and soil erosion.
After consideration of the recommendations of the city engineer, the city, or its duly authorized representative, may grant a permit for use of the site in accordance with the submitted plans.
4. If, after review of the plans required by this section of the ordinance, the city, or its duly authorized representative, determines that said proposed plans will not minimize hillside slippage, the city shall deny a permit for the development of said land, and the site shall be limited to those open type uses, excluding structures, as permitted or conditionally permitted in the Conservation Zone.
SECTION 9.24 LAND USED FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: Pursuant to KRS 100, any land which is used for agricultural purposes (exclusive of land and building used for residences), shall have no regulations, except that:
A. Setback lines shall be required for the protection of existing and proposed streets and highways, as required for the zone in which the use is located;
B. That all buildings or structures in a designated floodway or floodplain or which tend to increase flood heights or obstruct the flow of flood waters shall be in accordance with this ordinance; and
C. All dwellings to be constructed or provided as part of the land used for agricultural purposes shall meet all requirements of the zone in which said use is located and all other requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.25 FILING OF CERTIFICATE OF LAND USE RESTRICTIONS
A. FILING OF CERTIFICATES OF LAND USE RESTRICTIONS: A "Certificate Of land Use Restriction" shall be filed in the office of the county clerk by the planning commission, legislative body, and/or board of adjustment, whichever body(s) impose(s) and land use restrictions according to the provisions of KRS 100.3681 to 100.3684. A $10.50 fee for recording such filing shall be collected by the body imposing the restriction. This fee shall be paid over to the county clerk. An additional fee, not to exceed $10.50, may be imposed by the body imposing the restriction for costs of completing and filing the certificate.
SECTION 9.26 REGULATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
A. The Fiscal Court of Kenton County, after consultation among the mayors, councils, commissioners and staffs of the municipalities and the county within the
Article IX General Regulations 9-43
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
County, found that a substantial need exists to revise significantly the ordinances regarding sexually oriented businesses within Kenton County.
B. The Fiscal Court, in association with Planning and Development Services of Kenton County and the Fiscal Court of adjacent Campbell County its cities in the Northern Kentucky Community, retained Duncan Associates to conduct a study of existing sexually oriented uses and related businesses in Kenton and Campbell Counties, which is part of a single, larger community.
C. Duncan Associates assigned two nationally-known planners, Eric Damian Kelly, FAICP and Connie B. Cooper, FAICP, to conduct that study
D. Kelly and Cooper have completed that study, including the following elements:
1. Field study, involving visits to all identified existing sexually oriented businesses in Kenton and Campbell Counties;
2. Meetings with stakeholder groups involved in these businesses;
3. Consultation with the Kenton County, Campbell County Attorney, and the city attorneys for certain cities, and the community at large on this issue;
4. Consultation with the professional staff of Planning and Development Services of Kenton County on this issue;
5. Review of studies and litigation concerning sexually oriented businesses in other communities;
6. Investigation of regulatory approaches to massage therapy;
7. Review of existing ordinances in Kenton and Campbell Counties;
8. Review of similar ordinances in a number of communities outside the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
9. Review of Kentucky statutes related to regulating sexually oriented businesses.
E. Duncan Associates has summarized this work and presented recommendations to Planning and Development Services of Kenton County and Kenton and Campbell Counties and their cities in an August 2003 report entitled “Site Visit Analysis: Sexually Oriented and Related Businesses in Kenton and Campbell Counties” (hereinafter called simply the “Kelly and Cooper Study”).
F. That study has also been made available to the legislative bodies of Kenton and Campbell Counties for their consideration and use.
G. That study has been accepted and used by the Fiscal Court of Kenton County in adopting the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, as amended, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus in 2004.
Article IX General Regulations 9-44
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
H. The United States Supreme Court in City of Renton v. Playtime Theater, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), held that local governments may rely upon the experiences of other cities as well as on its own studies in enacting local legislation to regulate sexually oriented businesses;
I. The United States Supreme Court in Renton and other cases has held that a local government may regulate such uses through content-neutral, time, place, and manner restrictions, so long as said regulations are designed to serve the government interest and do not unreasonably omit avenues of communication, and are aimed not at the content of protected speech within said establishments but rather at the secondary effects of said establishments on the surrounding communities.
J. The study by Kelly and Cooper found extensive physical interaction between patrons and dancers at many of the establishments in both Kenton and Campbell Counties.
K. Covington, the only municipality in Kenton County that has had sexually oriented businesses within its border, from January 1, 2002, to February 11, 2004, the police made a total of 469 calls to sexually oriented businesses in the city. The crimes committed at these establishments during this time period included robbery, assault, fraud, malicious mischief, public intoxication, and possession of illegal drugs. In addition, on June 13, 2003, Covington police arrested three individuals for prostitution-related charges at Liberty's Show Lounge, a sexually oriented cabaret in the city.
L. As the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals noted in a decision addressing issues related to the Adult Entertainment ordinance in the City of Newport (Campbell County), there is a long history underlying efforts to regulate sex businesses in Northern Kentucky:
Defendant City of Newport ("City" or "Newport") long ago gained a reputation as home to a veritable smorgasbord of vice, attracting patrons from across the nation. For decades, the small city was considered the Midwest's answer to Las Vegas, and leaders of organized crime were said to operate its gambling casinos and nightclubs.
In the 1960's, public pressure began to demand that Newport be cleaned up. This pressure has continued until the present, with varying degrees of success.
A 1986 report generated by the Newport Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator indicated that of 28 adult bars opened since 1978 (including successive bars at the same site), 21 had had at least one prostitution-related conviction, and 18 had had multiple convictions. Def. Ex. K, p. 2. The report explained that "all of the prostitution in businesses with adult entertainment
Article IX General Regulations 9-45
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
involved an alcoholic beverage as the median [sic] of exchange and the solicitation of such drinks by 'mixers.'" Id. In all, 98% of prostitution arrests in Newport occurred in the vicinity of these bars. Id. Adult entertainment establishments, which constituted 12% of all businesses serving alcohol, accounted for 17% of all police runs. Def. Ex. K, p. 21.
A later review, conducted in 1990 by the Newport License Inspector, documented the continued prostitution arrests occurring at several adult dancing establishments. Def. Ex. G. Moreover, the City determined that over $ 70,000 was expended in 1990 to target, patrol and prosecute the illicit behavior occurring in and around the bars. Def. Ex. H.
Several of Newport's citizens, merchants and church groups also opposed the presence of the semi-nude dancing clubs. These groups generally believed that the adult entertainment clubs were "clouds over [the] neighborhood that keep [it] from growing in the [right] direction." See Def. Ex. I (letter to Mayor from Taylors Landing Business District). Complaints commonly expressed were that the seamy establishments deterred other merchants from locating in Newport's business district, deterred shoppers, served a poor example for the City's youth, and generally tarnished the City's image. Id.
Bright Lights, Inc., v. City of Newport, 830 F. Supp. 378, 380-81 (E. D. Ky. 1993).
Based on those findings, the court went on to hold in relevant part:
Having considered the matter carefully, the court concludes that some leeway must be afforded the reform efforts of the City Council of Newport. This body has been elected by the citizens to attempt to "clean up the image" of the City.
To do this, it must overcome the sleazy impression of Newport and Northern Kentucky that survives from "the heyday" when things ran wide open; reform candidates were literally drugged and framed for morals offenses by public officials and police officers; the members of reform citizens groups were vilified and harassed; and a "liberal" in local parlance was a person favoring the continued open and notorious violation of the gambling and morals laws.
To illustrate that the Council's perception of a need to clean up the image of the City is not paranoid, the court notes the following statements in a national magazine's satirical Chapter on Newport's big sister, the city of Cincinnati.
"The city's streets fairly shine; the odd litterer draws a scornful stare. Wide avenues, bosky side streets, the most inviting of thoroughfares. And clean. So clean. No X-rated movie theaters, no adult-book stores, no bare-breasted night joints soil these streets, all of them long ago jettisoned over to the Kentucky side of the river."
Article IX General Regulations 9-46
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Peter Richmond, “Town Without Pity,” Gentlemen's Quarterly, July 1993, at 102, 104.
This court holds that the City of Newport has the right to secede as Cincinnati's combat zone.
The court holds that the City has "an important and substantial governmental interest" in advancing these reform goals, which interest is furthered by the ordinances in question. Barnes, 111 S. Ct. at 2461. The court further finds and holds that in the case of the City of Newport, given its unique history, the ordinances' "incidental restriction on alleged First Amendment freedoms is no greater than is essential to the furtherance of that interest." Id. (quoting O'Brien, 391 U.S. at 376-77, 88 S. Ct. at 1678-79).
Newport's image affects that of all of Northern Kentucky, a community of nearly 300,000 people. That City and its community have the right to project a progressive and decent image. The nudity ordinances contribute to the enhancement of this interest and will be upheld. 830 F.Supp. at 384;
M. The Supreme Court had earlier noted in upholding another regulation in Newport, “it is plain that, as in Bellanca, the interest in maintaining order outweighs the interest in free expression by dancing nude.” Newport v. Iacobucci, 479 U.S. 92, 97, 93 L. Ed. 2d 334, 340, 107 S. Ct. 383, 386 (1986). Although the significance of the opinion itself is now questionable (see J&B Social Club # 1 v. City of Mobile, 966 F. Supp. 1131, 1135 (S.D. Ala. 1996)), the quoted part of the opinion stands unchallenged.
N. The cities of Covington and Newport continue their efforts to improve their image. Since 1985, Covington has redeveloped its riverfront, creating several new office towers, high-end condominiums, hotels, and a convention center. In Newport, in conjunction with private development and Southbank Partners, Inc., the City has built a major entertainment center along the river. This initiative has promoted improved pedestrian and transit connections in Northern Kentucky’s river cities to and from the stadiums and other attractions along the Cincinnati riverfront.
O. Despite these efforts, the areas of downtown Covington and Newport away from the riverfront continue to suffer in many ways. The study by Kelly and Cooper found in the area near to existing sexually oriented uses a number of building vacancies and building maintenance falling far short of that found in the revitalized areas near the river.
P. The City of Crestview Hills respects the Constitutional rights of its citizens, including the right to present certain types of entertainment that may not appeal to the entire population. Through this ordinance, it is the desire of the City of
Article IX General Regulations 9-47
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Crestview Hills to balance the Constitutional rights of businesses that present sexually oriented entertainment with the City of Crestview Hills interests in ensuring that this community not suffer from the same sorts of adverse effects that Covington and Newport have long suffered.
Q. From long experience in Covington and Newport, as well as from the following studies and others not listed, the City of Crestview Hills also finds that such businesses may have primary and secondary effects involving crimes related to the activities in the establishments, of which prostitution and crimes of violence are those of greatest concern. See for example:
1. “Final Report to the City of Garden Grove: The Relationship between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard,” Richard W. McCleary, Ph.D., James W. Meeker, J.D., Ph.D., October 23, 1991.
2. “Survey of Appraisers: Fort Worth and Dallas – Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property Values,” Duncan Associates, Eric Damian Kelly, FAICP, and Connie B. Cooper, FAICP, September 2004.
3. “Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis, An Analysis,” 1984.
4. “Adult Business Study,” by City of Phoenix Planning Department, May 25, 1979.
5. “Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul,” June 1978, City of Saint Paul Division of Planning, Department of Planning and Management; and Community Crime Prevention Project, Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board.
6. “Staff Report, Whittier City Planning Commission; Subject: Adult Business Regulations,” July 11, 1994.
7. “Adult Entertainment Study,” Department of City Planning, City of New York, Second Printing, November 1994.
8. “Adult Use Study,” Newport News Department of Planning and Development, March 1996.
9. “A Report on the Secondary Impact of Adult Use Businesses in the City of Denver,” prepared by multiple city departments for Denver City Council, January 1998.
10. “Survey of Appraisers in Monroe County, New York,” Summer 2000. For detailed results of the survey, see Kelly and Cooper, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Regulating Sex Businesses, Planning Advisory Service Report No. 495-96. Chicago: American Planning Association, 2000; pages 51-57.
11. The Tucson “study” consisting of two memos: one from the Citizens Advisory Planning Committee, addressed to the Mayor and City Council, and dated May 14, 1990; and the other from an Assistant Chief of Police to the City Prosecutor, regarding “Adult Entertainment Ordinance,” dated May 1, 1990.
Article IX General Regulations 9-48
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
R. The City of Crestview Hills recognizes that some of the cited studies included bars without sexually oriented entertainment among the businesses studied; the City of Crestview Hills finds, nevertheless, that addressing the establishments that have live, sexually oriented entertainment is a more critical local issue than that of bars without such entertainment, for three reasons:
1. Bars in Kentucky are already regulated by the Commonwealth, and those state regulations directly address many of the concerns that arise with the service of alcohol;
2. The local history of prostitution and sex-related crimes has largely been related to businesses with live, sexually oriented entertainment, and not with other establishments that serve alcohol; and
3. The interaction between dancers who are paid to work with very limited clothing and the customers who pay to see them work in the establishments with live entertainment creates a sexually charged environment and the opportunity to negotiate for the provision of additional services that do not involve dancing or other protected expression and that are simply unacceptable under the standards of the County and its citizens.
S. As noted earlier in these findings, there is a long local history of prostitution and sex-related crimes at or incident to the operation of establishments with live, sexually oriented entertainment. Further, the studies shown herein provide further evidence of the potential crime-related secondary effects from such businesses. Although the methodologies and quality of these studies vary somewhat, local experience has demonstrated to the City of Crestview Hills that the relationship between crime and such establishments is a fact in Northern Kentucky and not just a theory published in a study.
T. The City of Crestview Hills has reviewed evidence and testimony presented at public meetings before the County, and information based on the past experiences of the Kenton and Campbell Counties and the cities of Covington and Newport, the experiences of the County Attorneys’ offices prosecuting numerous and varied offenses that have occurred in and around the sexually oriented entertainment establishments, and based upon the documented experiences of other governmental units within Kentucky and elsewhere in dealing with the impact of sexually oriented entertainment, that such businesses can, if not properly regulated, be deleterious to said community.
U. The City of Crestview Hills finds that the countywide licensing ordinance related to sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus adopted by the Fiscal Court of Kenton County is an effective tool for addressing the many operational issues that can arise with such businesses.
Article IX General Regulations 9-49
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
V. The City of Crestview Hills finds that amendments to the city’s Zoning Ordinance regarding the location and design of such businesses are important variables in the nature and extent of adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community, and further finds that location and design are among the types of issues that are typically addressed through zoning.
W. Based on the recommendations of Kelly and Cooper, which are based on their experience in other communities and their review of the studies cited above and other local efforts to address such secondary effects, the City of Crestview Hills finds that the following principles are essential to effective zoning controls of sexually oriented businesses:
1. Sexually oriented businesses should, to the maximum extent practicable, be separated from one another by a distance that is greater than a convenient walking distance, because experience elsewhere has shown that the location of such businesses near one another may increase the adverse secondary effects, particularly those related to crime, by a greater than arithmetic factor;
2. Although there are currently several such businesses located near one another in Covington’s downtown area, the Covington City Commission has determined that the City will not attempt to require these existing businesses be relocated;
3. Sexually oriented businesses have the greatest adverse effect on residential neighbourhoods and should thus be separated to the maximum extent practicable from residential neighbourhoods;
4. Sexually oriented businesses are likely to attract criminal elements that prey on “soft targets,” including children, and it is thus important to separate sexually oriented businesses from schools, parks, recreation centers, and religious institutions, all of which are places where children are likely to congregate, often without parental protection;
5. Also because of the tendency of sexually oriented businesses to attract criminal elements that prey on soft targets, it is important to seek locations for such businesses that are not located along pedestrian routes, where young people, old people and others who are vulnerable, are likely to walk in going about their day-to-day business. Thus, locations to which the primary access is by automobile minimize the risk of persons going about their daily business encountering persons who are visiting or even loitering around the sexually oriented business;
6. Experiences in other communities show that private booths, back rooms, “VIP” rooms and other small and private spaces in sexually oriented businesses create the opportunity for casual sexual activity and create logistical difficulties and risks of physical endangerment for police officers responsible for dealing with such activities. For that reason, it is essential that movies, performances and other activities at sexually oriented businesses should be permitted only in large rooms that are open and
Article IX General Regulations 9-50
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
visible to management, other patrons and code and police officers who may visit the establishment during operating hours.
X. FINDINGS: The facts and other matters set forth in the previous clauses that form the preamble to this ordinance are hereby adopted as findings of fact in support of the legislative action of the City of Crestview Hills in adopting this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. Upon adoption of this zoning amendment, these shall be incorporated into the Zoning Code by reference as if fully set forth therein to the adopting Resolution.
Y. DEFINITIONS:
1. CABARET OR THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to “adult entertainment,” “strippers,” “showgirls,” “exotic dancers,” “gentleman’s club,” “XXX” or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that an establishment holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available.
2. CUSTOMER – any person who:
a. Is allowed to enter a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or
b. Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or
c. Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person.
3. DAY CARE CENTER – a licensed facility providing care, protection and supervision for children 12 years old or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged.
4. DISPLAY PUBLICLY – the act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and material other than sexually oriented media are offered for sale or rent to the public.
Article IX General Regulations 9-51
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
5. ENCOUNTER CENTER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a business or enterprise that, as one of its principal purposes, offers: physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
6. ENTERTAINER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – any person paid as an employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the operator of a cabaret who frequently appears in a state of semi-nudity at any establishment regulated by this chapter.
7. ENTERTAINMENT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business that is required to be licensed: dancing, singing, talking, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers for which some type of remuneration is received.
8. ESCORT – a person who is held out to the public to be available for hire for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission, or salary, and who for said consideration consorts with or accompanies or offers to consort with or accompany, another or others to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or within any private quarters, and shall include a “service oriented escort;” for purposes of this ordinance, the term “escort” shall not include any person who would be understood by a reasonably prudent person as providing “babysitting” services or working as an assisted living companion to the elderly, infirm, disabled, or handicapped, and shall further not include licensed health professionals.
9. ESCORT, SERVICE ORIENTED – an escort that:
a. operates from an open office;
b. does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau that so advertises; and
c. does not offer to provide sexual conduct.
10. ESCORT BUREAU, SERVICE ORIENTED – an escort bureau that
a. maintains an open office at an established place of business;
b. otherwise operates in full accordance with the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus, as such ordinance may be amended from time to time.
Article IX General Regulations 9-52
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
11. ESCORT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an escort who:
a. works for (either as an agent, employee, or independent contractor), or is referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort bureau; or,
b. either advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for (either as an employee, agent, or independent contractor), or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau that so advertises; or,
c. offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee from an escort patron or a prospective escort patron.
12. ESCORT BUREAU, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an escort bureau that operates in any of the following manners:
a. engages in fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive advertising that is designed to make the prospective client believe that acts of prostitution (as defined under Kentucky law) will be provided; or,
b. collects money (whether paid in advance or paid after the promised proscribed act) for the promise of acts of prostitution by its escorts; or,
c. uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution, and refuses to cease the use of such a person; or,
d. operates an escort bureau as a “call girl” prostitution operation; or,
e. advertises that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron or customer, or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred, or introduced to a patron or customer; or,
f. solicits, offers to provide, or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron or customer; or,
g. employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort.
13. ESTABLISHMENT – any business regulated by this Section.
14. EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL – any pictorial or three dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or material of anthropological significance shall not be deemed to fall within the foregoing definition.
15. FLOOR AREA, GROSS PUBLIC – the total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters,
Article IX General Regulations 9-53
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled “public”), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
16. FREQUENTLY – two or more times per month.
17. MASSAGE – touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body (excluding an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment).
18. MASSAGE PARLOR – any business offering massages that is operated by a person who is not a state licensed “massage therapist” or that provides massages by persons who are not state licensed massage therapists.
19. MASSAGE THERAPY – the profession in which a certified massage therapist applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well being of the client.
20. MASSAGE THERAPIST –a person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of Kentucky Rev. Statues §309.350 et seq.
21. MEDIA – anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures.
22. MEDIA, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CDs, DVDs or other devices used to record computer images, or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
23. MEDIA STORE WITH SOME SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA – a retail book, video or other media store that has sexually explicit media that constitutes more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its inventory or that occupies more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its gross public floor area.
Article IX General Regulations 9-54
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
24. MEDIA STORE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an establishment that rents and/or sells sexually oriented media, and that meets any of the following three tests:
a. More than forty percent (40%) of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually oriented media; or
b. More than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media; or
c. It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX,” “adult” or “sex” business, or otherwise as a sexually oriented business, other than sexually oriented media outlet, sexually oriented motion picture theater, or sexually oriented cabaret.
25. MODELING STUDIO, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups in a space smaller than 600 feet.
26. MOTEL, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that meets any of the following criteria:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with sexually oriented entertainment or transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;”
b. Marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” “couples,” or “sexually oriented.”
27. MOTION PICTURE ARCADE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a building or portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
28. MOTION PICTURE ARCADE BOOTH, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by customers therein. The term “booth,”
Article IX General Regulations 9-55
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
“arcade booth,” “preview booth,” and “video arcade booth” shall be synonymous with the term “motion picture arcade booth.”
29. MOTION PICTURE THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” or that are marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” or sexually oriented. Frequently shown films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression.
30. NUDE MODELING STUDIO – any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. “Nude model studio” shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of Kentucky or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
31. NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY – the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola or nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, Semi-nude.
32. OPERATOR – any person operating, conducting, or maintaining a business regulated under this Chapter.
33. OWNER(S) – the individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent (10%) or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten percent (10%) or more. “Owner” includes the spouse(s) of any of the above individuals.
34. PERSON – an individual, firm, partnership, joint-venture, association, independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), limited liability
Article IX General Regulations 9-56
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
35. PREMISES – the physical location at which a business operates; as used in this Chapter, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement.
36. PRIMARY ENTERTAINMENT – entertainment that characterizes the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances.
37. PROTECTED LAND USE – residential zoning district, school, religious institution, park, library, public recreation area, or day care center.
38. PUBLIC AREA – a portion of a sexually oriented business, excluding sexually oriented motels, that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business.
39. SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES – flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
40. SEMI-NUDE OR IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION – the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
41. SEX SHOP – an establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests:
a. It offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following categories: sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually oriented novelties; and the combination of such items constitute more than ten percent (10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than 10 percent (10%) of its floor area;
b. More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented toys or novelties; or
c. More than five percent (5%) of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
Article IX General Regulations 9-57
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
42. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS – an inclusive term used to describe collectively the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or theater; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented motion picture arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented escort bureau; bathhouse; massage parlor; sex shop; sexually oriented modeling studio; or any other such business establishment whose primary purpose is to offer sexually oriented entertainment or materials. This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of the County or any applicable municipal zoning code or other applicable ordinances.
43. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE – any license applied for under the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9 as amended, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus, adopted in 2004.
44. SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES – instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs.
45. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS – include:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; and
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; and
c. Areas of the human anatomy included in the definitions of “nude” or “nudity.”
46. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES – Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person’s genitals whether clothed or unclothed.
Z. PROHIBITED USES: The following uses are prohibited in the city of Crestview Hills and county-wide under Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented
Article IX General Regulations 9-58
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
escort bureaus. No Zoning Permit shall be issued for the following prohibited businesses:
1. Sexually oriented motion picture arcade or booth;
2. Sexually oriented encounter center;
3. Sexually oriented motel;
4. Sexually oriented massage parlor or any business offering massages that is operated by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of Kentucky Rev. Statues §309.350 et seq.;
5. Sexually oriented modeling studio;
6. Sexually oriented nude modeling studio; and
7. Sexually oriented escort bureau.
AA. PERMITTED USES: The following uses are permitted if they hold an approved Zoning Permit and a valid License approved under the county-wide Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus:
1. Media store with some sexually oriented media (not subject to licensing);
2. Sexually oriented media store;
3. Sex shop;
4. Service oriented escort bureau;
5. Sexually oriented motion picture theatre; and
6. Sexually oriented cabaret or theatre.
AB. PERMITTED ZONING DISTRICTS:
1. A media store carrying some sexually oriented media is permitted in any zoning district where other retail establishments are permitted.
2. A sexually oriented media store, sex shop or service oriented escort bureau is permitted in the following zoning districts if it holds an approved Zoning Permit and a valid License approved under the county-wide Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus:
a. SC (Shopping Center) Zone
3. A sexually oriented business featuring on-premise entertainment such as sexually oriented motion picture theatre, cabaret or theatre is permitted in the following zoning districts if it holds an approved Zoning Permit and a valid Kenton County Sexually Oriented Business License:
a. HC-1 (Highway Commercial One) Zone
b. HC-3 (Highway Commercial Three) Zone
Article IX General Regulations 9-59
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
c. LHS (Limited Highway Service) Zone
d. LSC (Limited Service Commercial) Zone
e. SC (Shopping Center) Zone
f. All Industrial (I) Zones, except for the IP (Industrial Park) Zone
AC. ZONING PERMIT: Any application for a sexually oriented business Zoning Permit shall be processed in accordance with Article XVI of the Zoning Ordinance with the following additional requirements:
1. Zoning Permit and License Required
a. Permit and license required. Each sexually oriented business or service oriented escort bureau is required to obtain a Zoning Permit under the City of Covington’s Zoning Code and License under the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9 as amended, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus. However, no license is required for a media store with some sexually oriented media.
b. Order of submissions. For a new sexually oriented business or service oriented escort bureau, the process is designed for the applicant to apply for a Zoning Permit first and Kenton County License second.
c. Application Contents: In addition to the other requirements of an application for a Zoning Permit, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Administrator at least the following:
(1) A complete description of the exact nature of the business to be conducted;
(2) A location plan, showing the location of the property and the applicant’s identification of any school, religious institution, public recreation area, park or day care center within 1,500 feet of the property;
(3) A sketch of the exterior and interior of the premises, showing all areas that will be open to the public and their purposes, the dimensions of such areas, all entrances and exits, the location of the screen for a motion picture theatre, the location and dimensions of the stage for a cabaret or theatre;
(4) A parking plan; and
(5) A lighting and signage plan, showing fixtures that are adequate in number, design and location to meet the lighting requirements and applicable provisions of the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9 as amended, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus.
Article IX General Regulations 9-60
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
AD. GENERAL STANDARDS:
1. General Standards related to sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus.
a. Separation distances. No retail-only sexually oriented business (sexually oriented media store or sex shop) or service oriented escort bureau shall be located within 500 feet of any area within the zoning districts having the designation of “residential” as the district classification or within 500 feet of any parcel of land occupied by a school, religious institution, park, library, public recreation area, or day care center (considered “protected uses”) in any other district.
b. Separation distances. No sexually oriented business offering on-premise entertainment (sexually oriented motion picture theatre, cabaret or theatre) shall be located within 1000 feet of any area within the zoning districts having the designation of “residential” as the district classification or within 1000 feet of any parcel of land occupied by a school, religious institution, park, library, public recreation area, or day care center in any other district.
c. Separation distances. No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business or service oriented escort bureau; this restriction shall require such a separation regardless of whether it is located within the city or within the county.
d. Single use. There shall be no more than one type of sexually oriented business or service oriented escort bureau at any one location.
e. Nonconformity. No legally established and permitted sexually oriented business or service oriented escort bureau shall become nonconforming through subsequent establishment of a school, religious institution, park, library, public recreation area, or day care center (protected uses); nor shall a Zoning Permit for a sexually oriented business or service oriented escort bureau be denied based on the filing of a Zoning Permit application for a protected use after the filing of such application for a sexually oriented business.
f. Measurement method. Where this section requires that one use be separated from another use, measurements shall be made in accordance with this subsection. For a use which is the only use or the principal use on a lot or parcel, the measurement shall be made from property line to property line from a point nearest to the use for which the measurement is being made. If the use is located in a multi-tenant building, then the distance shall be measured from the portion of the building of the leasehold or other space actually
Article IX General Regulations 9-61
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
controlled or occupied that is nearest to the use for which the measurement is being made Measurements between properties or spaces under this section shall be made by the shortest distance between the two properties and/or spaces.
2. Standards for Parking: An Off-Street Parking Plan shall be submitted as a part of the application for a Zoning Permit. All off-street parking shall be in accordance with Article XI with specific standards related as follows:
a. A sexually oriented media store, sex shop or service oriented escort bureau: 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross public floor area.
b. A sexually oriented cabaret or theatre: 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for dancing or assembly, or 1 space for each 4 persons based on design capacity, whichever is greater, plus 1 space for each 2 employees on shift of largest employment.
c. A sexually oriented motion picture theatre: 1 parking space for each 4 seats, based on a maximum seating capacity, plus 1 additional space for each 2 employees on shift of largest employment.
3. Standards for Exterior Lighting and Signage: An Exterior Lighting and Signage Plan shall be submitted with the application for a Zoning Permit. The required lighting shall be as follows:
a. Exterior lighting of the entries and private parking areas shall be a minimum of 15 footcandles as measured 3 feet from the ground or paving.
b. For a business on a single lot or parcel, no lighting shall illuminate any property not in control of the business by more than 5 footcandles as measured at the nearest adjacent property.
c. All signage shall be in accordance with the Article XIV.
AE. INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS STANDARDS:
1. Standards for a Service Oriented Escort Bureau: A service oriented escort bureau shall be subject to the following additional standards:
a. Room size. The establishment shall operate all business in an open area of at least 600 square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the room where customers are located.
b. Lighting. The area occupied by customers shall be well lit at a lighting level of least 30 footcandles measured 3 feet from the floor.
Article IX General Regulations 9-62
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. Standards for a Media Store with Some Sexually Oriented Media: A retail book, video or other media store that has sexually explicit media that constitutes more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its inventory or that occupies more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its gross public floor area shall not be classified as a sexually oriented business but shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Separate room. The sexually explicit media shall be kept in a separate room from the rest of the inventory of the store and shall not visible outside the room;
b. Age limit. Sexually explicit media shall be available only to persons 18 years or older;
c. Access. Access to the room shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic control device monitored by the clerk or manager on duty through direct visual control;
d. Visibility. Customers and activities in the room shall be visible at all times to the clerk or manager on duty through a video system located at the clerk’s or manager’s counter; and
e. Lighting. The area occupied by customers shall be well lit at a lighting level of least 30 footcandles measured 3 feet from the floor.
3. Standards for a Sexually Oriented Media Store or Sex Shop: A sexually oriented media store or sex shop shall be subject to the following additional standards:
a. Room size. The establishment shall operate all business in an open area of at least 600 square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the room where customers are located;
b. Displays. No displays of sexually explicit media or images shall be visible from the exterior of the buildings; and
c. Lighting. The area occupied by customers shall be well lit at a lighting level of least 30 footcandles measured 3 feet from the floor.
4. Standards for a Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theatre: A sexually oriented motion picture theater shall be subject to the following additional standards:
a. Presentation area. All screenings and presentations of motion pictures, videos or other media shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least 1000 square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the room.
b. Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least 5 footcandles as measured at the floor.
Article IX General Regulations 9-63
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
c. Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs, with solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating may be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
5. Standards for a Sexually Oriented Cabaret or Theatre: A sexually oriented cabaret or theater shall be subject to the following additional standards:
a. Presentation area. All entertainment shall occur in an unobstructed room of at least 600 square feet of floor area with a person in any part of such room having a clear view of all entertainment areas;
b. Performance stage. All entertainment shall take place on stage elevated at least 24 inches above the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of 100 square feet, and with a horizontal separation of at least 60 inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which customers have access—the horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail, or other physical barrier, which may be located either on the stage (to keep the entertainers back from the edge) or on the floor (to keep the customers back from the stage);
c. Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least 15 footcandles as measured 3 feet from the floor.
d. Seating. Seating shall consist of chairs or open booths; no couches, beds, or loose cushions or mattresses, or of any form shall be provided.
AF. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR REVIEW AND EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT:
1. Determination of Completeness: Within 5 business days of submission of the sexually oriented land use permit application, the Zoning Administrator shall determine if the application is complete. If the application is incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall return the application to the applicant with a letter or form specifying the items that are missing. The application shall not be further processed unless and until the applicant submits a complete application.
2. Review, Decision: If the Zoning Administrator determines that an application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and, within 20 calendar days of submittal of the complete application, grant or deny the permit. If the permit is denied, the denial shall be made in writing, by letter or on a form, and shall specify the reasons why the application was denied, citing the specific provisions of
Article IX General Regulations 9-64
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
this ordinance or other provisions of the City’s ordinances that provide the basis for such denial. If the Zoning Administrator fails to act on a complete application within the 20-day period, the application is deemed denied. Upon denial or deemed denial, the applicant may appeal that denial to the Board of Adjustment.
3. The applicant may, at its option, pursue other or additional administrative remedies available under the zoning ordinance; by doing so, applicant shall be deemed to have waived any right to a decision within a particular time period and shall be subject to all of the terms, conditions and timelines applicable to such administrative remedies under the zoning ordinance.
4. Expiration of Zoning Permit: The issuance of the Zoning Permit shall be conditioned on the applicant obtaining and retaining a Kenton County Occupational License for the use represented by the Zoning Permit. If a no license has been granted within 6 months after the issuance of the Zoning Permit, then the Zoning Permit shall expire; provided, however, that the expiration date for the Zoning Permit shall be extended until 30 days after the end of any administrative or judicial appeal of the Zoning Permit.
AG. APPEAL PROCEDURES:
1. Appeals to Board of Adjustment
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an official action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within 10 calendar days after such action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the Zoning Administrator, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and all parties of record. A fee, as required by § 158.007, shall also be paid to the Zoning Administrator at this time. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record on which the action appealed from was taken and shall be treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings. At the public hearing on the appeal held by the Board, an interested person may appear and enter his or her appearance, and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
b. The Board of Adjustment shall hear the appeal within 30 calendar days of its filing with the Zoning Administrator and give public notice in accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as well as written notice to
Article IX General Regulations 9-65
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
the appellant and the Zoning Administrator at least 7 calendar days prior to the hearing. The affected parties may appear at the hearing in person or by an attorney. The Board of Adjustment shall hear the matter and render a decision within 36 days after the filing of the appeal. If the Board of Adjustment fails to act within such time, the application is deemed denied.
2. Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
a. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the Board of Adjustment shall appeal from the action to the circuit court of the county in which the property which is the subject of the action of the Board of Adjustment lies. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 calendar days after the final action of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court. All final actions which have not been appealed within 30 days shall not be subject to judicial review and shall become final.
b. After the appeal is taken, the procedure shall be governed by the Rules of Civil Procedure. When an appeal has been filed, the Clerk of the Circuit Court shall issue a summons to all parties, including the Board of Adjustment in all cases, and shall cause it to be delivered for service as in any other law action.
AH. SEVERABILITY: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city of Crestview Hills that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Chapter are severable, and if any phrase clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the city of Crestview Hills without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
SECTION 9.27 FLOOD PROTECTION DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in Kentucky Revised Statutes 151.230 delegated to local government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
Article IX General Regulations 9-66
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the legislative body of the City of Crestview Hills, Kentucky, hereby adopts the following floodplain management ordinance, as follows:
2. FINDINGS OF FACT
a. The flood hazard areas of the City of Crestview Hills are subject to periodic inundation which result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
3. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding by provisions designed to:
a. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;
b. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
c. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood waters;
d. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage, and
e. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other areas.
4. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this ordinance are to:
a. Protect human life and health;
Article IX General Regulations 9-67
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding;
g. Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area; and,
h. Ensure that those who occupy a Special Flood Hazard Area assume responsibility for their actions.
B. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
1. A Zone - Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are not determined.
2. Accessory structure (Appurtenant structure) - A structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
3. Accessory use - A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
4. Addition (to an existing structure) - Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a structure.
5. AE zones - Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
Article IX General Regulations 9-68
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
6. AH zone - An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are determined.
7. AO zone - An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are determined.
8. Appeal - A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or from the floodplain administrator's ruling on a request for a variance.
9. AR/A1 – A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A zones - Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete these areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
10. A99 zone - That part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to be protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
11. Area of shallow flooding - A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
12. Base flood - A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this ordinance.
13. Base Flood Elevation (BFE) - The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
14. Basement - any area of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
15. Building - See definition for structure.
Article IX General Regulations 9-69
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
16. Community - A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
17. Community Rating System (CRS) - A program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the Regular Program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.
18. Community Flood Hazard Area (CFHA) - An area that has been determined by the Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams.
19. Critical facility - Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the health and safety of the public. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities important to maintaining or restoring normal services before, during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
20. D zone - An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
21. Development - Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
22. Elevated structure – For insurance proposes, a non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
23. Elevation Certificate - A statement certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related information to verify compliance with this ordinance.
Article IX General Regulations 9-70
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
24. Emergency Program - The initial phase under which a community participates in the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
25. Enclosure - That portion of a structure below the lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage, or access to the structure.
26. Encroachment - The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
27. Existing construction - Any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
28. Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by a community.
29. Expansion to an existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
30. Five-Hundred Year Flood - The flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-year flood have a moderate risk of flooding.
31. Flood or Flooding - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Article IX General Regulations 9-71
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
c. Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
d. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
32. Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) -A map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
33. Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) -A map on which the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e. mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
34. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - A map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.
35. Flood Insurance Study - The report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) containing flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and/or the Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
36. Floodplain or flood-prone area - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from any source.
37. Floodplain Administrator - The individual appointed by the community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
38. Floodplain Management - The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management ordinances, and open space plans.
Article IX General Regulations 9-72
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
39. Floodplain Management Regulations - This ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
40. Floodproofing - Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents.
41. Floodproofing Certificate - A certification by a registered professional engineer or architect, the FEMA form in effect at the time of certification stating that a non-residential structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact forces.
42. Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as the “regulatory floodway”.
43. Floodway fringe - That area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway.
44. Freeboard - A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. Freeboard must be applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level, but also to the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components, etc.
45. Fraud and victimization - As related in Article 6, Appeals and Variance Procedures, of this ordinance, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject
Article IX General Regulations 9-73
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
46. Functionally dependent use facility - A facility, structure, or other development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
47. Governing body - The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
48. Hazard potential - The possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g. safety, structural integrity, flood routing capacity).
49. Highest adjacent grade - The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
50. Historic Structure - Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
Article IX General Regulations 9-74
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
51. Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) – Increased cost of compliance coverage means under the standard flood insurance policy the cost to repair a substantially flood damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged building into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are floodproofing (nonresidential), relocation, elevation, demolition, or any combination thereof.
52. ICC coverage is available on residential and non-residential buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
53. Letter of Map Change (LOMC) – An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC’s include the following categories:
a. Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) – A revision based on technical data showing that a property was inadvertently included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.
b. Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) - A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features.
c. Letter of Map Revision – Based on Fill (LOMR-F) – A determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
54. Levee - A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
55. Levee System - A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Article IX General Regulations 9-75
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
56. Limited storage - An area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant material, void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature controlled.
57. Lowest adjacent grade – The lowest elevation of the sidewalk, patio, attached garage, deck support, basement entryway or grade immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction.
58. Lowest Floor - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, structure access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a structure’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
59. Manufactured Home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle” (see Recreational Vehicle).
60. Manufactured home park or subdivision - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
61. Map - The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
62. Map Panel Number - The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first revision.)
63. Market value - The property value (as agreed between a willing buyer and seller), excluding the value of the land as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value of the structure can be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (Actual Cash Value) or adjusted assessed values.
Article IX General Regulations 9-76
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
64. Mean Sea Level (MSL) - The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as shown on the community’s FIRM. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
65. Mitigation - Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of disaster response and recovery.
66. Mudslide (i.e. mudflow) - Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e. mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
67. Mudslide (i.e. mudflow) area management - The operation of and overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e. mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
68. Mudslide (i.e. mudflow) prone area - An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
69. National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) - The federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry.
70. National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRM’s. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
71. New Construction - Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
Article IX General Regulations 9-77
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
72. New manufactured home park or subdivision - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
73. Non-Residential – Structures that are not designed for human habitation, including but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses, recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than 6 months duration.
74. North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) – As corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRM’s and Digitally Referenced FIRM’s (DFIRM’s). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM panel legend for correct datum.)
75. Obstruction - Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
76. One-Hundred Year Flood (100-Year Flood) (see Base Flood) - The flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to inundation by the 100-year flood. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26-percent chance of experiencing such a flood with the SFHA.
77. Participating Community - A community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
78. Pre-FIRM Construction - New construction or substantial improvements for which start of construction occurred on or before December 31, 1974,
Article IX General Regulations 9-78
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
79. Post-FIRM Construction – New construction or substantial improvements for which start of construction occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
80. Probation – A FEMA imposed change in community’s status resulting from violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations.
81. Program Deficiency - A defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management standards.
82. Public Safety and Nuisance - Anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
83. Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle that is:
a. Built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light duty truck; and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
84. Regular Program - The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and flood elevations determined in the FIS.
85. Regulatory floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. See Base Flood.
86. Remedy a violation - The process by which a community brings a structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the
Article IX General Regulations 9-79
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
impact of non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
87. Repair - The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
88. Repetitive Loss - Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
89. Repetitive Loss Property - Any insurable building for which two or more claims of more than $1,000 were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling 10-year period, since 1978. At least two of the claims must be more than ten days apart but, within ten years of each other. A RL property may or may not be currently insured by the NFIP.
90. Riverine - Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
91. Section 1316 - That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
92. Severe Repetitive Loss Structure - Any insured property that has met at least one of the following paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership:
a. Four or more separate claim payments of more than $5,000 each (including building and contents payments); or
b. Two or more separate claim payments (building payments only) where the total of the payments exceeds the current market value of the property.
In either case, two of the claim payments must have occurred within ten years of each other. Multiple losses at the same location
Article IX General Regulations 9-80
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
within ten days of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment amounts added together.
93. Sheet flow area - see "Area of shallow flooding”.
94. Special flood hazard area (SFHA) - That portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1 – A30, AH, AO, or AR.
95. Start of Construction (includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development) - The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
96. Structure - A walled and roofed building, including gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
97. Subdivision - Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels.
98. Subrogation – A legal action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party.
99. Substantial Damage - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Article IX General Regulations 9-81
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
100. Substantial Improvement - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 1-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
b. Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
101. Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions - Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equaling or exceeding 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced.
102. Suspension - Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
103. Utilities – Include, but not limited to, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment that service the structure and the site.
104. Variance - Relief from some or all of the requirements of this ordinance.
105. Violation - Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
106. Watercourse - A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
107. Water surface elevation - The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
Article IX General Regulations 9-82
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
108. Watershed - All the area within a geographic boundary from which water, sediments, dissolved materials, and other transportable materials drain or are carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake, or underlying aquifer.
109. X (shaded) and B zones - Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood that are outside of the SFHA, areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood
110. X (unshaded) and C zones - Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
111. Zone - A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
C. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES
This ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), areas applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official as determined by the legislative body of the City of Crestview Hills from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the legislative body of the City of Crestview Hills which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Crestview Hills.
2. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Kenton County, dated May 16, 2013, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS), other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by the City of Crestview Hills, and for those land areas acquired by the City of Crestview Hills through annexation. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of
Article IX General Regulations 9-83
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by City Council pursuant to statutes governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of the City of Crestview Hills and are on file and available for review by the public during regular business hours at PDS offices at 2332 Royal Drive, Fort Mitchell, Kentucky, 41091.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See Section 9.27.D.2 for instructions and explanation.
Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.
4. COMPLIANCE
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the legislative body from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
5. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
6. INTERPRETATION
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
a. Considered minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
Article IX General Regulations 9-84
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
7. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Local Floodplain Administrator of the City of Crestview Hills, any officer or employee, thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
8. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION NOTICE AND PENALTIES
a. Civil Offense: If, at any time, development occurs which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit and any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
b. Notice of Violation: If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this ordnance and/or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this ordinance or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See below.
Article IX General Regulations 9-85
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
c. Notice of Citation: If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this ordinance or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven (7) days of the date the citation is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued does not respond to the citation within seven (7) days, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation occurred shall be considered final.
d. Penalties: Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor offense. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 and/or imprisoned for not more than 12 months, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. ADMINISTRATION
1. DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
The legislative body of the City of Crestview Hills hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions, and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
Article IX General Regulations 9-86
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
A Development Permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any special flood hazard area established in Section 9.27.C.2. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of floodplain administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can be processed. Specifically, the following information is required.
a. Application Stage
(1) Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and elevation of highest adjacent grade; or
(2) Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;
(3) All appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 9.27.E.2.b and Section 9.27.E.4.b;
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
b. Construction Stage
Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction continues, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the State a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed elevation, as built, in relation to Mean Sea Level. In AE, A1-30, AH, and A zones where the Community has adopted a regulatory Base Flood Elevation, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the
Article IX General Regulations 9-87
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed, authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this ordinance, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a. Permit Review: Review all development permits to ensure that:
(1) Permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied;
(2) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained: review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334.;
(3) Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner;
(4) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this ordinance, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
b. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Article 3, Section B, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to
Article IX General Regulations 9-88
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
administer the provisions of Article 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the legislative body for adoption.
c. Notification of Other Agencies:
(1) Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division of Water, and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and
(2) Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
(3) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
d. Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:
(1) Certification required by Section 9.27.E.2.a (lowest floor elevations) as shown on an accurately completed and certified Elevation Certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 9.27.D.2.b;
(2) Certification required by Section 9.27.E.2.b (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on an accurately completed and certified FEMA floodprooofing certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level) to which the new and substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 9.27.D.2.a;
(3) Certification required by Section 9.27.E.2.c (elevated structures),
(4) Certification of elevation required by Section 9.27.E.5.a (subdivision standards),
(5) Certification required by Section 9.27.E.2.e (floodway encroachments),
(6) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
(7) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance; and
(8) Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this ordinance as specified in Section 9.27.C.8.
e. Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas,
Article IX General Regulations 9-89
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
(1) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 9.27.F.3.a;
(2) When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 9.27.C.2, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 9.27.E;
(3) When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Section 9.27.E.2.b a floodproofing certificate;
(4) All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open for public inspection.
f. Right of Entry
(1) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this ordinance, or whenever the floodplain administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the floodplain administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the floodplain administrator by this ordinance.
(2) If such structure or premises are occupied, the floodplain administrator shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request entry.
(3) If entry is refused, the floodplain administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
Article IX General Regulations 9-90
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(4) When the floodplain administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the floodplain administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this ordinance.
g. Stop Work Orders
(1) Upon notice from the floodplain administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
h. Revocation of Permits
(1) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this ordinance, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(2) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this ordinance.
i. Liability
(1) Any officer, employee, or member of the floodplain administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee, or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of
Article IX General Regulations 9-91
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
this ordinance shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings.
j. Expiration of Floodplain Construction Permit
(1) A floodplain development permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the “start of construction” has not occurred within one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days from the date of its issuance.
E. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
1. GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
b. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
c. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
d. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
e. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if
f. Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
Article IX General Regulations 9-92
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
g. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
h. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
i. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
j. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance;
k. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced.
2. SPECIFIC STANDARDS
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in Section 9.27.C.2, the following provisions are required:
a. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork elevated no lower than 2 feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.27.E.2.c.
(1) In an AO zone, the lowest floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or higher than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(2) In an A zone, where no technical data has been produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Floodplain Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods include, but are not
Article IX General Regulations 9-93
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, use of existing data available from other sources, approximate methods, use of historical data, best supportable and reasonable judgement in the event no data can be produced. The lowest floor shall be elevated no lower than 2 feet above such base flood elevation. Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Chapter 4, Regulation 060, Section 5(5)a, states as a part of the technical requirements for a State Floodplain Permit: The applicant shall provide cross sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby Base Flood Elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross sections shall be referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than + five-tenths (0.5) foot. Cross sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross section shall extend across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require additional cross sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.
(3) In all other Zones, elevated 2 feet above the base flood elevation.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspection department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
b. Non-residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes) shall be elevated to conform with Section 9.27.E.2.a or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
(1) Be floodproofed to an elevation 2 feet above the level of the base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
Article IX General Regulations 9-94
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy and debris;
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification along with the design and operational maintenance plans shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
(4) Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Section 9.27.E.2.d.
(5) All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials to an elevation 2 feet above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Openings for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the standards of Section 9.27.E.2.c.
c. Elevated Structures. New construction and substantial improvements of elevated structures on columns, posts, or pilings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(1) Openings for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
(i) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment used in
Article IX General Regulations 9-95
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
connection with the premises (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
(3) The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms.
d. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles.
(1) All new and substantially improved manufactured homes placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
i) On individual lots or parcels,
ii) In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
iii) In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or
iv) In substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
v) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, and
vi) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood,
All such manufactured homes must be:
(i) Elevated on a permanent foundation, and
(ii) Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than 2 feet above the level of the base flood elevation, and
(iii) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(2) Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that:
(i) The manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
o The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than 2 feet above the base flood elevation, or
o The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
Article IX General Regulations 9-96
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
(3) All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must either:
(i) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(iii) Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this ordinance, including anchoring and elevation requirements for “manufactured homes”.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the State of Kentucky motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
e. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 9.27.C.2, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood discharge;
(2) If Section 9.27.E.2.e is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 9.27.E.
3. STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR FLOODWAYS
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 9.27.C.2, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply:
Article IX General Regulations 9-97
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
b. New construction and substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or flood proofed to elevations established in accordance with Section 9.27.C.2.
4. STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 9.27.E.C.2, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (1 – 3’), where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
Article IX General Regulations 9-98
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in Section 9.27.E.2.b.
5. STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS
a. All subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and,
d. In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available, base flood elevation and floodway data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall be provided.
e. All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
6. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE LETTER ‘A’
For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated ‘A’ the following provisions shall apply:
a. Must be non-habitable;
b. Must be anchored to resist floatation and lateral movement;
c. Must be provided with flood openings in accordance with the standards of Section 9.27.E.2.c;
d. Must be built of flood resistant materials to 2 feet above the base flood elevation;
e. Must elevate utilities 2 feet above the base flood elevation;
f. Can only be used for storage or parking; and
g. Must not be modified for a different use after permitting.
Article IX General Regulations 9-99
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
7. CRITICAL FACILITIES
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the floodway; however, they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
F. APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES
1. Nature Of Variances
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the legislative body to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
2. Designation of Variance and Appeal Board
a. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of these regulations.
Article IX General Regulations 9-100
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
3. Duties of Board of Adjustment
a. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance and appeals of decisions or determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
b. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
4. Variance Procedures
In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and the:
a. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
d. Importance to the community of the services provided by the existing or proposed facility;
e. Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case of functionally dependent use;
f. Availability of alternative locations, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets, and bridges and culverts.
5. Conditions for Variances
Article IX General Regulations 9-101
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
a. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" to afford relief considering the flood hazard. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this ordinance. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the legislative body need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the legislative body believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in the definition section under "Public safety and nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization of the public (as defined in the definition section) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
d. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor being situated below the base flood elevation.
e. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request
f. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Article 6 (4) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
Article IX General Regulations 9-102
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
6. Variance Notification
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Kenton County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
c. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance or denial, and report such variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7. Historic Structures
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see definition) upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
G. SEVERABILITY
This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
If any clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
This ordinance was adopted at a public meeting of the legislative body of the City of Crestview Hills on March 14, 2013.
Article IX General Regulations 9-103
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Article X Zones 10-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
ARTICLE X
ZONES
SECTION 10.0 CO (CONSERVATION) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Agricultural uses, but not including the feeding of garbage to animals
2. Publicly owned and/or operated parks and/or recreation areas, including public swimming pools
3. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated such as golf courses and country clubs, including commercial swimming pools
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of such use shall have been applied for and approved by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Golf driving ranges
2. Riding academies and stables
D. AREA, HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as determined and approved by the city.
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. All "Uses Permitted" and "Conditional Uses", permitted in this zone shall require a certificate of approval from the city engineer, certifying his approval of the type of and manner of construction to be built (insuring that such construction shall not cause flood hazard, soil erosion, adverse changes in natural drainage courses, or unnecessary destruction of natural features), which completed certificate shall be submitted to the appropriate officer or board, as required herein, at time of request.
2. Dwelling units are not permitted in this zone.
3. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
Article X Zones 10-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
4. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
5. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any residential zone.
6. Where any yard of any use permitted abuts a residential zone, a minimum yard requirement of one hundred (100) feet for each side screening area and additional setback shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance and/or rear yard which abuts said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
7. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
8. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use in this zone.
9. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.1 R-1Bc (RESIDENTIAL ONE-Bc) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Detached single-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses (detached garages are prohibited)
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of such use shall have been applied for and approved by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery schools
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Semi-public swimming pools;
Article X Zones 10-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Ten (10) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot, and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
5. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.2 R-1C (RESIDENTIAL ONE-C) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Detached single-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses (detached garages are prohibited)
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and approved of by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery schools
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreation centers, including swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - Eighty (80) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Forty-five (45) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Eight (8) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
5. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.3 R-1D (RESIDENTIAL ONE-D) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Detached single-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses (detached garages are prohibited)
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and approved of by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery schools
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreation centers, including swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Nine thousand (9,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - Seventy (70) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Six (6) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
5. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-9
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.4 R-1E (RESIDENTIAL ONE-E) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Detached single-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses (detached garages are prohibited)
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and approved of by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery schools
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreation centers, including swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-10
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - Sixty (60) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty-five (35) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Five (5) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Thirty-five (35) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
5. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-11
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.5 R-2a (RESIDENTIAL TWO-a) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Two-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and approved of by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Nursery schools
5. Publicly owned and/or operated parks and playgrounds
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet for each two (2) dwelling unit building. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted on one lot
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Ten (10) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
6. Maximum building height - Two (2) stories or forty (40) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-12
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
Minimum Zoning Lot Requirements Building Requirements
Conditionally Location Adjacent
Permitted Lot Front- Set- Side Rear Minimum Gross Maximum To Arterial Street
Uses Area age back Yard Yard Floor Area Height Required
Cemeteries - - 100' - - - 35' No
Churches: Other
Places Of Worship 1 acre 150' 100' 30' 50' - - Yes
Convalescent
Homes, Nursing
Homes, and Homes 1 acre 150' 100' 30' 50' 400 Sq. Ft. 25' Yes
For The Aged Per Unit
Nursery Schools 110
and Day Care Sq. Ft. 150' 50' 20' 50' 40 Sq. Ft. 35' No
Centers Per Child Per Child
Public Parks and
Playgrounds - - - - - - - Yes
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts property in a single-family residential zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance, shall be required.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone, except when development is proposed under the Planned Unit Development regulations, as regulated by Section 10.7 of this ordinance.
6. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-13
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.6 R-2b (RESIDENTIAL TWO-b) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of this zone are to: promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the relationships between the location and types of uses and structures; promote the advantages of modern large scale site planning for community development through the efficient use of land, facilitating a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses, and utilities; preserve, to the greatest extent possible, existing landscape features and amenities, and to utilize such features in an harmonious fashion; provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities, and other public and common facilities, than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures, but always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: The purpose of these procedures is to permit an initial review of and a public hearing upon the proposal by the Planning Commission at an early opportunity, while the details of the plan remain flexible. Applications shall be processed as follows:
1. Preliminary Development Plan - Except as provided for in Section 17.0, I., of this ordinance, applications for a map amendment to zone an area R-2b shall be accompanied by a Preliminary Development Plan, as regulated by Section 10.7, D., of this ordinance, along with supporting information/documentation pertaining to each of the criteria items identified in Subsection M., below. If an area, however, is currently zoned R-2b, the submission of the Preliminary Development Plan, for review by the planning commission and the legislative body, shall not be required until the area is proposed to be developed. Development shall include the demolition, erection, physical expansion, or change of use of any structure. Development shall not include the normal maintenance (e.g., cleaning, painting, etc.) of any structure.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said application with regard to its compliance with the stated purposes of the R-2b Zone, the required elements of the Preliminary Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Preliminary Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
Article X Zones 10-14
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
b. The legislative body shall, within ninety (90) days after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove said application. Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection B., 1., a., above.
Approval of the R-2b Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the approved Preliminary Development Plan.
The legislative body shall forward a copy of the approved Preliminary Development Plan to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the requirements for Final Development Plan and Record Plat.
2. Final Development Plan and Record Plat - A Final Development Plan and Record Plat shall be developed in conformance with the approved Preliminary Development Plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.7, F. of this ordinance, and submitted to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review and approval. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 10.7, F. of this ordinance shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Final Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 10.7, F. of this ordinance, other applicable elements of this ordinance, other applicable regulations, and its conformity with the approved Preliminary Development Plan. Minor adjustments from the approved Preliminary Development Plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do not affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Article X Zones 10-15
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
Upon approval of the Final Development Plan, by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, a copy of said plan shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator, who shall grant permits only in accordance with the approved Final Development Plan and other regulations, as may be required by this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Final Development Plan, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Record Plat, if applicable, with regard to its compliance with the required elements of the subdivision regulations, and its conformance with the approved Final Development Plan.
Upon approval of the Record Plat, by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, copies of said plat, certified by the planning commission, and suitable for recording, shall be forwarded to the office of the County Clerk to be recorded.
C. RESIDENTIAL USES AND DENSITIES:
1. All types of residential housing units may be permitted within a R-2b Zone, including but not limited to, single - family, two - family, and multi - family residential units.
2. The maximum density of the R-2b Zone shall be 6.0 dwelling units per net acre. This density shall be applied to the total project area excluding that land devoted to nonresidential uses and streets (public and private).
D. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
E. PUBLIC AND SEMI - PUBLIC USES: Public and semi - public structures and uses may be permitted in the R-2b Zone. These uses shall be delineated on the Preliminary Development Plan and may include the following:
1. Child care centers
2. Community centers
3. Country clubs
4. Fire or police stations
5. Open space/recreation areas
6. Parochial, private, and public schools
F. AREA REQUIREMENTS
Article X Zones 10-16
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
1. No R-2b Zone shall be permitted on less than twenty - five (25) acres of land However, an area of less than twenty - five (25) acres may be zoned R-2b, provided it is adjacent to an area with an existing approved Preliminary Development Plan and is currently zoned R-2b.
2. The minimum area for submission of a Preliminary Development Plan, within an existing R-2b Zone, shall be not less than five (5) acres. However, a Preliminary Development Plan may be submitted for an area of less than five (5) acres, provided it is adjacent to an area with an existing approved Preliminary Development Plan and is in agreement with all other requirements of the R-2b Zone.
G. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: Requirements may be as approved in the plan and as otherwise allowed or required in this ordinance.
No residential buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for single-family residences; five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be provided for every dwelling unit thereafter in the same building. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted on one lot.
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum front yard depth - Forty (40) feet.
4. Minimum side yard width -
Detached single-family dwelling units: Total: Twenty (20) feet; One Side: Eight (8) feet.
All other dwelling units: Fifteen (15) feet.
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Thirty (30) feet.
6. Maximum building height - Three (3) stories or forty (40) feet.
No public or semi - public building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-17
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
Minimum Zoning Lot Requirements Building Requirements
Conditionally Location Adjacent
Permitted Lot Front- Set- Side Rear Minimum Gross Maximum To Arterial Street
Uses Area age back Yard Yard Floor Area Height Required
Child Care Centers 110 150' 50' 20' 50' 70 Sq. Ft. 35' No
Sq. Ft. Per Child
Per Child
Community
Centers 1 acre 150' 50' 30' 50' - 35' No
Fire/Police
Stations 1 acre 150' 100' 30' 50' - 35' Yes
Public, Private, or 10 150' 100' 75' 200' 80 Sq. Ft. 35' No
Parochial Schools acres Per Child
H. OFF - STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off - street parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities, shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
I. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and signs, may be as approved in the plan and as otherwise allowed or required in this ordinance.
J. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
K. COMMON OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREA:
1. At least twenty percent (20%) of the total acreage of the proposed R-2b Zone shall be retained as common open space/recreation area, and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and maintenance. Such open space/recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily accessible, available to, and usable by all activities within the zone. Common open space/recreation areas shall be that part of the total project exclusive of buildings, streets, parking areas, single - family residential lots, commercial areas, and access drives.
2. Ownership of this common open space either shall be transferred to a legally established Homeowner's Association or be dedicated to the City of Crestview Hills for use as a public park. The proper legal document necessary for such transfer or dedication shall be prepared by the owner/developer(s) of the tract of land, and approved by the Crestview Hills City Council.
Article X Zones 10-18
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
L. SCREENING: Shall be as approved in the plan.
M. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposed development plan shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Agreement with the various elements of the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan and where applicable, any Officially adopted Neighborhood Concept Plan by the planning commission or the legislative body, or other adopted plan.
2. Extent to which the proposed development plan is consistent with the purpose of the R-2b Zone.
3. Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (based on topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.).
4. Nature and extent of the proposed uses in relation to the unique characteristics of the site; the current or anticipated need for such use(s) and the specific size and locale of the market area from which the specific uses of the site will draw or serve.
5. Extent to which the proposed design, as indicated in the Preliminary Development Plan, is compatible and coordinated with existing and/or proposed development contiguous to the site. Compatibility and coordination with existing and/or proposed development shall be reviewed in terms of intensity of land use type in relation to the general character of the surrounding areas, including coordination of vehicular and pedestrian circulation; the scale (e.g., height and mass of structures) of the proposed development; location of open spaces and size of setbacks; provisions of screening areas or utilization of natural features; the transition of land use types based on the proposed design; and the impact of the proposed development on adjacent uses, such as noise, visual impact, hours of operation, traffic circulation, etc.
6. Amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed operation and the ability of the existing highway system to adequately handle said traffic. Where deficiencies exist, proposed traffic improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
7. Extent to which the design of the internal street system provides for the efficient and safe movement of traffic within and adjacent to the site.
8. Extent to which all necessary public utilities and facilities are available to service the development including police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and other services normally provided within the area. Where deficiencies exist, improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
Article X Zones 10-19
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
N. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection B., subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
O. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the R-2b Zone shall be subject to the time constraints, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said R-2b Zone should revert to its original zoning designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions apply:
1. Final Development Plan has not been approved by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, within a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months from the date of the approved Preliminary Development Plan and map amendment by the legislative body; provided than an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or their duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Preliminary Development Plan obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Final Development Plan by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Final Development Plan obsolete. The amount of construction constituting initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the approved Final Development Plan.
P. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
2. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right - of - way or into any adjacent property.
3. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-20
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.7 R-PUD (RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) ZONE
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT: The R-PUD Residential PUD Zone is intended to provide alternative, voluntary zoning procedures for residential development and housing. The R-PUD Zone shall be used only when a relatively large land holding under unified ownership is planned and developed as a unit in accordance with an approved overall Preliminary Development Plan and subsequent Final Development Plan(s) for each section of the total land holding. The planning and development of the Planned Unit Development shall be carried out in such a manner as to have minimum adverse effect on the natural features and environment of the planned unit tract and its surrounding areas. Planned Unit Development typically features varied setback lines, dwelling types, and "cluster" type site planning, whereby provisions for maximum overall "gross" density are established to encourage imaginative land planning and efficient use of the land and to permit creation of usable and suitably located common open space for a higher level of amenity within the PUD.
B. USES/DENSITIES PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL USES, AND REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
1. Uses Permitted:
a. Detached single-family dwellings
b. Multiple-family dwellings and attached single-family dwellings, provided that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total PUD land holding shall be utilized for this type of housing
c. Publicly owned and operated parks and playgrounds
2. Densities Permitted: There shall be permitted a maximum gross density of 4.5 dwelling units per acre. The zoning lots for single-family dwellings shall not be less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet and the zoning lots for multiple-family dwellings shall be not less than sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet.
3. Conditional Uses: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and approved of by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
a. Churches, other religious places of worship
b. Institutions for human medical care - convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged
c. Municipal buildings
d. Nursery schools
Article X Zones 10-21
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
e. Public and parochial schools
4. Required Common Open Space: There shall be reserved, within the tract to be developed on a planned unit basis, a minimum land area ranging from fifteen (15) percent to twenty-five (25) percent of the entire tract depending upon the location and character of the land to be set aside as open space. This common open space shall not consist of isolated or fragmented pieces of land which would serve no useful purpose. Included in this common open space may be such uses as: pedestrian walkways, park land, open areas, drainage ways, swimming pools, club houses, tennis courts, and other land of essentially open character, exclusive of off-street parking areas.
Ownership of this common open space either shall be transferred to a legally established Homeowner's Association or be dedicated to the city of Crestview Hills for use as a public park. The proper legal document necessary for such transfer or dedication shall be prepared by the owner/developer(s) of the tract of land, and approved by the Crestview Hills City Council.
5. Accessory Uses Permitted
a. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
b. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11
c. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: The purpose of these procedures is to permit an initial review of and a public hearing upon the proposal by the planning commission at an early opportunity, while the details of the plan remain flexible and before the applicant has invested a large sum of money in the engineering and architectural services needed to provide the detail necessary for final plat and plan approval. Application for the Planned Unit development Zone shall be processed as follows:
1. An application for approval of the Preliminary Development Plan for a R-PUD Area and an application for an R-PUD Zone change, where applicable, may only be filed by a person having an interest in the property to be included in the planned unit. The PUD applications shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner or owners of property included in the development. However, the R-PUD application(s) may be filed by holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property.
2. Preapplication Conference: The applicant shall be required to meet with the zoning administrator, planning commission, and the Crestview Hills
Article X Zones 10-22
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
City Council prior to submitting the R-PUD Preliminary Development Plan for review and approval. The purpose of this preapplication conference shall be to familiarize the applicant with all the necessary steps, all applicable rules and regulations and to pre-review the applicant's thinking and concepts with the appropriate city officials. The applicant shall present a general outline of his approach to the R-PUD and the city officials shall give to the applicant an initial reaction which is not legally binding but which is advisory in character.
3. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application (preliminary development plan and, where applicable, the zoning map amendment) in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said application with regard to its compliance with the state purposes of the R-PUD Zone, the required elements of the Preliminary Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the city council: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Preliminary Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
4. The city council shall, within forty-five (45) days after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove said R-PUD application (preliminary development plan, and where applicable, the zoning map amendment). Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the city council take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection C., 3., above. Approval of the R-PUD Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the approved preliminary development plan.
The city council shall forward a copy of the approved plan to the planning commission for further processing in accordance with the requirements for the final development plan and record plat.
Zoning Map Amendment - Upon approval of the R-PUD Zone, where applicable, the official zoning map shall be amended for the area as shown on the approved preliminary development plan.
5. A final development plan and record plat shall be developed in conformance with the approved preliminary development plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.7, F., and submitted to
Article X Zones 10-23
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
the planning commission for its review and approval. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 10.7, F. shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission shall review the submitted final development plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 10.7, F. for final development plans, other applicable elements of this ordinance, and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with the approved preliminary development plan. The planning commission, in approving the Final development Plan, may authorize minor adjustments from the approved preliminary development plan, provided that the adjustments do not: affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), or decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Final development Plan, the planning commission shall review the submitted record plat with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 10.7, F., for record plats, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and its conformance with the approved Final development Plan.
Upon planning commission approval of the record plat, copies of said plat, certified by the planning commission, and suitable for recording, shall be forwarded by the planning commission to the office of the county clerk to be recorded.
D. PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS: A preliminary development plan shall be submitted, identifying and providing the following:
1. An aerial photograph of the subject property.
2. A plan(s) of the subject property, drawn to a scale of not greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, showing:
a. The total area in the project.
b. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties.
Article X Zones 10-24
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
c. All public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued, created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned.
d. Existing and proposed topography with a maximum of five (5) foot contour intervals. Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2) percent, the plan shall show either one (1) foot contours or spot elevations where necessary, but not more than fifty (50) feet apart in all directions.
e. The location and height of every existing and proposed building on the subject property, including existing and proposed residential uses by housing type, and commercial and public uses by type and function.
f. All walks, malls, parking areas, water bodies, open areas, recreational areas, including swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts, playgrounds, etc.
g. Types of surfacing proposed on off-street parking and driveway areas.
h. Location of all proposed streets, highways, and alleys, with approximate dimensions of pavement and right-of-way widths and relationship to the city's official thoroughfare plan.
i. All existing and proposed utility lines indicating, where applicable, pipe sizes and types.
j. Accessibility to essential public facilities and services, such as fire protection, schools, recreation.
k. Identification of the soil types on the subject property, indicating soil problems and proposed methods of handling said soil problems.
l. A preliminary schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential areas, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit.
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority.
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership with a preliminary statement indicating how maintenance of the latter will be handled.
E. PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES: Upon receipt of the report of the planning commission, the city council shall study and review the proposed R-PUD application and Preliminary Development Plan on the basis of: (1) that all requirements have been satisfied; and (2) finding that the following specific conditions are fully met:
Article X Zones 10-25
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
1. That the PUD Zone and/or the preliminary development plan is in conformance with the comprehensive plan for Crestview Hills, Kentucky.
2. That each individual stage or successive stage of development shall not exceed the maximum density allowed for the Planned Unit Development land holding as a whole, except that in construing the density of the development, each completed stage of development shall be considered.
3. That the use(s) proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under other zones.
4. That the areas proposed shall be used only for the permitted uses and the usual accessory uses such as garages, storage spaces, parks, recreation sites, open spaces, and community purposes, including churches and schools.
5. That the interval streets and major and minor thoroughfares that are proposed shall properly interconnect with the surrounding existing major and minor thoroughfares, as designated in the Official Thoroughfare Plan of Crestview Hills, Kentucky.
6. That, when applicable, the R-PUD proposed Zone shall be so located with respect to major highways and thoroughfares within the city as to provide direct access to said zone without creating excessive traffic volumes along minor streets in adjacent residential neighborhoods.
7. That the minimum common open space area(s) has been designated and shall be duly transferred to a legally established Homeowner's Association, or has been dedicated to, and accepted by, the city of Crestview Hills, as herein provided.
8. That the Preliminary Development Plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this ordinance, to promote public health, public safety, and general welfare of the residents of Crestview Hills.
9. Administrative Procedures: Approval of the preliminary development plan and, where applicable, the zoning map amendment, shall require a favorable vote of the majority of the membership of the city council. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall be limited to the general acceptability of the land uses proposed, proposed general density levels, and their interrelationship, and shall not be construed to endorse precise location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility which are to be determined in the subsequent preparation of the final development plan(s). In taking action, the city council may deny the R-
Article X Zones 10-26
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
PUD Preliminary Development Plan or may recommend approval of said plan, subject to specified modifications.
10. At the time of approving and R-PUD development, the city council shall make appropriate arrangements with the owner developer(s) which will ensure the accomplishment of the public improvements and reservation of common open space as shown on the approved preliminary development plan.
11. Time Limits and Extensions: After a period of two (2) years, the approval of a preliminary development plan is subject to another review by the planning commission unless a Subdivision Final Plat has been recorded in the office of the Kenton County Recorder within that two (2) year period.
F. FINAL DEVELOPMENT -- PLAN AND RECORD PLAT REQUIREMENTS: The Final Development Plan and Record Plat shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Final development Plan Requirements: Plan(s) of the subject property drawn to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that identifies and provides the following information:
a. The existing and proposed finished topography of the subject property shown by contours with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet. Where conditions exist that may require more detailed information on the proposed topography, contours with intervals of less than five (5) feet may be required by the planning commission;
b. All housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing - Location, arrangement, and number of all lots, including lot dimensions and setbacks, and maximum height of buildings;
(2) Attached housing - Location, height, and arrangement of all buildings, indicating the number of units in each building, and, where applicable, location, arrangement, and dimensions of all lots;
c. Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all nonresidential buildings and uses on the subject property and, where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions;
Article X Zones 10-27
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
d. Location and arrangement of all common open space areas, and recreational facilities, including lot dimensions. Methods of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be identified;
e. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the location, type, and height of walls and fences;
f. Location of signs indicating their orientation and size and height;
g. All utility lines and easements:
(1) Water distribution systems, including line sizes, width of easements, type of pipe, location of hydrants and valves, and other appurtenances;
(2) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width of easements, gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations, capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and other appurtenances;
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins, and data indicating the quantity of storm water entering the subject property naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at each pickup point (inlet), the quantity of storm water generated by development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm water to be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject property;
(4) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of service and the width of easements;
h. Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions, and the number and arrangement of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading spaces;
i. Circulation System:
Article X Zones 10-28
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, and width;
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross sections;
j. Provisions for control of erosion, hillside slippage and sedimentation, indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction;
k. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential area, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit;
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority;
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership; and
(4) Non-residential buildings and uses, in order of priority.
The aforementioned information required may be combined in any suitable and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly indicated.
2. RECORD PLAT REQUIREMENTS: The applicant shall submit a Record Plat, in conformance with the approved Final Development Plan. If the Record Plat is submitted in sections, an index shall be developed showing the entire plan area. The particular number of the section, and the relationship of each adjoining section shall be clearly shown by a small key map on each section submitted. The Record Plat shall conform to the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, unless specifically waived by the planning commission.
G. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No R-PUD Zone shall be permitted on less than fifty (50) acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing R-PUD Zone, may be permitted, when approved by the planning commission, if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
H. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the Final Development Plan, subject to the following:
Article X Zones 10-29
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
1. No single-family residence shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
2. There shall be a minimum buffer area of thirty-five (35) feet where the R-PUD Zone is adjacent to any other "R" District. Setbacks for buildings shall be as designated on the Final development Plan(s).
a. Where setbacks for individual lots are not included in an approved Final Development Plan, the following standards shall apply as minimum:
(1) Single-Family structures - lot width Seventy (70) feet
front yard Thirty (30) feet
side yard Six (6) feet
rear yard Fifty (50) feet
(2) Accessory buildings - front yard Not Allowed
side yard Six (6) feet
rear yard Ten (10) feet
3. No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
Minimum Zoning Lot Requirements Building Requirements
Conditionally Location Adjacent
Permitted Lot Front- Set- Side Rear Minimum Gross Maximum To Arterial Street
Uses Area age back Yard Yard Floor Area Height Required
Churches: Other
Places of Worship 1 acre 150' 100' 30' 50' - 35' Yes
Convalescent
Homes, Nursing
Homes, and Homes 1 acre 150' 100' 30' 50' 400 Sq. Ft. 25' Yes
For The Aged Per Unit
Public and 10 acres 150' 150' 75' 200' 80 Sq. Ft. 35' No
Parochial Schools Per Child
Nursery Schools 110 150' 50' 20' 50' 40 Sq. Ft. 35' No
and Day Care Sq. Ft. Per Child
Centers Per Child
Municipal Building 1 acre 150' 100' 30' 50' - 35' Yes
I. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
Article X Zones 10-30
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
J. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and signs shall be as approved in the plan.
K. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans may be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
L. EXPIRATION: As a condition to the zone change, where applicable, substantial construction shall have been initiated within twelve (12) consecutive months following the date of approval of the final development plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the city, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control. For the purposes of this ordinance, substantial construction shall be defined as the amount of construction to be completed as set forth in, and approved as part of, the phasing of the final development plan. At the expiration of said permit and extension, if any, a public hearing shall be initiated by the city, or its authorized representative, and held by the planning commission, according to the requirements of KRS 100, for the purpose of determining whether said zone change should revert to its original zoning designation.
M. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-31
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.8 SC (SHOPPING CENTER) ZONE
A. USES PERMITTED: The following retail and service businesses:
1. Advertising agencies
2. Antique shops
3. Apparel shop
4. Art supplies
5. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively on the premises
6. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies with drive-in windows
7. Barber shops
8. Beauty shops
9. Book, stationery, or gift shop
10. Bus shelters
11. Business, secretarial, medical, and computer schools
12. Camera and photographic supplies
13. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store, excluding drive-ins
14. Carpet and rug stores
15. Clinics - medical or dental
16. Delicatessen
17. Department store, excluding discount department stores
18. Drug store
19. Dry cleaning store
20. Eating and drinking places, without drive-in or drive-thru facilities
21. Employment agencies
22. Florist shop
23. Food store and supermarkets
24. Furniture store
25. Garden supplies
26. Glass, china, or pottery store
27. Haberdashery
28. Hardware store
29. Health clinics and health spas
30. Hobby shop
31. Household and electrical appliance store, including incidental repair
32. Interior decorating studio
33. Jewelry store, including repair
34. Laboratories - medical and dental
35. Leather goods and luggage store
36. Library
37. Locksmith shop
38. Music, musical instruments, and records, including incidental repair
39. Office appliances and supplies
Article X Zones 10-32
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
40. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
41. Offices
42. Opticians and optical goods
43. Package liquor and wine store, without drive-in or drive-thru facilities
44. Paint and wallpaper store
45. Pet shop, excluding boarding and outside runs
46. Police and fire stations
47. Post office
48. Radio and television store, including repair
49. Shoe store and shoe repair
50. Sporting goods
51. Studios for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts, photography, music, drama, or dance
52. Tailor shop
53. Theaters, excluding drive-ins
54. Toy stores
55. Travel Bureaus
56. Variety store, including notions and "five and ten" stores
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. The location, size, height, and type of all signs shall be in accordance with Article XIV of this ordinance or as approved in the development plan
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and approved of by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.15 of this ordinance:
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum building site area - Five (5) acres (In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area)
2. Minimum front yard depth – Ninety (90) feet.
3. Minimum side and rear yard requirements - Thirty-five (35) feet.
4. Maximum building height - Thirty (30) feet. The maximum height for buildings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet, provided that for each additional foot over thirty (30) feet, an additional foot shall be required for all side and rear yards, as required in Subsection D., 1., 3.
Article X Zones 10-33
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any residential zone.
4. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone. Such site plan shall include the layout of the entire area of the proposed shopping center and shall take into consideration good shopping center design (i.e., internal and external good pedestrian and vehicular access) and functional relationship of uses within the shopping center.
5. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
6. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
7. Off-street parking is permitted as follows:
a. To a minimum of twenty (20) feet from property lines along major streets (collector and arterial).
b. To a minimum of ten (10) feet from property lines along interstate highways.
c. To a minimum of seventy (70) feet from property lines immediately adjacent to a residential zone.
Article X Zones 10-34
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.9 PO-1 (LOW RISE OFFICE PARK) ZONE
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT: The intent of this office park district is to create an area that will accommodate a wide variety of office uses (administrative, business, professional) in a campus setting that is relatively open in character. This area should be compatible with the Thomas More College campus and should provide land area for certain offices related to the St. Elizabeth Medical Center and/or to Thomas More College, or for certain offices requiring good general accessibility to the region.
B. USES PERMITTED
1. Administrative offices, including public and semi-public, civic, educational, religious, or charitable organizations
2. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies
3. Business offices provided that no retail trade is conducted with the general public and no stock of goods is maintained on the premises for sale to customers
4. Libraries and museums
5. Medical and dental clinics
6. Medical laboratories
7. Professional offices including offices for doctors, dentists, optometrists, opticians, lawyers, accountants, architects, engineers, planners, landscape architects, surveyors, insurance agents, advertising agencies
8. Radio and television broadcasting studios
9. Regional and metropolitan area headquarters offices
10. Research and development laboratories
11. Substance abuse treatment facilities, outpatient
C. CONDITIONAL USES
1. Substance abuse treatment facilities, inpatient
D. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses as listed below, as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, providing that the accessory uses shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building:
a. Barber shop
Article X Zones 10-35
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
b. Beauty shop
c. Coffee shop or refreshment stand
d. Eating and drinking places, excluding drive-ins
e. Medical supplies establishments
f. News and confectionery stands
g. Prescription pharmacy
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum building site area - Three (3) acres. (In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area).
2. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet.
3. Minimum side yard width - Thirty (30) feet.
4. Minimum rear yard depth - Forty (40) feet.
5. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet or three (3) stories.
6. Maximum lot coverage - Thirty (30) percent of lot area.
F. OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING
1. At least thirty (30) percent of the total building site shall be preserved in open space and not be used for building or parking purposes.
2. Any developed part of the office park land holding not used for structures, streets, parking and loading/unloading areas, shall be landscaped or otherwise approved, or if approved by the city, left in its natural state.
G. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
2. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
3. A Conceptual Circulation Plan shall be required for any use permitted in this zone. Such Conceptual Circulation Plan shall include the layout of the entire area of the office park complex and shall take into consideration good design including internal and external pedestrian and vehicular access, and functional relationship of uses within the office park.
4. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
5. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
Article X Zones 10-36
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
6. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
7. Off-street parking may be permitted to extend into the minimum side and rear yards except when adjacent to residential zones and in the case of corner lots which must maintain minimum setback lines along the street frontage.
8. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
9. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-37
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.10 PO-2 (HIGH RISE OFFICE PARK) ZONE
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT: The intent of this office park district is to create an area that will accommodate a wide variety of office uses (administrative, business, professional) in a campus setting that is relatively open in character. This area should be compatible with the Thomas More College campus and should provide land area for certain offices related to the St. Elizabeth Medical Center and/or to Thomas More College, or for certain offices requiring good general accessibility to the region.
B. USES PERMITTED
1. Administrative offices, including public and semi-public, civic, educational, religious, or charitable organizations
2. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies
3. Business offices provided that no retail trade is conducted with the general public and no stock of goods is maintained on the premises for sale to customers
4. Libraries and museums
5. Medical and dental clinics
6. Medical laboratories
7. Professional offices including offices for doctors, dentists, optometrists, opticians, lawyers, accountants, architects, engineers, planners, landscape architects, surveyors, insurance agents, advertising agencies
8. Radio and television broadcasting studios
9. Regional and metropolitan area headquarters offices
10. Research and development laboratories
C. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses as listed below, as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, providing that the accessory uses shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building:
a. Barber shop
b. Beauty shop
c. Coffee shop or refreshment stand
d. Eating and drinking places, excluding drive-ins
e. Medical supplies establishments
f. News and confectionery stands
Article X Zones 10-38
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
g. Prescription pharmacy
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum building site area - Three (3) acres. (In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area).
2. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet.
3. Minimum side yard width - Thirty (30) feet.
4. Minimum rear yard depth - Forty (40) feet.
5. Maximum building height - Eighty (80) feet or eight (8) stories.
6. Maximum lot coverage - Thirty (30) percent of lot area.
E. OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING
1. At least thirty (30) percent of the total building site shall be preserved in open space and not be used for building or parking purposes.
2. Any developed part of the office park land holding not used for structures, streets, parking and loading/unloading areas, shall be landscaped or otherwise approved, or if approved by the city, left in its natural state.
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
2. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
3. A Conceptual Circulation Plan shall be required for any use permitted in this zone. Such Conceptual Circulation Plan shall include the layout of the entire area of the office park complex and shall take into consideration good design including internal and external pedestrian and vehicular access, and functional relationship of uses within the office park.
4. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
5. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
6. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
7. Off-street parking may be permitted to extend into the minimum side and rear yards except when adjacent to residential zones and in the case of corner lots which must maintain minimum setback lines along the street frontage.
Article X Zones 10-39
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
8. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
9. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-40
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.11 HLC (HISTORICAL COMMERCIAL) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Historical Commercial (HLC) Zone is to preserve a building(s) in the city which has an exceptional historical character and significance to the city; and to provide for a reasonable use of said building(s) which would help to preserve the building(s) and would not be detrimental to its historical character.
B. USES PERMITTED
1. Branch bank, with drive-up windows
2. Offices
3. Residential condominiums
C. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
D. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following nor shall any of the following uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been approved by the Board of Adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Studios for the following:
a. Art studio
b. Interior design showrooms
2. Standards for studios: In order to provide compatible uses in the HLC district, the following standards are set forth:
a. No processes and/or equipment shall be used or goods sold which are objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, and vibration
b. Hours of operation shall be limited to 9 am to 9 pm
c. There shall be no warehousing of merchandise
d. Any use must preserve the historic characteristics of the district
E. AREA, BUILDING, AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. No HLC Zone shall be permitted on less than six (6) acres of land. The minimum building site shall also be six (6) acres.
Article X Zones 10-41
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
2. Development within the HLC Zone shall perpetuate and include the use of the existing historical building(s). Expansion of the historic building(s) and construction of additional buildings may be permitted, provided that said additional buildings reflect the architectural character of and are compatible with the existing historic building(s). All structural alterations and additional structures shall conform to the following:
a. Minimum depth from arterial streets, as defined herein, shall be ninety (90) feet from the right-of-way.
b. Minimum depth from collector and local streets, as defined herein, forty-five (45) feet.
c. Minimum depth from interstate highways, as defined herein, and ramps thereto, five (5) feet.
d. Maximum building height - Two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet, measured to midpoint of gable.
e. Pavement for parking shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet of any right-of-way of an arterial street, collector street, or local street, as defined herein, and, irrespective of the foregoing, parking shall not be located in any area of the building site where prohibited by the legislative body.
f. Evaluation of a proposed development plan shall be based upon its agreement with the various elements of the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan.
3. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot.
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Article XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. All parking areas shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a zone containing single-family residential buildings, by a landscaped earthen berm or by other means approved by the legislative body.
3. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
4. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
Article X Zones 10-42
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
5. Any part of the total building site not used for structures, streets, parking, and loading/unloading areas, shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance, or if approved by the city, left in its natural state.
6. Fences and walls will be regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance.
7. Signs will be regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance.
8. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
G. DENSITY: Areas within an HLC Zone may be developed to a density that does not detract from or diminish the significance of the historic building(s), but in no event shall the density exceed that required to comply with the "open space" requirement of Section G., below.
H. OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING
1. At least forty (40) percent of the total building site of an HLC Zone shall be "open space". "Open space" is defined to exclude building structure, parking spaces, black top or concrete except sidewalks.
2. Any part of the total building site not used for structures, streets, parking and loading/unloading areas, shall be landscaped as approved by the legislative body and in accordance with the landscaping shown on the approved development plans and in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
3. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
I. PROCEDURE
1. Before a parcel of land can be developed within an HLC Zone or rezoned to an HLC Zone, the developer must submit a Stage I Plan of the proposed development in accord with Paragraph I., below of this section.
2. The Stage I Plan must be reviewed by the local planning commission (at this time, the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission). The planning commission will approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Stage I Plan. The planning commission will transmit its decision to the legislative body. A majority of the entire membership of the legislative body shall be required to override the recommendation of disapproval by the planning commission.
Article X Zones 10-43
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
3. Should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation.
4. After receiving the recommendation of the planning unit, the legislative body will review the Stage I Plan and then vote to approve or disapprove the Stage I Plan.
5. Minor revisions to the Stage I Plan may be approved by the legislative body without prior review by the planning commission.
6. After approval of the Stage I Plan, the developer must submit a Stage II Plan to the legislative body for review. The Stage II Plan must be done in accord with Paragraph J., below of this section.
7. The Stage II Plan must conform to the concepts and general layout of the approved Stage I Plan and the requirements of this ordinance.
8. The Stage II Plan must include the total HLC Zone, or at least the minimum building site area of six (6) acres.
9. No site development work may be commenced until the legislative body has approved the Stage II Development Plan.
10. A developer may waive the requirements of submitting a Stage I Plan and elect to submit the Stage II Plan for review, so long as the Stage II Plan contains all the information required of both a Stage I and Stage II Plan.
J. PLAN REQUIREMENTS - STAGE I
STAGE I -- PLAN REQUIREMENTS: Stage I Plan shall identify and provide the following information:
1. Plan(s) of the subject property, drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing:
a. The total area in the project;
b. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
c. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued, created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned;
Article X Zones 10-44
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
d. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any topographical changes shown by contour with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet;
e. Delineation of all existing and proposed buildings in the project with a statement indicating:
(1) The average density per acre of the total project, setbacks, and the height and exterior dimensions of each building;
(2) The number of stories, including basement area, and the gross floor area of each building;
(3) Open space -- The amount of area proposed for open space and identification of trees and unique natural features to be retained.
f. Delineation of all proposed waste receptacle sites.
g. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying approximate dimensions;
h. Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions of pavement, right-of-way widths, and grades;
i. The location of landscape areas, screening, lighting, buffering, walls, fences, and signs;
j. Location of all existing and proposed electric and telephone lines, water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes;
k. The number and approximate location of parking spaces;
l. Identification of the soil types and geologic formations on the subject property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed methods of handling said problems;
m. Other information that the legislative body may determine necessary for description and/or to insure proper integration of the proposed project into the surrounding area;
n. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
Article X Zones 10-45
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
(1) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority;
(2) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership; and
(3) Buildings and uses, in order of priority.
2. The Stage I Plan must include the following information in a narrative form that will be considered an integral part of the Stage I Plan:
a. A history of the historic building(s) on the site;
b. A description of the architectural features, both exterior and interior, of the historic building(s);
c. Statement of intended uses of the historic building(s) and the proposal for maintaining the historic integrity of the interior and exterior of the historic structure(s);
d. A description of the materials to be used in altering the historic building(s) and in constructing additional buildings in order to insure the compatibility of all renovation and construction of the existing historic building(s);
e. A description of all other measures that will be implemented by the owner/developer(s) to insure that the development will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; and
f. A description of the significant architectural and environmental features of the surrounding neighborhood.
K. PLAN REQUIREMENTS - STAGE II
The Stage II Plan shall conform to the following requirements:
Plan(s) of the subject property drawn to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that identifies and provides the following information:
a. The existing and proposed finished topography of the subject property shown by contours with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet.
Article X Zones 10-46
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
b. Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all buildings and uses on the subject property and, where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions.
c. Elevations of all sides of each building, identifying and delineating all exterior materials and architectural features. The legislative body may require that the renderings be made in color and shown in three dimensions.
d. Location and arrangement of all common open space areas, and recreational facilities, including lot dimensions. Methods of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be identified.
e. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the location, type, and height of walls and fences.
f. Location of signs indicating their orientation, size, and height. Types and locations of all exterior lighting.
g. All utility lines and easements, including:
(1) Water distribution systems, including line sizes, width of easements, type of pipe, location of hydrants and valves, and other appurtenances;
(2) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width of easements, gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations, capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and other appurtenances;
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins, and data indicating the quantity of storm water entering the subject property naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at each pickup point (inlet), the quantity of storm water generated by development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm water to be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject property;
(4) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of service and the width of easements;
Article X Zones 10-47
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
h. Location of all refuse receptacle sites, off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions, and the number and arrangement of off-street parking, and loading and/or unloading spaces.
i. Circulation System:
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, and width;
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross sections;
j. Provisions for control of erosion, hillside slippage and sedimentation, indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction.
k. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority;
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership; and
(4) Buildings and uses, in order of priority.
L. PLAN REQUIREMENTS - AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans must be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
M. PLAN REQUIREMENTS - EXPIRATION: As a condition to development within the HLC Zone, or to a zone change to HLC, substantial construction shall have been initiated within twelve (12) consecutive months following the date of approval of the final development plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the city, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control. For the purposes of this ordinance, substantial construction shall be defined as the amount of construction to be completed as set forth in, and approved as part of, the phasing of the final development plan. At the expiration of said permit and extension, if any, a public hearing shall be initiated by the city, or its authorized representative, and held by the planning commission in
Article X Zones 10-48
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
accordance with the requirements of KRS 100, for the purpose of determining whether approval of the development plan ought to be withdrawn or whether the zoning should revert to the property's original zoning designation.
Article X Zones 10-49
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.12 IP (INDUSTRIAL PARK) ZONE
A. USES PERMITTED: The following uses are permitted providing all permitted uses are in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Article XV of this ordinance:
1. Business and industrial offices
2. Crating services
3. Electric supply company
4. Equipment rental establishments
5. Industrial engineering consultant offices
6. Laboratories, offices, and other facilities for research, both basic and applied, conducted by or for any industrial organization or concern, whether public or private
7. Labor union meeting halls
8. Mail order houses
9. Publishing and distribution of books, newspapers, and other printed material
10. Schools for industrial or business training
11. Storage and mini-storage buildings
12. Testing laboratories
13. Warehouses and associated office space which may have a maximum lot coverage of seventy-five (75) percent and a maximum floor area ratio of 0.75
14. Wholesale houses and storage facilities which may have a maximum lot coverage of seventy-five (75) percent and a maximum floor area ration of 0.75
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses, including operations required to maintain or support any use permitted in this zone on the same lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs - only business and identification signs pertaining to the identification, use, or occupation of the building, structure, or premises, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance, will be allowed in this zone. Advertising signs, as defined herein, are not permitted in this zone
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum site for an industrial park zone - Forty (40) acres
2. Minimum lot area - One (1) acre (forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet)
Article X Zones 10-50
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
3. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
4. Minimum front yard depth - On internal roads - Fifty (50) feet
5. Minimum side yard width -
a. In internal parts of the park - Twenty-five (25) feet
b. Where the side yard is adjacent to a residential zoning district - Seventy-five (75) feet
6. Minimum rear yard depth - In internal parts of the park - Fifty (50) feet. No rear yard shall be required where a rail spur line forms the rear property line. Where the rear yard is adjacent to a residential zoning district - Seventy-five (75) feet
7. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet or three (3) stories
8. Maximum lot coverage - Fifty (50) percent of lot area, except as provided herein
9. Maximum floor area ratio - 0.5, except as provided herein
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
Article X Zones 10-51
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.13 INST (INSTITUTIONAL) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship.
2. Colleges and universities, including those structures used by the college or university and used for directly related purposes, including recreation and the housing of students, guests, and employees of the college or university. This includes administrative buildings, classrooms, lecture halls, laboratories, libraries, athletic facilities, dormitories, faculty and staff housing, student and faculty centers, and maintenance buildings.
3. Hospitals, including those structures used by the hospital and use for directly related purposes, including recreation and housing of employees, guests, and students of the hospital. This includes administrative buildings, classrooms, lecture halls, laboratories, libraries, dormitories, faculty and staff housing, student and faculty centers, and maintenance buildings.
4. Public, parochial, and vocational schools.
5. Nursing schools.
6. Nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest homes, and homes for the aged.
7. Day care centers.
8. Municipal building and fire house.
9. Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, and community recreation centers.
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Fences, walls, and signs, as approved according to the site plan
3. Uses as listed below, provided in conjunction with a permitted use, primarily as a convenience to its occupants, its customers, patients, and employees, and located within the same building as the permitted use:
a. book store
b. medical supply store
c. restaurant or cafeteria
C. AREA, HEIGHT, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTED USES:
Article X Zones 10-52
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
Minimum Zoning Lot Requirements Building Requirements
EACH MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM
PERMITTED BUILDING LOT LOT FRONT SIDE REAR BUILDING
USE SITE AREA WIDTH YARD YARD YARD HEIGHT
Colleges and
Universities 100 acres (1) -- 1,000 Ft. (2) 100 Ft. 100 Ft. 100 Ft. 50 Ft.
Hospitals 100 acres (1) -- 1,000 Ft. (2) 100 Ft. 100 Ft. 100 Ft. 50 Ft.
Nursing Homes,
Convalescent
Homes, Rest
Homes, and Homes
For The Aged -- 2 acres 150 Ft. 50 Ft. 25 Ft. (3) 35 Ft. (3) 35 Ft.
Public, Parochial,
and Vocational
Schools -- 15 acres 300 Ft. 100 Ft. 50 Ft. 50 Ft. 35 Ft.
Public Parks,
Playgrounds, and
Community
Recreation Centers -- -- -- -- -- -- --
All Other
Permitted Uses -- 1 acre 150 Ft. 50 Ft. 20 Ft. (3) 30 Ft. (3) 35 Ft.
(1) For purposes of computing the minimum building site, property located outside the city limits of Crestview Hills may be utilized, provided that all of the following conditions are met: (a) the property must be contiguous to the property located within the city and under the same ownership; (b) the property located outside the city must be developed for the same permitted use as the property located in the city; (c) the property outside the city must be zoned for institutional purposes (i.e., be zoned "Institutional" which zone must be generally compatible with Crestview Hills' Institutional Zone; or must be an approved "conditional use" in another zone).
(2) One thousand (1,000) feet of frontage on a public street is required for the building site. No specific lot width requirements if building site is subdivided.
(3) Fifty (50) feet when adjacent to a residential zone.
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. No building shall be erected, or structurally altered, nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel of land in the Institutional Zone until a site
Article X Zones 10-53
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
plan layout has been submitted and approved in accordance with Section 9.19.
2. A conceptual circulation plan shall be required for any use permitted in this zone to show the relationship of said use to other institutional uses within this zone and to transportation systems (pedestrian and vehicular) in this zone.
3. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
4. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
5. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
6. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
7. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
Article X Zones 10-54
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.14 RP-1 (RESEARCH PARK) ZONE
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT: The intent of this district is to create a planned/research office park that will accommodate a wide variety of research, office, training, and other business uses in a high quality campus environment compatible with Thomas More College and St. Elizabeth Medical Center.
B. USES PERMITTED
1. Corporate headquarters, regional and administrative offices
2. Professional, medical, and dental offices
3. Regional and metropolitan offices
4. Sales and marketing offices
5. Data and communication centers, including information processing facilities
6. Sales and service offices related to electronic equipment, computers, and similar office equipment
7. Research and development facilities
8. Medical clinics, medical supplies, and other related sales and services
9. Hotels and meeting facilities
10. Training, educational, and conference facilities
11. Printing and publishing facilities
12. Athletic and recreational facilities
13. Financial institutions and services
14. Retail and retail services in conjunction with an located within an office building, hotel, conference center, or athletic facility
15. Day care center
16. Colleges, technical, and business schools
17. Libraries and museums
18. Free standing sit-down restaurants, without drive-in or drive-thru facilities, and having seating capacity greater than one hundred fifty (150) seats
C. ACCESSORY USES
1. Storage in conjunction with the primary use and provided that said storage area does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the building area
2. Customary accessory buildings and uses
3. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
5. Uses as listed below as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, providing that the accessory uses shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross area of the permitted use in the development (see item G., 4., below for possible alternative approach):
a. Barber shop
Article X Zones 10-55
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
b. Beauty shop
c. Coffee shop/refreshment stand
d. Copy/print center
e. Eating and drinking places, without drive-in or drive-thru facilities
f. Financial services (bank, credit union, S & L)
g. Florist
h. Medical supplies establishment
i. News stand
j. Office supply store
k. Pharmacy/card shop/convenience store
l. Retail and retail services in conjunction with an located within an office building, hotel, conference center, or athletic facility
m. Travel agency
6. A business services center which would be a separate facility housing accessory uses as outlined in C., 5., a., 1. Such a facility could also encompass general office space probably including the offices of the Park Management.
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum building site area - One (1) acre. (In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area)
2. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum side yard width - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum rear yard depth - Forty (40) feet
5. Maximum building height - Eight (8) stories
6. Minimum area of research park (RP-1) zone - Fifty (50) acres
7. Minimum lot width - Two hundred (200) feet at building line
E. OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING
1. At least thirty (30) percent of the total building site shall be preserved in open space and not be used for building or parking purposes.
2. Any developed part of the office park land holding not used for structures, streets, parking, and loading/unloading areas, shall be landscaped or otherwise improved; or if approved by the city, left in its natural state.
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
Article X Zones 10-56
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
2. Screening and landscaping shall be provided as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements established for this zone.
3. A Conceptual Circulation Plan shall be required for any use permitted in this zone. Such Conceptual Circulation Plan shall include the layout of the entire area of the office park complex and shall take into consideration good design including internal and external pedestrian and vehicular access, and functional relationship of uses within the office park.
4. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted in this zone.
5. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
6. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
7. Off-street parking exception to Section 9.10, F. Off-street parking is permitted as follows:
a. To a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the property line along major streets (collectors and arterials;
b. To a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the property line along other streets;
c. To a minimum of ten (10) feet from all other lot lines, except when adjacent to a residential zone, where required minimum yards shall be maintained.
8. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
9. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
G. PROCEDURE
Before a parcel of land can be rezoned to RP-1, or developed within an RP-1 Zone, the developer must submit a Stage I Plan of the proposed development, in accord with Article I of this section.
The Stage I Plan is to be used as a guideline for the development of the total research park.
The Stage I Plan must be reviewed by the city planning unit (at this time, the Kenton County and municipal Planning and Zoning Commission). The planning unit will approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Stage I Plan. The
Article X Zones 10-57
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
planning unit will transmit their decision to the city council. The planning unit's decision is in the way of a recommendation and is not binding upon the city council.
After receiving the recommendation of the planning unit, city council will vote to approve or disapprove the Stage I Plan.
Minor revisions to the Stage I Plan may be approved by city council.
After approval of the Stage I Plan, the developer may submit a Stage II Plan to the city council for review. The Stage II Plan must be done in accord with Article J of this section.
The Stage II Plan must conform to the concepts and general layout of the approved Stage I Plan.
The Stage II Plan may include the total research park or any part of it.
No site development work may be done until the city has approved the Stage II Development Plan.
H. PLAN REQUIREMENTS -- STAGE I
STAGE I -- PLAN REQUIREMENTS: Stage I Plan shall identify and provide the following information:
1. Plan(s) of the subject property, drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing:
a. The total area in the project;
b. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
c. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued, created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned;
d. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any topographical changes shown by contour with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet;
e. Delineation of all existing and proposed residential areas in the project with a statement indicating net density of the total project:
Article X Zones 10-58
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
(1) detached housing - location and approximate number of lots, including a typical section(s) identifying approximate lot sizes and dimensions, and setback and height of buildings.
(2) Attached housing - location and description of the various housing types (i.e., townhouse, fourplex, garden apartment, etc.) including approximate heights of typical structures, and the approximate number of units by housing type.
f. Delineation of all existing and proposed non-residential uses in the project:
(1) Commercial uses - location and type of all uses including approximate number of acres, gross floor area, and heights of buildings.
(2) Open Space/Recreation - the approximate amount of area proposed for common open space, including the location of recreational facilities, and identification of unique natural features to be retained.
(3) Other public and semi-public uses - location and type of all uses, including approximate number of acreage, and height of buildings.
g. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying approximate dimensions;
h. Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions of pavement, right-of-way widths, and grades;
i. Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes. Indication should also be given regarding the provision of electric and telephone service.
j. Certification from appropriate water and sewer agencies that services will be available.
k. Identification of the soil types and geologic formations on the subject property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed methods of handling said problems
Article X Zones 10-59
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
l. Other information that the legislative body may determine necessary for description and/or to insure proper integration of the proposed project in the area.
m. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential area, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit.
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority.
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership.
(4) Non-residential buildings and uses, in order of priority.
The aforementioned information required may be combined in any suitable and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly indicated. A separate plan or drawing for each element is not necessary, but may be provided at the option of the applicant.
I. STAGE II - PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The Stage II Plan shall conform to the following requirements:
Plan(s) of the subject property drawn to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that identifies and provides the following information:
a. The existing and proposed finished topography of the subject property shown by contours with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet. Where conditions exist that may require more detailed information on the proposed topography, contours with intervals of less than five (5) feet may be required by the planning commission.
b. All housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing - location, arrangement, and number of all lots, including lot dimensions and setbacks, and maximum height of buildings.
(2) Attached housing - location, height, and arrangement of all buildings indicating the number of units in each building, and, where applicable, location, arrangement, and dimensions of all lots.
Article X Zones 10-60
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
c. Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all non-residential buildings and uses on the subject property and, where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions.
d. Location and arrangement of all common open space areas, and recreational facilities, including lot dimensions. Methods of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be identified.
e. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the location, type, and height of walls and fences.
f. Location of signs indicating their orientation, size, and height.
g. All utility lines and easements, including:
(1) Water distribution systems, including line sizes, width of easements, type of pipe, location of hydrants and valves, and other appurtenances;
(2) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width of easements, gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations, capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and other appurtenances;
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins, and data indicating the quantity of storm water entering the subject property naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at each pickup point (inlet), the quantity of storm water generated by development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm water to be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject property;
(4) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of service and the width of easements;
h. Location of all refuse receptacle sites, off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions, and the number and arrangement of off-street parking, and loading and/or unloading spaces.
i. Circulation System:
Article X Zones 10-61
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, and width;
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross sections;
j. Provisions for control of erosion, hillside slippage and sedimentation, indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction.
k. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential area, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit.
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority.
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership.
(4) Non-residential buildings and uses, in order of priority.
Article X Zones 10-62
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
SECTION 10.15 R-1Bd (RESIDENTIAL ONE-Bd) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Detached single-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses (detached garages are prohibited)
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses be permitted until and unless the location of such use shall have been applied for and approved by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery schools
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Semi-public swimming pools;
Article X Zones 10-63
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at minimum building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Ten (10) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES: No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter, except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot, and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
5. All utilities must be underground in a new subdivision or development when transmission lines are extended or altered.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.A. Intent
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 1 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16.1. OVERVIEW
A. INTENT
The regulations of the mixed-use (MX) zones are intended to support appropriately scaled redevelopment in the two MX zones mapped to implement locations identified in the Kenton County comprehensive plan as ideal for mixed-use development. Further, these zones are intended to achieve the following:
1. Sense of Place
A sense of place defined by human-scaled development consisting of a variety of high-quality buildings and civic spaces with well-designed landscape and streetscapes.
2. Walkable Development
Walkable development that is comfortable, safe, and interesting for the pedestrian through the use of appropriately scaled blocks, an interconnected system of streets with multiple choices for routes, and prioritization of streets for pedestrians and vehicles.
3. Connected Development
Connected development that provides meaningful, safe, and walkable connections to adjacent neighborhoods and development to eventually provide connectivity throughout the community.
4. Mixed-Use
Vibrant places with a “live-work-play” atmosphere, accommodated through a required mix of uses that activate internal streets and civic spaces during the day and into the evenings, and multi-story development that define the public spaces and create “eyes on the street.”
B. ORGANIZATION OF CODE
1. Section 10.16.1: Overview
Section 10.16.1 provides the introductory provisions for the MX zones regulations, including such items as mapping and procedures.
2. Section 10.16.2: Master Developments
Section 10.16.2 provides requirements for the introduction of new streets and open space, and the use and layout of multiple building types on larger developments.
3. Section 10.16.3: Building Types & Uses
Section 10.16.3 outlines the permitted building forms and uses within the zones. Allowable building form is established by a series of building types that contain regulations for locating the buildings and parking on the site, the height of the buildings, the uses located within the building, and facade and roof requirements. Permitted uses within each building type are also defined in this section.
4. Section 10.16.4: General Building Design
Design requirements applicable to all building types are defined in Section 10.16.4. Building materials, balcony design, and window design are examples of regulations included in this section.
5. Section 10.16.5: General Site Design
Design requirements applicable to the site are included in section 10.16.5. Landscape requirements, parking lot design, and signs are examples of regulations established in this section.
6. Section 10.16.6: Definitions & Measuring
Definitions for Section 10.16 and methods for measuring requirements are included in Section 10.16.6.
C. ZONES ESTABLISHED
The following zones are established for the mixed-use areas of the City. The MX zones are available for properties designated in Figure 10.16.1-1 and Figure 10.16.1-2 and, once rezoning is approved per Section 10.16.1.D, will be designated on the City’s official zoning map.
1. MX-1
The MX-1 zone is intended for use in geographic Town Center, including shopping, limited residential, and limited office areas.
2. MX-2
The MX-2 zone is intended for use in office park locations, including office buildings, corner shops/restaurants, and limited residential areas.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.C. Zones Established
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 2
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.D. Development Approval Process
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 3 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
D. DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCESS
The following establishes the process for rezoning and development approvals in the MX zones.
1. Pre-Submittal Meetings
A pre-submittal meeting is required with the zoning administrator and the City’s designated zoning staff.
2. Master Development Plan Approval
An application shall be submitted for review and approval of the master development plan and rezoning. Refer to Figure 10.16.1-3 for a flow chart of the process.
a. Applicable Area. The master development plan shall include all properties in the mapped outline per Figure 10.16.1-1 and Figure 10.16.1-2; however, project implementation may be phased.
b. Zoning Staff Review. Following the formal submission of a complete application for a master development plan, the City’s designated zoning staff will prepare a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval based upon the requirements of the MX zones.
c. Economic Development and Zoning Committee. The City’s Economic Development and Zoning Committee shall review the complete application and the zoning staff recommendation and will make a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval based upon the requirements of the MX zones.
d. City Administrator Approval. The city administrator or his/her designee shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application. Approval with conditions requires a resubmittal of the master development plan for full approval.
e. Master Development Plan Submittal Requirements. The following submittal requirements are required and shall illustrate compliance with Section 10.16.2 and other applicable requirements at this stage, as determined by the zoning administrator.
(1) Narrative Information. A project narrative shall be provided including the following:
(a) Total area in development project including legal description.
(b) Ownership and contact information.
(c) Intent of development.
(2) Project Phasing. Description and mapping of project timing and phasing, including all components (such as utilities, streets, parking, civic spaces, landscaping, uses, building types).
(3) Plans and Details. Refer to Table 10.16-1 for a list of submittal drawings required.
f. Master Development Plan Components. The master development plan shall include the components defined in Section 10.16.2., including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Streets and Blocks. All streets require boundaries located on the master development plan and designed per Section 10.16.2. Regulations for anticipated building types shall be considered when setting block depth and width to avoid the need for future variances or exceptions.
(2) Primary Street Designation. Primary streets shall be designated on the master development plan per Section 10.16.2.G. Primary streets will establish the location for fronts of buildings and driveways to parking and loading.
(3) Civic Space. Civic open space shall be located on the master development plan with boundaries and shall meet the requirements of Section 10.16.2.K.
(4) Landscape Buffers. Landscape buffers shall be located on the master development plan with boundaries and shall meet the requirements of Section 10.16.2.I.
(5) Building Types. The master development plan shall locate the boundaries for building types per Section 10.16.2.L and shall consider
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.D. Development Approval Process
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 4
the regulations for building types in Section
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.D. Development Approval Process
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 5 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16.3 to ensure the areas designated can accommodate buildings meeting the regulations. Building plans are not required for the master development plan; however, building and parking footprints are encouraged.
g. Master Development Plan Posting. The approved master development plan shall be posted on the City’s website and available at City Hall for public viewing.
3. Rezoning
Rezoning of the parcel is required per the following:
a. Rezoning may occur concurrently with the Master Development Plan approval process.
b. Rezoning shall follow the processes defined Article XVII.
c. Rezoning shall be contingent upon approval of the Master Development Plan and the Master Development Plan shall accompany the zoning. No parcel shall be rezoned to an MX zone without an approved, on-file Master Development Plan.
4. Subdivision Platting
Subdivision of the parcel is optional, but required with dedication of any rights-of-way, landscape buffers, civic spaces, or other spaces. The process established in Article 3 of the Kenton County subdivision regulations is required.
5. Infrastructure Implementation
The process for grading plan and approval of improvements is required per Section 3.6 of the Subdivision Regulations.
6. Zoning Permit Approvals
Upon master development plan and zoning approvals, each building development may be built as a matter of right when it meets all of the standards of the MX zones. In an MX zone, new buildings, additions to buildings, additions or renovation of site features, and changes to the exterior facade of any building require review and approval in accordance with the following procedures.
a. Zoning Staff Review. Following the formal submission of a complete application for a zoning permit, the City’s designated zoning staff
will prepare a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval based upon the requirements of the MX zones.
b. Economic Development and Zoning Committee. The City’s Economic Development and Zoning Committee shall review the complete application and the zoning staff recommendation and will make a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval based upon the requirements of the MX zones.
c. City Administrator Approval. The city administrator or his/her designee shall review and approve or disapprove the application.
d. Zoning Permit Submittal Materials. The following submittal requirements are required and shall illustrate compliance with Section 10.16 and other applicable requirements, as determined by the zoning administrator.
e. Narrative Information. A project narrative shall be provided including the following:
f. Total area in development project including legal description.
g. Ownership and contact information.
h. Intent of development.
i. Plans and Details. Refer to Table 10.16-2 for a list of submittal drawings required.
j. Conditional Uses. Conditional use permits shall follow the process defined in Section 18.7 of the zoning ordinance.
7. Appeals
Appeals shall follow the process defined in Article XVIII of the zoning ordinance.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.D. Development Approval Process
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 6
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.D. Development Approval Process
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 7 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.E. Minor Exceptions
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 8
E. MINOR EXCEPTIONS
Minor exceptions to master development plans may be requested for approval by the zoning administrator, as follows:
1. Conditions
Exceptions, outlined below, are permitted under the following conditions:
a. The exception fulfills the intent defined for this Section 10.16 of the zoning regulations.
b. The resulting form is consistent or compatible with the surrounding context and the vision defined in the comprehensive plan and other planning documents approved by the City.
2. Permitted Minor Exceptions for Zoning Permits
The following are permitted minor exceptions, if the above conditions are met.
a. The location of the building within up to 5 feet from any minimum yard requirement or build-to zone width/location.
b. Up to 10 percent increase in total impervious coverage, not to exceed the total amount of permitted impervious plus semi-pervious coverage. (Compliance with stormwater regulations is required.)
c. Up to 10 percent decrease in primary frontage coverage.
d. Additional height of any story up to 2 feet, as long as the overall building height does not exceed the allowable height of all floors at their maximum permitted height.
e. Up to 10 percent decrease in transparency or a 10 percent increase in blank wall limitation for corner side facades.
f. Additional minor exceptions are noted throughout this Section 10.16.
3. Permitted Minor Exceptions for Master Development Plan
The following are permitted minor exceptions, if the above conditions are met.
a. The dimension of any street component up to 2 feet in size.
b. Other minor exceptions defined throughout this Section 10.16.
F. DESIGN EXCEPTIONS
1. Application
An application for design exception shall accompany any Master Development Plan application or zoning permit submittal. The application shall define the requested exception, reference the applicable code section, and provide supporting material for approval, in the opinion of the applicant.
a. Master Development Plan. design exceptions per Section 10.16.2 shall be reviewed and approved as part of the master development plan approval process.
b. Building Type, Building Design, and Site Design. Design exceptions per Section 10.16.3, Section 10.16.4, Section 10.16.5 ,and this Section 10.16.1.F shall be reviewed and approved prior to approval of the zoning permit.
2. Approval
Approval of the design exception must be obtained by:
a. Review by the zoning administrator with recommendation for consideration by the Architectural Review Board (ARB).
b. Review by the Economic Development and Zoning Committee with recommendation for consideration by the ARB.
c. The ARB shall consider recommendations provided by the zoning administrator and the Economic Development and Zoning Committee upon review of the application.
d. The ARB may request additional information from the applicant, hear testimony of the applicant, and hear public comments.
e. The ARB, acting on authority given by the zoning administrator, shall consider the application, the zoning ordinance, any testimony, and additional facts to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the design exception application.
3. Conditions
Design exceptions allowed by this Section 10.16 are permitted under the following conditions:
a. The exception fulfills the intent defined for this Section 10.16 of the zoning regulations. Refer to Section 10.16.1.A. Intent.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.F. Design Exceptions
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 9 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
b. The resulting form is consistent or compatible with the surrounding context or the vision defined in the comprehensive plan and other planning documents approved by the City.
4. Appeals
Appeals are processed in accordance with Section 18.2 of the zoning ordinance.
a. The Board of Adjustment shall only determine if the Architectural Review Board followed the procedures defined in this Section 10.16 in making its determination.
b. The Board of Adjustment shall make its decision based on the facts considered by the ARB in making its decision by reviewing the record of the ARB decision, including the minutes, the zoning ordinance, and any facts or testimony presented as part of the design exception application. No additional testimony or new information may be considered.
c. Should new information or testimony become available, the application is referred back through the approval process defined in Section 10.16.1.F.2.
5. Master Development Plan Exceptions
Design exceptions to the requirements are defined throughout Section 10.16.2. Other design exceptions defined by the applicant may be requested. Master development plan design exceptions shall be reviewed and approved as part of the master development plan approval process.
6. Building Type, Building Design, and Site Design Exceptions
Design exceptions to the requirements are defined throughout Section 10.16.3, Section 10.16.4, and Section 10.16.5. Additionally, the following apply:
a. Existing Building Exceptions. The following exceptions are permitted when applied to the renovation of an existing building(s):
(1) For renovation of existing buildings, the maximum primary frontage coverage may be waived with an existing coverage of 60%; however, any expansion on the ground story shall contribute to the extension of the primary frontage coverage.
(2) For renovation of existing buildings, the location of the building within up to 5 feet from any minimum yard requirement or build-to zone width/location.
(3) For renovation of existing buildings, the minimum height of the ground story and upper story may be increased or decreased by up to two feet for existing stories.
(4) For renovation of existing buildings, other required dimensions may be modified up to five feet or 10 percent, whichever is less, unless otherwise modified by this section.
b. Alternative Building Materials. Alternative building materials may be exempted from the requirements of Section 10.16.4.C. and Section 10.16.4.D., unless expressly prohibited. For approval, the following shall be met:
(1) The Applicant shall submit samples and local examples of the material a minimum of four weeks prior to the review, to allow site visits to the location.
(2) The submitted application meets the intent of the materials requirements and the material will maintain its structure, color, and appearance for a minimum period of 15 years with little or no maintenance.
c. General-Office Building Height. Refer to Section 10.16.3.E for the General building type. Additional building height for a General-Office building may be approved with a design exception, under the following conditions:
(1) The building shall be located within an MX-2 zone.
(2) The building shall be located a minimum of 350 feet from any single-family zone.
(3) The building shall be no taller than 8 stories in height. The building shall meet the allowable floor-to-floor height for all stories per the building type.
(4) The Applicant shall submit three-dimensional massing drawings illustrating the proposed building massing and the massing of all buildings, existing and/or proposed, within 600-foot radius. Multiple views are required
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.G. Nonconforming Structures
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 10
and different views may be requested by the ARB.
(5) The drawings submitted shall illustrate that the design of the building fits well within the context of the surrounding area, including any proposed or potential buildings in the area.
G. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
All regulations apply to all new construction and renovation of existing structures. The following exceptions for nonconforming buildings in the MX zones is in addition to the requirements of Section 9.12.
1. General Building Design Requirements
For any expansion or exterior renovation, Section 10.16.4 General Building Design Requirements shall be met. A design exception may be requested per Section 10.16.1.F.
2. General Site Design Requirements
For any site renovations, Section 10.16.5 General Site Design Requirements shall be met. A design exception may be requested per Section 10.16.1.F.
3. General Renovations
Where any renovation includes an addition of more than 50 percent in gross building square footage within a 5-year period, all requirements of Section 10.16 shall be met. A design exception may be requested per Section 10.16.1.F.
4. Facade Renovations
If the building’s façade exists or will exist within the required build-to zone of these regulations, the Facade Requirements of the applicable building type (per Section 10.16.3. Building Types & Uses) shall be met, if the renovation includes any one of the following:
a. Expansion or change in location of 50 percent or more of the windows on any street façade of the building. Refer to Section 10.16.6.A for definition of street facade.
b. Replacement of 50 percent or more of facade materials on any street facade of the building with a different facade material.
5. Roof Renovations
If the renovation of the shape or style of more than 50 percent of the roof occurs and 30 percent of the street façade exists within the build-to zone, the Roof Type Requirements of the applicable building type (per Section 10.16.3. Building Types & Uses) shall be met.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.A. Intent
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 11
10.16.2. MASTER DEVELOPMENTS
All master development plans shall meet the requirements of this Section 10.16.2.
A. INTENT
In addition to the intent defined for the MX district regulations (refer to Section 10.16.1.A), these regulations are intended to require larger parcels to provide a system of blocks and open space, and a mix of building types and uses within new, walkable districts.
B. MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A master development plan shall be submitted for approval to illustrate compliance with the regulations in this Section 10.16.2.2 and those sections referenced, and to provide guidance throughout all phases of the project.
C. BOUNDARY LINES
All streets, civic open space, landscape buffers, and building sites require measurable boundary lines delineated on the master development plan. These boundary lines provides the baseline for measuring the allowed location of buildings and other requirements.
1. Easement and Property Lines
If a component (street, civic space, building site) is dedicated or under separate ownership, the easement line, right-of-way or property line serves as the boundary line.
2. No Other Areas
All areas of a site within a master development plan shall be covered by one of the following: streets (per Section 10.16.2.E), alley or service drives (per Section 10.16.2.F), civic spaces (per Section 10.16.2.K), landscape buffers (per Section 10.16.2.I), and building sites (per Section 10.16.2.L).
D. BLOCKS
An interconnected system of streets and blocks is required for all development sites. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-4 and Figure 10.16.2-5 for illustrations of one example layout of these regulations. Note that other configurations that meet the regulations are possible.
1. Block Size
Block length shall be no more than 600 feet, with a maximum perimeter of 1800 feet. Deviations from these dimensions for sites with natural or existing constraints may be approved with a minor exception per Section 10.16.1.E.
2. Access Points
A minimum of two access points shall be provided for each development, with a minimum of one per every 1,500 feet of boundary. An access point is a new street connecting to an existing street. Deviations from these requirements for sites with natural or existing constraints may be approved with a minor exception per Section 10.16.1.E
3. Extend Existing Street
Streets shall connect and continue existing streets from adjoining areas. Future connections shall be considered and temporary dead end streets may be supplied for future extension.
4. Shape of Blocks
The shape of a block shall be generally rectangular in order to accommodate typically rectilinear buildings, but may vary due to natural features or site constraints.
5. Lots and Building Sites Configuration
All lots or building sites shall have frontage along a street per the building type requirements, unless otherwise specified. Refer to Section 10.16.3.3.
a. With the exception of blocks containing open space, blocks shall typically be fronted with lots or buildings on at least two block faces, preferably on the longest streets.
b. The configuration of the blocks shall consider alley and service drive inclusion per Section 10.16.2.F.
c. Blocks may be established including already existing lots and those lots may retain their existing district designation.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.D. Blocks
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 12 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
6. Block Orientation
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.D. Blocks
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 13
Consider lot and block orientation for maximum
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.E. Streets
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 14 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
energy efficiency, depending on the building type. For example, block orientation along an east-west longitudinal axis will encourage development of long mixed-use buildings oriented along an east-west axis, with smaller east and west facing facades, able to take advantage of passive solar technology.
E. STREETS
Complete streets provide for multiple modes of access throughout the city. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-4 and Figure 10.16.2-5 for illustrations of these regulations.
1. Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets.
Cul-de-sac and temporary dead-end streets require a design exception and are permitted only when necessitated by natural features or site constraints, including but not limited to waterways, or highways. If allowed, pedestrian connections and landscape plantings may be required.
2. Civic Space
Refer to Section 10.16.2.K for civic open space requirements, including street frontage requirements. Open space, existing and new, shall be fronted with streets to provide more visibility and access.
3. Base Street Requirements
The base street type is illustrated in Figure 10.16.2-6. The zoning administrator may require additional street width or configuration based on existing context and circulation needs. The base street defines the minimum components of any new street on the interior of the development and includes the following:
a. On-Street Parking. On-street parallel parking shall be provided on both sides of all new streets through MX districts. Back-in or head-in, angled parking is acceptable in lieu of parallel parking, but may require additional street space. On-street parking on one side of the street may be approved as a minor exception by the zoning administrator, though parking on both sides is encouraged.
b. Streetscape
(1) The minimum dimension required for streetscapes along non-residential ground stories is 14 feet, with a clear sidewalk width of at least 6 feet and an
8-foot street tree and furnishings district.
(2) Along residential ground stories, the minimum is 13 feet with a clear sidewalk of at least 5 feet and an 8-foot landscape district (parkway).
(3) See Section 10.16.5.A in landscape for streetscape requirements.
(4) A minor exception may be approved by the zoning administrator for up to 2 feet less of any dimension per Section 10.16.1.E.
c. Maximum Pavement Width. The maximum pavement width for all streets internal to the development is 38 feet. Pavement widths wider must include a median in the middle to provide pedestrian refuge and/or bulb-outs to reduce the crossing widths to less than 38 feet.
d. Medians. Landscape medians are optional and permitted up to a maximum of 15 feet in width. Medians shall accommodate pedestrian crossings. Note that wider spaces within street configurations may be permitted by utilizing a civic space type per Section 10.16.2.K
e. Reduced Minimum Pavement. When only one lane of on-street parking is approved, the minimum pavement width for a two-way street is 28 feet and the minimum right-of-way width is 54 feet.
f. Exceptions. A design exception may be approved for other street configurations per Section 10.16.1.F.
4. Bicycle Accommodations
New streets within the development shall accommodate bicycle access per the City’s most recent bicycle policy. Bicycle accommodations shall be included on through streets and higher activity streets. On non-commercial and lower activity streets, bicycles may share vehicular lanes.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.E. Streets
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 15
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.E. Streets
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 16 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.F. Alleys, Lanes, or Service Drives
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 17
F. ALLEYS, LANES, OR SERVICE DRIVES
Alleys, lanes, or service drives (see Figure 10.16.2-7) shall be provided through all blocks to provide vehicular access to all lots, except as follows:
1. Parking Drives
Parking drives and parking structure drives may serve as alleys/lanes if the drive is continuous
through the block with at least 2 access points and serves all lots on the block.
2. Exception
A design exception per Section 10.16.1.F may be approved per block with one of the following conditions:
a. A single point of access is all that is required and a non-primary street is available for access.
b. Natural or existing constraints limit the block depth and no more than 2 vehicular access points are required for the lots on the block.
G. PRIMARY STREET DESIGNATION
The orientation and location of buildings on lots is determined by the primary street designation. Some building type requirements are specific to the primary street frontage. Primary street frontages prioritize the street frontages for locating the front facade of the building and limit vehicular access to parking off these streets.
1. Minimum Designation
A minimum of 50 percent of a combination of the new streets in the development and existing streets fronting the development shall be designated as primary streets. A design exception may be approved for up to a 20 percent reduction in the minimum requirement for streets treated as primary. Refer to Section 10.16.1.F for the design exception process.
2. Building Frontage
Primary streets shall be designated so that all building lots or sites front at least one primary street, except for up to 20 percent of the lots or building sites may front a non-primary street.
3. Civic Space Frontage
Where practicable, streets along civic space or other open space shall be designated as primary streets to ensure buildings front the open space. Refer to Section 10.16.2.K for civic space regulations.
4. Driveways and Alleys/Lanes
Driveways and alleys/lanes to building sites or lots shall not be located off a primary street, except when the lot/site is fronted by more than two primary streets and/or there is no other alternative access.
5. Major Streets
When the development abuts a major street, including Dixie Highway, Turkeyfoot Road, or Thomas More Parkway, one of the following layouts shall be utilized to create slower, more accessible, and more walkable streets for fronting commercial or mixed-use buildings than the major street would provide:
a. Perpendicular. New primary streets shall be located generally perpendicular to existing major streets.
b. Frontage Street. A new primary street shall be provided essentially parallel to the major street with a landscape buffer island separating the streets of at least 8 feet. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-8 for Typical Frontage Layout.
H. PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
Connections to the MX districts from surrounding sites and neighborhoods and within the site is encouraged. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-4 and Figure 10.16.2-5 for key locations where pedestrian connections may be required, when practicable, in addition to sidewalks along streets. Connections may include the following:
1. Mid-Block Pedestrian Paths within Development
Mid-block pedestrian paths may be located on blocks within the development that are longer than the maximum block sizes, approved by the zoning administrator during the Master Development Approval process. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-9 for illustrative images.
a. Mid-Block Pedestrian Paths to Adjacent Sites. Mid-block pedestrian paths may also be located to provide a connection between the development and adjacent neighborhood sidewalks.
b. Where approved by the property owner, the neighborhood, and the municipality, paths shall be located in a public easement.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.I. Landscape Buffers
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 18 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
c. Pedestrian paths to adjacent sites shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width and located in a minimum 12-foot easement.
d. Landscaping and other amenities may be required by the neighborhood, property owner, or municipality.
e. Where the path is located on the applicant’s property, shade trees shall be provided at an average minimum of 40 feet on center along the path. Refer to Section 9.17 for landscape regulations.
2. Pedestrian Tunnels
Where pedestrian tunnels under larger streets are planned for access adjacent to the applicant’s property, the applicant shall provide clearance for appropriately sloped access to the tunnel. A dedicated easement may be required per the zoning administrator.
3. Street Crosswalks
Crossings at all street intersections shall include a clear pedestrian path across streets (crosswalks) with accessibility ramps at curbs, demarcated by paint, stamped patterns, or pavers. Raised crosswalks are encouraged. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-10 for illustrative images.
I. LANDSCAPE BUFFERS
1. A landscape buffer, minimum 45 feet in depth, is required where any MX district or new street abuts any existing single-family district. Refer to Section 10.16.5.C.2 for planting requirements.
2. Landscape buffers do not count towards civic space requirements per Section 10.16.5.K, unless the buffer is treated as a greenway.
J. VISTAS
Views down streets shall be considered when laying out streets and locating open space, parking, and buildings. See Figure 10.16.2-11 for illustrative images of appropriately terminated vistas.
1. Rears of Buildings
The location of open space and streets shall not create views of the rear of buildings or parking behind buildings.
2. Street Termini
When a street terminates at a parcel, the parcel shall be occupied by one of the following:
a. Open Space. If the parcel is open space, any civic space type shall be utilized and a
vertical element shall terminate the view. Acceptable vertical elements include, but are not limited to, a stand or group of trees, a sculpture, a gazebo or other public structure, or a fountain.
b. Building. If the parcel is not utilized as an open space, the facade of a building, whether fronting a primary street or not, shall terminate the view. The building shall incorporate one of the following treatments to terminate the view: a tower, a bay, or a courtyard.
c. Parking. In no case, shall a parking structure or a surface parking lot terminate a vista.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.J. Vistas
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 19
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.K. Civic Space
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 20 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
K. CIVIC SPACE
All developments where a master development plan is required shall provide the following open space.
1. Required Amount
The following minimum amount of open space shall be provided:
a. A minimum of 10% of the total development site shall be provided as one of the civic space types, and
b. One type of civic space is required within a 500-foot distance, as measured continuously along a sidewalk, from the principal entrance of all residential and live-work units, and all other buildings. The intent is to provide usable open space within a short walkable distance for all occupants and visitors.
2. Types of Civic Space
The following types of civic space are permitted. A mix of types is required, with not more than 3 of any one type utilized. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-12 for example images.
a. Plaza. A plaza is a generally hardscaped area (minimum 60 percent coverage), minimum 1/8 acre in size, with either street, pedestrianway, or building frontage on all sides and at least one side the equivalent of 25 percent of the perimeter fronting a primary street. A single plaza may not fulfill the minimum open space requirements; if a plaza is utilized to meet the distance requirement, another open space shall be incorporated in another location on the site.
b. Square. A square is a combination of hardscape and landscape (approximately 50% and 50% respectively), minimum 1/4 acre in size, and surrounded by street frontage on all sides.
c. Green. A green is a generally landscaped space (minimum 70 percent), minimum 1/2 acre with street frontage on at least 50 percent of the perimeter.
d. Greenway. A greenway is a linear landscape space, minimum 2 acres in total with minimum 30 feet wide and minimum average 60 feet wide, and with street frontage on at least 30 percent of the perimeter.
e. Park. A park is a larger, generally landscaped space, a minimum of 2 acres in size, with at least 25 percent of the perimeter on street frontage.
3. Existing Open Space
With approval of the zoning administrator, existing usable open space, more than 1/4 of an acre and meeting one of the types defined above, may fulfill the requirements. Landscape area and buffer area does not count towards the civic space requirement.
4. Trails
Refer to any City open space and/or trail plans, and any existing trails surrounding the site, to provide connections through and within the site for continuous trails.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.L. Layout & Location of Building Type Sites
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 21
L. LAYOUT & LOCATION OF BUILDING TYPE SITES
The master development plan shall define locations of building types to meet the following requirements. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-13 and Figure 10.16.2-14 for illustrations of one site layout fulfilling these regulations.
1. Permitted Building Types
Refer to Section Table 10.6.2-A. for permitted building types by district. Refer to Section 10.16.3.3 for description and regulations for permitted building types.
2. Master Development Plan
The general location of all building type sites proposed shall be located within boundary lines on the master development plan and shall fulfill the requirements of this Section 10.16.2.L.
3. General Layout of Building Type
The following general layout requirements apply:
a. The same building types shall generally face each other across streets, including existing buildings.
b. More intense buildings and uses located on blocks with less intense buildings and uses should be located on block ends.
c. Changes in building type shall generally occur at a rear boundary line, at an alley, or at corner parcels.
d. A design exception per Section 10.16.1.F may be requested for changes to the general layout of building types.
4. Location of Storefront Buildings
The following layout requirements are applicable to any Storefront buildings applied to a site.
a. Storefront building sites shall begin within 500 feet of any major street and may extend, generally continuously, into the site any distance.
b. Storefront building sites should be clustered into areas of at least 10,000 square feet of net lot area or located linearly along a corridor.
c. Storefront building sites shall be uninterrupted and continuous. Permitted General-Office and Row-Office buildings may be located between Storefront buildings and General-Residential and Row-Residential buildings.
d. Storefront building sites shall not be located closer than 150 feet from any single-family Crestview Hills district.
5. MX-1 District
The following minimum requirements apply to the master development plan for MX-1 districts. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-13 for illustrations of one site layout fulfilling these regulations.
a. Minimum Number of Building Types. At least 2 different building types are required in MX-1 districts.
b. Storefront Buildings. A minimum of 300,000 square feet of land area shall be designated as Storefront building sites. Refer to Section 10.16.1.L. 4, above, for location and layout.
c. General-Office and Row-Office Buildings. General-Office and Row-Office buildings are permitted, but shall not be located within 200 feet of an existing single-family Crestview Hills district.
d. General-Residential and Row-Residential Buildings.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.L. Layout & Location of Building Type Sites
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 22 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
(1) Maximum Residential Buildings. A maximum of 15 percent of the MX-1 site may be designated for General-Residential and Row-Residential buildings.
(2) Minimum Required Residential Mix. With more than 2.5 gross acres of General-Residential and/or Row-Residential buildings, at least 2 building types permitted in the MX-1 district are required.
(3) Maximum Area of General-Residential Building. No more than 7.5 percent of the site may be designated for the General-Residential building.
(4) Location of Residential. General-Residential and Row-Residential buildings shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from Dixie Highway.
e. Civic Buildings. Civic buildings require a design exception for use in the MX-1 district.
6. MX-2 District
The following minimum requirements apply to the master development plan for MX-2 districts. Refer to Figure 10.16.2-14 for illustrations of one site layout fulfilling these regulations.
a. General-Office Buildings. A minimum of 120,000 square feet of area shall be designated for General-Office buildings.
b. Storefront Buildings. One node located in the area east of Turkeyfoot Road and one node located in the area west of Turkeyfoot Road may be designated for Storefront building sites as follows:
(1) The eastside node shall be located at the intersection of two streets and shall be no more than 40,000 square feet of land area or 10 percent of the total land area, whichever is greater.
(2) The westside node shall be located on Town Center Boulevard and shall be no more than 80,000 square feet of land area or 35 percent of the total land area, whichever is greater.
(3) For these nodes, the Storefront building site(s) may be located on one corner, an exception to the general location and
layout regulations in Section 10.16.1.L. 4, above.
c. General-Residential Buildings. General-Residential buildings may be designated for no more than 15 percent of the total land area.
d. Civic Buildings. Civic buildings require a design exception for use in the MX-2 district.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.L. Layout & Location of Building Type Sites
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 23
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.2.L. Layout & Location of Building Type Sites
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 24 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.A. Introduction
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 25
10.16.3. BUILDING TYPES & USES
A. INTRODUCTION
1. Applicability
This section establishes the building form and use regulations for new buildings, additions, and exterior renovations within the MX districts defined in Sec. 10.16.1.C.
2. Building Types Permitted
Each building type shall be constructed only within its designated location as defined by the master development plan.
a. No Other Building Types. All principal buildings constructed shall meet the standards of the permitted building types.
b. Multiple Principal Buildings on One Lot. For all building types, multiple principal buildings are permitted on all lots; however, each building must meet the requirements of the building type, unless otherwise noted.
c. Permanent Structures. All buildings constructed shall be permanent construction without a chassis, hitch, or wheels, or other features that would make the structure mobile, unless otherwise noted.
3. Uses by Building Type
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.I for uses permitted per building type. Building types may have additional standards on permitted uses.
B. DESCRIPTION AND INTENT OF BUILDING TYPES
The following defines the intent behind each building type. Regulations for each building type are established on the following pages.
1. Storefront Building Type
The Storefront building type is a highly pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use building. Ground story storefront is required along all primary streets with retail sales, eating and drinking establishments, and a variety of service uses to provide activity. Upper story uses are flexible. Parking is located in the rear, screened from the primary street by the building.
2. General Building Type
The General building type is a basic building that can accommodate a wide range of uses, from residential as apartment and/or condominium buildings to offices. The General building type does not call for groundfloor storefront glass, requiring the same minimum level of transparency on the ground and upper stories. Additionally, unlike the Storefront building type, the ground story may be elevated above the sidewalk level.
3. Row Building Type
The Row building type is similar to the General building, but is smaller in scale and divided into a series of vertical units each with separate entrances. Townhouses, rowhouses, or live-work units exemplify this building type.
4. Civic Building Type
The Civic building type is the most flexible building, meant to allow for singular, more iconic designs or buildings set back with landscape surrounding. This building type, however, is limited to civic and institutional uses.
C. GENERAL BUILDING TYPE REQUIREMENTS
The following applies to all building types.
1. General Design Requirements
Refer to Section 10.16.4.4 for General Building Design requirements and Section 10.16.5.5 for General Site Design requirements.
2. Build to the Corner
The intersections of two build-to districts at a corner shall be occupied by building. Refer to Figure 10.16.3-15 Build-to Corner and Build-to Districtscts.
3. Primary and Non-Primary Street Frontages
A hierarchy of frontages is established for the MX districts by the definition of primary streets on the master development plan. Refer to Sec. 10.16.2.G for information on the location of primary and non-primary streets.
a. Arterial Primary Streets. Unless otherwise determined by the master development plan, Dixie Highway, Town Center Boulevard, Turkeyfoot Road, and Thomas More Parkway shall be treated as primary streets.
b. Frontages along Civic or Open Space. Building sites containing or abutting civic
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.C. General Building Type Requirements
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 26 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
spaces or public ways shall treat facades abutting that space as primary frontage facades, unless a design exception is approved per Sec. 10.16.1.F.
c. Corners. At all intersections of primary and non-primary streets, primary frontage facade treatments shall extend along the facade of the non-primary street from the corner a minimum of 30 feet along the facade. Refer to Figure 10.16.3-16 for an example of this regulation.
d. Non-Primary Frontages. Non-primary frontages allow for a lower level of facade treatment as well as permit locations for garage and parking lot driveways entrances. Non-primary frontages may always be treated at the higher level of a primary frontage.
e. Two Primary Streets. When multiple primary streets abut a parcel, the zoning administrator shall determine which frontages shall serve as the primary, unless otherwise specified. A minimum of 50 percent of boundary or lot frontage is recommended to be treated as primary frontage.
f. No Primary Streets. When no primary streets abut a parcel, the zoning administrator shall determine which frontages shall serve as the primary, unless otherwise specified. A minimum of 50 percent of boundary or lot frontage is recommended to be treated as primary frontage.
4. Landscape and Hardscape Areas
The following establishes the required landscape and hardscape treatments permitted for the site other than building locations:
a. Landscape Areas. All street yards, build-to districts, side yards, and rear yards not covered by buildings, parking, or driveway shall contain either landscape, patio space, or sidewalk space. Maximum impervious and semi-pervious site requirements for each building type apply, unless otherwise stated.
(1) Landscape includes trees and ground plane vegetation per Section 10.16.5.C.
(2) Patio space is outdoor living space that includes seating, outdoor eating, or outdoor display.
(3) Sidewalk is any walking surface serving as a path between points of interest or access.
b. Permitted Parking and Driveway Locations. Parking areas and driveway locations are permitted in specific locations by building type regulations. Generally, parking is not permitted in street yards, unless specifically noted.
c. Build-to Districts and Setbacks. Parking and driveways are not permitted in build-to districts or setbacks except as follows:
(1) Where driveway access is permitted off streets, driveways may cross perpendicularly through the build-to district or setback with a maximum width of 22 feet for two way driveways and 12 feet for one way and single-family residential driveways.
5. Driveways and Vehicular Access
Parking locations on a lot or building site are defined by building type. Driveway and vehicular access for all building types, unless otherwise defined, is allowed as follows:
a. Alleys, Lanes, and Service Drives. Alleys, lanes, and service drive locations are established by the master development plan. Refer to Sec. 10.16.2.F.
b. Driveways off Streets. If no alley is planned, one driveway or garage entrance is permitted off non-primary street or facade.
c. Row Building Alley Access off Streets. If no alley exists or is required per the master development plan, a private alley is required with access off a non-primary street for row buildings. One access point is permitted off a non-primary street for every 150 feet of street frontage.
d. Visibility of Garage Doors. Row building type units shall be configured so that garage doors are fully screened from the primary street by the building.
6. Accessory Structures
Use of accessory structures other than parking structures requires a design exception. Drive-
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.C. General Building Type Requirements
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 27
through structures are expressly prohibited per Sec. 10.16.2.I.
7. Utility Structures
Minor utility structures not located within buildings and permitted in the MX districts are exempted from the building type standards, but are subject to all other standards. Refer to 9.17 for landscape screening requirements.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.D. Storefront Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 28 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
D. STOREFRONT BUILDING TYPE
The following defines the requirements specific to this building type. Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.A through Sec. 10.16.3.B for requirements applicable to all building types and Section 10.16.4.4 for general building design applicable to all building types.
BUILDING SITING Refer to Figure 10.16.3-17.
q
Minimum Primary Frontage Coverage
95% required; one courtyard permitted
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.1 for measuring and courtyards.
w
Primary Frontage Build-to Zone
0’ to 10’; 0- 25’ for a maximum of 15% of frontage
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.2 for definition of build-to zone and measuring.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for explanation of primary and non-primary frontages.
e
Non-Primary Frontage Build-to Zone
0’ to 20’
r
Minimum Side Setback
0’; or minimum 5’ if abutting other building type
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
t
Minimum Rear Setback
10’; minimum 20’ if abutting a zone permitting single-family residential; 0’ if abutting an alley
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
y
Maximum Site Impervious Coverage Additional Semi-Pervious Coverage
90%
10%
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.4 for definitions of impervious and semi-pervious, and explanation of measuring.
u
Surface or Accessory Parking
Rear yard only
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of yards.
i
Refuse & Recycling, Utilities, & Loading Location
Rear yard only
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of yards.
Refer to Section 9.17.G for screening requirements.
o
Permitted Driveway Access Locations Permitted Garage Entrance Location
Alley only
Rear facade or non-primary frontage facade
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.5 for driveway access exception where there is no alley.
HEIGHT Refer to Figure 10.16.3-18.
1)
Overall: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
2 stories
4 stories
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for explanation of measurement.
1!
Ground Story: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
14’
18’
Stories are measured floor to floor. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.7 for explanation of measurement.
.
1@
Upper Stories: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
10’
12’
USES Refer to Figure 10.16.3-18.
1#
Primary Frontage Ground Story
All uses permitted on the ground floor per TABLE 10.16.3.A. Permitted Uses.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.I. Uses for use definitions. Note residential unit sizes in Sec. 10.16.3.I.6.
1$
Non-Primary Frontage, All Upper Stories, & Basement
All permitted uses per TABLE 10.16.3.A. Permitted Uses.
1%
Parking within Building
Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of all other stories
Refer to Occupied Building Space requirement below.
1^
Required Occupied Building Space
Minimum 20’ deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade; not required in any basement
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition for Occupied Building Space.
FACADE & CAP REQUIREMENTS Refer to Figure 10.16.3-19.
1&
Transparency: Ground Story Primary Frontage Facade
Minimum 70% measured between 2 and 8 feet above average grade of adjacent sidewalk.
Blank wall limitations apply.
Note that Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 requires primary frontage treatment to turn corners.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.8 for definition of transparency and explanation of measurement.
Blank wall limitations apply per Sec. 10.16.6.B.8.
1*
Transparency: All Street Facades & Facades Visible from the Street
Minimum 15%, measured per story of all stories. Blank wall limitations apply to primary facades only.
1(
Entrance Location & Number
Principal entrances required on primary frontage facade a minimum of one per every 60’ of facade
Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.K. for Principal Entryway requirements.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.9 for explanation of measurement.
2)
Entryway Configuration
Recessed between 3’ and 8’, maximum 8’ wide
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.D. Storefront Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 29
2!
Entrance/Ground Story Elevation
80% of the ground story shall be within 1.5’ of adjacent sidewalk grade
2@
Ground Story Vertical Facade Divisions
One 2” deep shadow line per every 30’ of facade width
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of shadow line. Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.L for building articulation, including building variety.
2#
Horizontal Facade Divisions
2” deep shadow line within 3’ of the top of the ground story
2$
Permitted Cap Types
Parapet, flat; tower permitted
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.H. for definition of Cap Types and exception for other cap types.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.D. Storefront Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 30 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.E. General Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 31
E. GENERAL BUILDING TYPE
The following defines the requirements specific to this building type. Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.A through Sec. 10.16.3.B for requirements applicable to all building types and Section 10.16.4.4 for general building design applicable to all building types.
GENERAL-OFFICE
REFERENCES/ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
BUILDING SITING Refer to Figure 10.16.3-20.
q
Minimum Primary Frontage Coverage
80% required; one courtyard permitted
75% required; one courtyard permitted
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.1 for measuring and courtyards.
w
Primary Frontage Build-to Zone
5’ to 20’
10’ to 20’
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.2 for definition of build- to zone and measuring.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for explanation of primary and non-primary frontages.
e
Non-Primary Frontage Build-to Zone
5’ to 15’
5’ to 20’
r
Minimum Side Setback
5’; or minimum 10’ if abutting another building type
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
t
Minimum Rear Setback
10’; minimum 20’ if abutting a zone permitting residential on ground story
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
y
Maximum Site Impervious Coverage Additional Semi-Pervious Coverage
75%
10%
60%
20%
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.4 for definitions of impervious and semi-pervious, and explanation of measuring.
u
Surface or Accessory Parking
Rear, limited side yard parking
Rear yard only
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of yards.
i
Refuse & Recycling, Utilities, & Loading Location
Rear yard only
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of yards. Refer to Section 9.17.G for screening requirements.
o
Permitted Driveway Access Locations Permitted Garage Entrance Location
Alley only
Rear or side facade
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.5 for driveway access exception where there is no alley.
HEIGHT Refer to Figure 10.16.3-21.
1)
Overall: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
2 stories
4.5 stories; 5.5 stories when located minimum 350 feet from any single-family zone
2 stories
4.5 stories
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for explanation of measurement and definition of half story.
For General-Office, a design exception for additional height may be approved in MX-2 only per Sec. 10.16.1.F.
1!
All Stories: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
9’
12’
9’
12’
Stories are measured floor to floor. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.7 for explanation of measurement.
USES Refer to Figure 10.16.3-21.
1@
All Frontages & Stories
All permitted uses per TABLE 10.16.3.A. Permitted Uses.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.I. Uses for use definitions. Note residential unit sizes in Sec. 10.16.3.I.6.
1#
Parking within Building
Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of all other stories
Refer to Occupied Building Space requirement below.
1$
Required Occupied Building Space
Minimum 20’ deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade; not required in any basement
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition for Occupied Building Space.
FACADE & CAP REQUIREMENTS Refer to Figure 10.16.3-22.
1%
Required Transparency Street Facades & Facades Visible from the Street
Minimum 15%, measured per story of all stories. Blank wall limitations apply to primary facades only.
Note that Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 requires primary frontage treatment to turn corners.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.8 for definition of transparency and explanation of measurement. Blank wall limitations apply per Sec. 10.16.6.B.8.
1^
Entrance Location & Number
Principal entrance required on primary frontage facade; entrances required a minimum of one per every 90’ of building facade
Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.K. for Principal Entryway requirements.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.9 for explanation of measurement.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of stoop.
1&
Entryway Configuration
Entry doors shall be off a stoop, minimum 6’ wide and 3’ deep
1
Entrance/Ground Story Elevation
80% of entrances and the ground story shall be within 30” of adjacent street sidewalk average elevation OR between 30” and 5’ with visible basement (transparency required)
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for definition of visible basement and explanation of measurement.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.E. General Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 32 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
*
1(
Ground Story Vertical Facade Divisions
One minimum 2” deep shadow line per every 100’ of facade width
One minimum 2” deep shadow line per every 60’ of facade width
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of shadow line.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.L for building articulation, including building variety.
2)
Horizontal Facade Divisions One minimum 2” deep shadow line within 3’ of the top of the ground story
2!
Permitted Cap Types
Parapet, flat; tower permitted; pitched with approved design exception
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.H. for definition of Cap Types and exception for other cap types.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.E. General Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 33
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.F. Row Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 34 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
F. ROW BUILDING TYPE
The following defines the requirements specific to this building type. Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.A through Sec. 10.16.3.B for requirements applicable to all building types and Section 10.16.4.4 for general building design applicable to all building types.
ROWROW-OFFICE
ROW-RESIDENTIAL
REFERENCES/ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
BUILDING SITING Refer to Figure 10.16.3-23.
For the purposes of the Row building type, a building consists of multiple units.
For every 3 units fronting a street, 1 unit may front a courtyard or civic space. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.1 for measuring and courtyards. For units fronting courtyards or civic space, the build-to zone is measured from the edge of the courtyard or boundary line of the civic space.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.2 for measuring of build-to zone and Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for explanation of primary and non-primary frontages.
q
Minimum Primary Frontage Coverage
80% required; courtyards permitted
70% required; courtyards permitted
w
Primary Frontage Build-to Zone 5’ to 20’
10’ to 15’
e
Non-Primary Frontage Build-to Zone
5’ to 15’
5’ to 15’
r
Minimum Side Setback
Minimum Space between Buildings
5’
10’
10’
15’
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
t
Minimum Rear Setback
15’; 5’ adjacent to alley
15’; 5’ adjacent to alley
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
y
Building Length per Street Facade
Maximum 8 units or 160’, whichever is less
Building length is measured along street facades.
u
Minimum Unit Width
18’
Unit width is the narrowest dimension of each unit.
i
Maximum Site Impervious Coverage Additional Semi-Pervious Coverage
75%
20%
70%
15%
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.4 for definitions of impervious and semi-pervious, and explanation of measuring.
o
Surface or Accessory Parking, Refuse & Recycling, Utilities, & Loading Location
Rear yard only
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of yards.
Refer to Section 9.17.G for screening requirements.
1)
Permitted Driveway Access Locations Permitted Garage Entrance Location
Alley only
Rear facade only of principal building
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.5 for driveway access exception where there is no alley. Refer to Sec.
10.16.4.M for garage door requirements.
HEIGHT Refer to Figure 10.16.3-24.
1!
Overall: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
2 stories
3.5 stories
2 stories
3 stories
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for explanation of measurement and definition of half story.
1@
All Stories: Minimum Height Maximum Height
9’
14’
Stories are measured floor to floor. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.7 for explanation of measurement.
USES Refer to Figure 10.16.3-24.
1#
All Stories
Office and residential uses only.
Residential only
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.I. Uses for use definitions. Note residential unit sizes in Sec. 10.16.3.I.6.
1$
Parking within Building
Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of ground story
Refer to Occupied Building Space requirement below.
1%
Required Occupied Building Space
Minimum 20’ deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade. Not required in any basement.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition for Occupied Building Space.
FACADE & CAP REQUIREMENTS Refer to Figure 10.16.3-25.
1^
Transparency: Street Facades & Facades Visible from the Street
Minimum 15%, measured per story of all stories. Blank wall limitations apply to primary street facades.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.8 for definition of transparency and explanation of measurement. Blank wall limitations apply per Sec. 10.16.6.B.8.
1&
Entrance Location & Number
Each unit requires one principal entrance on a street, courtyard, or open space facade.
Minimum of one principal entrance required per 30’ of
primary street facade.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.K. for Principal Entryway requirements.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.9 for explanation of measurement.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of stoop and porch.
1*
Entrance Configuration
Entry doors shall be off a stoop, minimum 4’ wide and 3’ deep, OR a porch, minimum 8’ wide & 5’ deep.
Entry doors shall be off a porch, minimum 8’ wide & 5’ deep.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.F. Row Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 35
No more than 2 entry doors may be located off each stoop or porch.
1(
Entrance/Ground Story Elevation on Primary Frontage Facade
80% of entrances and the ground story shall be within 30” of adjacent street sidewalk average elevation OR between 30” and 5’ with a visible basement (transparency required)
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for definition of visible basement and explanation of measurement.
2)
Ground Story Vertical Facade Divisions
One 2” deep shadow line per every 60’ of facade width or every 2 units, whichever is less
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of shadow line. Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.L for building articulation, including building variety.
2!
Horizontal Facade Divisions
One 2” deep shadow line within 3’ of any visible basement
2@
Permitted Cap Types
Parapet, pitched, flat; one tower is permitted per building
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.H. for definition of Cap Types and exception for other cap types..
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.F. Row Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 36 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.G. Civic Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 37
G. CIVIC BUILDING TYPE
The following defines the requirements specific to this building type. Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.A through Sec. 10.16.3.B for requirements applicable to all building types and Section 10.16.4.4 for general building design applicable to all building types. In all districts where permitted, development of this building type requires approval of a design exception per Sec. 10.16.1.F.
CIVIC
REFERENCES/ ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
BUILDING SITING Refer to Figure 10.16.3-26.
q
Minimum Primary Frontage Coverage
none required
w
Primary Frontage Minimum Setback
15’
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.B.3 for explanation of primary and non-primary frontages. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.3 for definition of setback and measuring.
e
Non-Primary Frontage Minimum Setback
10’
r
Minimum Side Setback
15’
t
Minimum Rear Setback
15’
y
Maximum Building Length
None required
u
Maximum Site Impervious Coverage Additional Semi-Pervious Coverage
50%
30%
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.4 for definitions of impervious and semi-pervious, and explanation of measuring.
i
Surface or Accessory Parking, Refuse & Recycling, Utilities, & Loading Location
Rear yard, limited side yard
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of yards.
Refer to Section 9.17.G for screening requirements.
o
Permitted Driveway Access Locations Permitted Garage Entrance Location
Alley only
Rear or side facade
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.5 for driveway access exception where there is no alley.
2. HEIGHT Refer to Figure 10.16.3-27.
1)
Overall: Minimum Height
Maximum Height
1 stories
3.5 stories
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for explanation of measurement.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of half story.
1!
All Stories: Minimum Height Maximum Height
9’; 15’ for single story building
18’; 24’ on single story building
Stories are measured floor to floor. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.7 for explanation of measurement.
USES Refer to Figure 10.16.3-27.
1@
All Frontages & Stories
Limited to Civic and Institutional categories of uses per TABLE 10.16.3.A. Permitted Uses.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.I. Uses for permitted uses per zone.
1#
Parking within Building
Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of all other stories
Refer to Occupied Building Space requirement below.
1$
Required Occupied Building Space
Minimum 20’ deep on all full height floors from any street facade. Not required in any basement.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition for Occupied Building Space.
FACADE & CAP REQUIREMENTS Refer to Figure 10.16.3-28.
1%
Transparency: Street Facades & Facades Visible from the Street
Minimum 12%, measured per story of all stories
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.8 for definition of transparency and explanation of measurement.
Blank wall limitations apply to primary street facade per Sec. 10.16.6.B.8.
1^
Entrance Location & Number
Principal entrance required on primary frontage facade
Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.K. for Principal Entryway requirements.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.9 for explanation of measurement.
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of stoop.
1&
Entrance Configuration
No requirement other than principal entryway design requirements
1*
Entrance/Ground Story Elevation
Principal entrance and 80% of the ground story shall be within 30” of adjacent street sidewalk average elevation OR between 30” and 5’ with visible basement (transparency required)
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.B.6 for definition of visible basement and explanation of measurement.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.G. Civic Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 38 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
1(
Ground Story Vertical Facade Divisions
No requirement; one 2” deep shadow line recommended per every 60’ of facade width, whichever is less
Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A. for definition of shadow line. Refer to Sec. 10.16.4.L for building articulation, including building variety.
2)
Horizontal Facade Divisions
No requirement; one 2” deep shadow line recommended within 3’ of any visible basement
2!
Permitted Cap Types
Parapet, pitched, flat, other with design exception per Sec. 10.16.1.F;
tower permitted
Refer to Sec. 10.16.3.H. for definition of Cap Types and exception for other cap types..
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.G. Civic Building Type
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 39
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.H. Cap Types
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 40 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
H. CAP TYPES
The major components of any roof shall meet the requirements of one of the cap types permitted per building type. Roofs for bay or bow windows and dormers are not required to meet a cap type.
1. Parapet Cap Type
(Refer to Figure 10.16.3-29 Example of a Parapet Cap Type). A parapet is a low wall projecting above a building’s roof along the perimeter of the building.
a. Parapet Height. Height is measured from the top of the upper story to the top of the parapet. Minimum height is 2 feet with a maximum height of 6 feet. Horizontal shadow lines. An shadow line shall define the parapet from the upper stories of the building and shall also define the top of the cap. Refer to Sec. 10.16.6.A for definition of shadow line.
b. Occupied Building Space. Occupied building space shall not be incorporated behind this cap type.
c. Rooftop Appurtenances. With the exception of solar panels, any rooftop appurtenances shall be located towards the rear or interior of the parapet roof. The parapet shall screen the mechanicals from the elevation of the sidewalk across the street
2. Flat Cap Type
(Refer to Figure 10.16.3-30 Example of a Flat Cap Type). This cap type is a visibly flat roof with overhanging eaves.
a. Configuration. The roof shall have no visible slope from the street and eaves are required
on all primary and non-primary frontage facades.
b. Eave Depth. Eave depth is measured from the building facade to the outside edge of the eave. Eaves shall have a depth of at least 14 inches.
c. Eave Thickness. Eave thickness is measured at the outside edge of the eave, from the bottom of the eave to the top of the eave. Eaves shall be a minimum of 6 inches thick.
d. Interrupting Vertical Walls. Vertical walls may interrupt the eave and extend above the top of the eave with no discernible cap.
(1) No more than one-third of the front facade may consist of an interrupting vertical wall.
(2) Vertical walls shall extend no more than 8 feet above the top of the eave.
e. Occupied Building Space. Occupied building space shall not be incorporated behind this cap type.
f. Rooftop Appurtenances. With the exception of solar panels, any rooftop appurtenances shall be located behind the interrupting vertical wall with no visibility on any street elevation drawing.
3. Pitched Cap Type
(Refer to Figure 10.16.3-31 Examples of Pitched Cap Type). This cap type is a sloped or pitched roof. Slope is measured with the vertical rise divided by the horizontal span or run.
a. Pitch Measure. The roof may not be sloped less than a 4:12 (rise:run) or more than 14:12.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.H. Cap Types
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 41
Slopes less than 4:12 are permitted to occur on second story or higher roofs.
b. Configurations.
Hipped, gabled, and combination of hips and gables with or without dormers are permitted.
Butterfly (inverted gable roof) and shed roofs are permitted with a maximum height of 8 feet, inclusive of overhang.
(1) Gambrel and mansard roofs are not permitted.
c. Parallel Ridge Line. A gabled end or perpendicular ridge line shall occur at least every 100 feet of roof when the ridge line runs parallel to the primary frontage. (Refer to Figure 10.16.3-31 Examples of Pitched Cap Type).
d. Roof Height. Roofs without occupied building space and/or dormers shall have a maximum height on primary and non-primary frontage facades equal to no more than 1.5 times the upper story floor to floor height utilized on the building.
e. Occupied Building Space. Occupied building space may be incorporated behind this cap type. If used, the space counts as a half story.
f. Rooftop Appurtenances. With the exception of solar panels, any rooftop appurtenances shall be recessed within the pitched roof with no visibility on any street elevation drawing.
4. Other Cap Types
Special cap designs otherwise not defined in this section may be approved through an minor design exception during the design review process with the following requirements:
a. The building shall warrant a separate status from the majority of buildings in the district, with a correspondence between the form of the cap and the building use, such as a dome for a planetarium, a dome for a place of worship, or a unique, singular roof for a more distinctive city hall.
b. The cap type shall not create additional occupiable space beyond that permitted by the building type.
c. The scale and type of the cap type shall be consistent with the character of city and the area within which it is located.
d. The shape of the roof shall be different from those defined in this section 10.16.3.H. Cap Types, such as a dome, spire, or vault, and not a gabled roof, hipped roof, butterfly roof, gambrel roof, mansard roof, roof with parapet, or flat roof.
5. Towers
A tower is a vertical element, polygonal (simple), rectilinear or cylindrical in plan that shall be used with other cap types. Refer to Figure 10.16.3-32 Example of a Tower.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.H. Cap Types
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 42 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
a. Quantity. Unless otherwise defined in the building type tables (Sec. 10.16.3.D through Sec. 10.16.3.G), a maximum of 2 towers total are permitted within 15 feet of all street facades and 2 additional towers are permitted a minimum of 30 feet from a street facade. Tower locations are typically limited to allowing towers associated with the facade design and visible from the street, and those more functional towers located beyond the facade.
b. Tower Height. Maximum height, measured from the top of the parapet or eave to the top of the tower shaft not including the cap, is the equivalent of the height of one upper floor of the building to which the tower is applied.
c. Tower Width. Maximum width along all facades is one-third the width of the front facade or 30 feet, whichever is less.
d. Tower Spacing. Towers shall be generally spaced from other towers a minimum of 60 feet and specifically by a minimum of 120 feet along a primary or non-primary frontage facade.
e. Transparency. Towers that meet the minimum floor-to-floor to height of the building type and are located within 30 feet of a facade shall meet the minimum transparency requirements of the building.
f. Horizontal Shadow lines. A shadow line is required between the 4th and 5th stories of any tower and at the cap of the tower.
g. Occupied Building Space. Towers may be occupied by the same uses allowed in upper stories of the building type to which it is applied, unless otherwise stated.
h. Rooftop Appurtenances. No rooftop appurtenances are permitted on tower roofs.
i. Tower Cap. The tower may be capped by the parapet, pitched, or flat roof cap types.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.H. Cap Types
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 43
TABLE 10.16.3.A. PERMITTED USES
STOREFRONT
Building
Sec. 10.16.3.D
GENERAL- OFFICE
Building
Sec. 10.16.3.E
GENERAL- RESIDENTIAL
Building
Sec. 10.16.3.E
CIVIC SPACE
Sec. 10.16.2.K
REFERENCE
ROW-OFFICE Building
Sec. 10.16.3.F
ROW-RESIDENTIAL
Building
Sec. 10.16.3.F
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY
Dwelling, Detached Single-Family
U
U
P
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1 and 6
Dwelling, Attached Single-Family
U
U
P
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1 and 6
Dwelling, Two-Family
U
U
P
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1 and 6
Dwelling, Multi-family
U
U
P
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1 and 6
Dwelling, Group House
–
–
C
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1 and 6
CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORY
Assembly, General
–
–
C
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.7
College or University
U
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1
Governmental Office-Service
–
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.8
Hospital
–
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1
Library, Museum
P
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.9
Parks and Recreation
C
C
C
P
Sec. 10.16.3.I.10
Police, Fire Station
C
C
C
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.11
School, Public, Private, Parochial
–
P
–
C
Sec. 10.16.3.I.12
Utilities and Public Service Facility: Minor
P
P
P
P
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1
RETAIL AND SERVICE CATEGORY
Broadcast or Recording Studio
U
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1
General Service
P
L
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.13
Animal Service (no outdoor kenneling)
P
–
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.13
Child Care Center
P
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1
Eating and Drinking Establishments
(no drive-through facilities)
P
L
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.1
Entertainment
Indoor
P
C
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.14
Outdoor
–
–
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.14
Financial Services, except as indicated below (no drive-through facilities)
P
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.15
Personal credit establishment
–
–
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.15
Hotel
P
C
C
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.16
Retail Sales
Artisan
P
–
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.17
General retail
P
L
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.17
Large-scale retail (no outdoor storage)
C
–
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.17
Studio or Instructional Service
P
L
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.18
OFFICE AND CLASSROOM CATEGORY
Office
Business or professional office
U
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.19
Medical, dental or health practitioner office
P
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.19
Research and Laboratories
U
P
Sec. 10.16.3.I.20
Trade School
U
P
–
–
Sec. 10.16.3.I.21
OTHER
Parking Lot (Principal Use)
P
P
P
C
Sec. 10.16.3.I.22
KEY: P = Use permitted as of right U = Permitted in rear of ground story or upper stories only C = Requires conditional use approval
L = Limited to a gross floor area of no more than 30% of the building footprint – = Prohibited use
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.I. Uses
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 44 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
I. USES
Uses are allowed in the MX districts in accordance with the following table. Uses may be further restricted by building type Sec. 10.16.3.D through Sec. 10.16.3.G).
1. Definitions
Unless otherwise defined below, refer to Article VII for definitions of listed uses.
2. General Provisions
a. A building or building site may contain more than one principal use, unless otherwise specified.
b. Each of the principal uses may function as either a principal use or accessory use on a lot, unless otherwise specified.
c. Each use shall be located indoors (within a permitted building type), unless otherwise expressly stated.
3. Table of Principal Uses
Table 10.16.3-A identifies the principal uses allowed in each district.
a. Permitted Use (“P”). Uses designated with “P” are permitted by-right in the building types in which they are listed, in all locations within the building, unless otherwise noted. Use-specific standards may apply to the use per the definition. Further limitations may apply per the building type regulations in Sec. 10.16.3.D through Sec. 10.16.3.G.
b. Permitted in Limited Building Locations (“U”). Uses designated with “U” are permitted by-right in the building types in which they are listed, provided that the uses are located in the upper stories of the structure, in the ground story beyond a depth of at least 20 feet from the front facade, or within any basement. Further limitations may apply per the building type regulations in Sec. 10.16.3.D through Sec. 10.16.3.G.
c. Permitted with LImitations on Area (“L”). Uses designated with “L” are permitted by-right in the building types in which they are listed, however, the total gross square footage of all “L” uses on the lot is limited to no more than 30% of the total building footprint.
d. Requires Conditional Use Permit (“C”). Uses designated with “C” require a conditional use permit per section 9.14 in order to occur in the building types in which they are listed. The use must meet any use-specific standards defined for the use in this section as well as meet any requirements of the conditional use approval. The use may occur anywhere in the building, unless otherwise specified.
e. Prohibited Use (“–”). Uses designated with a “–” indicates that the use is prohibited in that building type.
4. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are expressly prohibited within the MX districts:
a. Drive-through facilities, where goods or services are distributed to the consumer in their vehicle, for any use.
b. Funeral home or mortuary service
c. Personal credit establishment (see Sec. 10.16.3.I.15 for definition)
d. Vehicle sales and service uses, such as fueling stations, personal vehicle repair and maintenance, personal vehicle sales and rentals, vehicle body and paint finishing.
5. Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses are permitted, unless otherwise stated.
a. Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining areas are permitted associated with eating and drinking establishments with the following conditions:
(1) The dining area may be located anywhere on the site; however, the building type requirements shall be met per 10.16.3.D through 10.16.3.G.
(2) Dining areas in a publicly dedicated right-of-way require an encroachment permit from the City. A minimum of 6 feet of clear sidewalk area is required.
(3) Dining areas in a privately held right-of-way do not require an encroachment permit; however, a minimum of 6 feet of clear sidewalk area is required.
(4) During the off-season, outdoor dining areas shall be completely removed from
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.I. Uses
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 45
any public or private street right-of-way sidewalk.
b. Temporary Outdoor Display. Temporary outdoor display of retail merchandise for sidewalk sales is permitted with the following conditions:
(1) A permit is required from the zoning administrator.
(2) The display shall occur only on sidewalks and a minimum of 6 feet of clear sidewalk area shall be maintained.
(3) The occurrence is permitted for no more than 3 continuous days, no more than 10 times per year.
c. Outdoor Display. Permanent outdoor display of goods is not permitted.
(1) A design exception may be approved for the permanent outdoor display of goods.
(2) The outdoor display shall not occur within a public or private street right-of-way.
(3) The display shall be consistent with the character of the area and with appropriate presentation and screening.
(4) The only goods permitted for display shall be consumer retail goods intended for outdoor use, such as gardening supplies or outdoor furniture.
6. Residential Unit Sizes
The following minimum requirements apply in the MX districts:
a. Dwelling, Attached Single-Family. A minimum gross building square footage required of 1,400 square feet is required for all attached single-family dwellings.
b. Dwellings, Multi-family. The following is required where multi-family dwellings are included in one building:
(1) A mix of unit sizes is required for each multi-family building utilizing the General-Residential building type.
1 In Cincinnati, average apartment sizes: 459 for studio, 686 for 1 bed, 953 for 2 bed. 20% studios +40% 1 bed +40% 2 beds = approx. 750 sf average. The average size of units in the
(2) No more than 20 percent of units in any building type may be studio apartments without a separate bedroom.
(3) The minimum average square footage of all units in any building shall be 800 square feet.1
c. Design Exception. A design exception may be approved for a different mix of dwelling sizes and unit mixes.
7. Assembly, General
A facility that has organized services, meetings, or programs to benefit, educate, entertain, or promote discourse amongst the residents of the community in a public or private setting, generally with little or no relationship to commerce. Includes places of worship, religious institutions, community centers, convention centers, performing arts venues.
8. Government Office-Services
Public community-serving facilities associated with government functions. Includes such uses as city hall and government offices.
9. Library, Museum
A facility open to the general public housing educational, cultural, artistic, or historic information, resources, and exhibits. May also include accessory food service and a gift shop.
10. Parks and Recreation
A use of land for active or passive, outdoor space available to the general public. Includes such uses as parks, plazas, greens, parklets, playfields, playgrounds, and tot lots for general recreation, athletics, and leisure. This use generally has little or no relationship to commerce. May include historic structures/monuments, ornamental gardens, or arboretums. May be associated with an assembly or school use. Park uses may also be utilized to host temporary private or community events, such as a farmer’s market or art fair. Additional use-specific standards include:
a. Parking.Parking lots are not permitted in parks in any district except by special use approval.
Rookwood Apartment building is 847 sf. Out of 130 units, only 5 are studios and the studios are 555 sf.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.I. Uses
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 46 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
b. Stormwater Accommodations. Parks that incorporate stormwater management on a site or district scale are encouraged.
c. Stormwater facilities shall be designed to accommodate additional uses, such as an amphitheater or a sports field.
d. Stormwater facilities shall be designed not to be fenced and shall not impede public use of the land they occupy.
11. Police/Fire Station
A facility providing public safety and emergency services; training facilities, and locker rooms. Limited overnight accommodations may also be included. Fire/Police Stations are permitted in applicable districts with the following use-specific standards include:
a. Garage doors are permitted on the front facade.
b. Exempt from maximum driveway widths.
12. School, Public, Private, Parochial
A public or private education facility for pre-kindergarten through 12th grade with classrooms and offices, that may also include associated indoor facilities such as ball courts, gymnasium, theater, and food service. Parking facilities may be provided for faculty, administration, staff, and visitors, and students.
13. General Service
A category of uses that provides patrons services that occur indoors and limited retail products related to those services. Visibility and accessibility are important to these uses; walk-in customers and by-appointment clients are typically both accommodated Includes such uses as, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, spa facilities, tailors, consumer goods repair. Does not include Animal Service.
a. Animal Service. A use that provides patrons animal care services and limited retail products related to those services, such as pet grooming services, veterinary services, Outdoor kenneling not permitted.
14. Entertainment.
a. Indoor. An commercial indoor facility for gathering events for entertainment such as, but not limited to, movie theaters and indoor skating rinks.
b. Outdoor. A large, outdoor facility for entertainment events and businesses, such as, but not limited to, putt-putt golf, driving ranges, batting cages, go-carts, swimming pools.
15. Financial Services
Chartered financial depository institutions, including such uses as banks, savings and loans. Does not include personal credit establishments. Drive-through facilities not permitted.
a. Personal Credit Establishments. An establishment primarily engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, left in pawn, on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller; of purchasing tangible personal property left in pawn; or of providing cash to patrons for payroll, personal, and bank checks.
16. Hotel
A facility offering short-term, temporary lodging to the general public with daily room cleaning services, and consisting of an unlimited number of sleeping rooms with or without in-room kitchen facilities. Secondary service uses may also be provided, such as restaurants and meeting rooms. The following use-specific standards apply:
a. Temporary lodging is permitted for up to 30 days within a 6 month period.
b. Rooms shall be accessed from the interior of the building.
c. Exterior stairs to upper stories are not permitted on any street facade.
d. Hotels shall not be located within 200 feet of any single-family district.
17. Retail Sales
A category of uses involving the sale of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption.
a. Artisan Studio/Retail. A use involving the creation of art works, custom goods, or small-scale production, assembly, and/or repair through the use of hand tools and small-scale equipment with little to no noxious by-products. Use must include a showroom or small retail outlet selling art and/or goods produced. Includes such uses as craft brewery, craft distillery, furniture
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.I. Uses
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 47
shop, glass blowers, jewelers, pottery and ceramic sales, upholsterers, woodworking shop. The following use-specific standards apply:
(1) The maximum overall gross floor area is limited to 10,000 square feet, unless otherwise noted.
(2) A showroom, taproom, tasting room, or retail outlet shall be located in the front of the building and shall occupy a minimum of 25% of the gross floor area. The space shall be generally opened to the public during regular shopping hours and shall sell the products produced on-site.
(3) This use may also include associated facilities such as offices and small scale warehousing, but distribution is limited to no more than 2 vans or small trucks. Distribution access shall be from the rear.
b. General Retail. Uses involving the sale of goods to the consumer in a store open regular business hours.
(1) This category includes such uses as apparel stores, convenience stores, drug stores, grocery and specialty food stores, wine or liquor stores, gift shops, florists, department stores, appliance stores, electronics stores, bike shops, book stores, stationery stores, art galleries, hobby shops, furniture stores, pet stores, antique shops, music stores, toy stores, sporting goods stores, variety stores, medical supplies, office supplies.
(2) Smoke shops, tobacco shops, vaping supply stores, and medical marijuana dispensaries are not permitted in this category.
c. Large-Scale Retail. Uses involving the sale of goods to the consumer in a warehouse or large-scale store 35,000 square feet or larger and open regular business hours. Outdoor storage of goods is not allowed. Includes such uses as lumber stores, home improvement stores, furniture warehouse stores, recreational equipment stores (i.e. trampolines, play equipment).
18. Studios or Instructional Service
Uses in an enclosed building that focus on providing individual or small group instruction or training in fine arts, music, dance, drama, fitness, language or similar activities. Includes dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts instruction, tutoring, artist studios and photography studios.
19. Office
Uses that focus on providing executive, management, administrative, professional or medical services in an office setting. Examples of specific office use types include:
a. Business and Professional Office. Office uses for companies and non-governmental organizations. Examples include corporate offices, law offices, architectural firms, insurance companies and other executive, management or administrative offices for businesses and corporations. Also included are insurance claims adjusters/estimators with no more than one vehicle inspection bay and no on-site repair facilities.
b. Medical, Dental and Health Practitioner Office. Office uses related to diagnosis and treatment of human patients’ illnesses, injuries and physical maladies that can be performed in an office setting with no overnight care. Typical uses include offices of physicians, dentists, psychiatrists, psychologists, and chiropractors. Also includes practitioners of massage therapy, when performed solely by state-licensed professionals. Surgical, rehabilitation and other medical centers that do not involve overnight patient stays are included in this use subcategory, as are medical and dental laboratories, unless otherwise expressly indicated. Ancillary sales of medications and medical products are allowed in association with a medical, dental or health practitioner office.
20. Research and Laboratories
Uses engaged in scientific research and testing services leading to the development of new products and processes. Such uses resemble office buildings or campuses and do not involve the mass production, distribution or sale of products. Research services do not produce odors, dust, noise, vibration or other external impacts that are
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.3.I. Uses
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 48 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
detectable beyond the building site of the subject property.
21. Trade School
Uses in an enclosed building that focus on teaching the skills needed to perform a particular job. Examples include schools of cosmetology, modeling academies, computer training facilities, vocational schools, administrative business training facilities and similar uses. Does not include outdoor training or driving facilities.
22. Parking Lot
A surface or structured parking lots located on a lot as the principal use of the lot. Does not include on-street parking. In the MX districts, parking structures within the buildings with other uses are regulated by the building type. Additional use requirements are as follows:
a. Location. Parking lots shall not be located on a primary street frontage. A design exception may be requested for temporary parking lots due to phased construction.
b. Materials. Any portion of the parking lot fronting a non-primary street or visible from any street shall meet the materials and color requirements of general design requirements.
c. Ramps. Drive ramps sloped more than 1:20 shall not be located on a street facade.
d. Height. The height of the separate structure must be lower than any part of an abutting principal structure by a minimum of 6 feet.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.A. Applicability
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 45
10.16.4. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN
A. APPLICABILITY
The following design requirements apply to all building types unless otherwise stated.
B. INTENT
The following specific intent statements apply to these design requirements in addition to the general intent stated in 10.16.1.
1. General
The requirements of this Section 10.16.4.4, in conjunction with the requirements of Section 10.16.3.3 Building Types & Uses, are intended to improve the physical quality of buildings, improve the long-term value and durability of buildings, enhance the pedestrian experience, and protect or establish the character of the city.
2. Durable, High Quality
The minimum design standards are intended to ensure use of well-tested, high quality, durable, weather-resistant, exterior grade, preferably natural materials on the majority of finished surfaces, while permitting a wider range of materials for details. High quality materials can improve the quality of buildings in that they weather well, have a low failure rate, require a low level of maintenance, have a longer life cycle and sense of permanence, and maintain higher long term value.
3. Simple, Well Organized Facades
The design requirements are intended to promote simpler, well organized facades that are easy to comprehend and have a clear hierarchy.
4. Human-Scaled Building Units
The design requirements are intended to yield building facade proportion that are comfortable to and in line with the scale of people. Additionally, a high level of detail relates facades to pedestrians and makes them more inviting.
C. MAJOR FACADE MATERIALS
A minimum of 70 percent of each street and non-street facade surface, not including window and door areas, shall be composed of major materials per Table 10.16-3.3.
1. Simplicity of Surface Materials
A minimum of 60 percent of each building or 60-foot or wider facade division, not including window and door areas, shall be faced of a single major material. See Figure 10.16.4-33.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.C. Major Facade Materials
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 46 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
TABLE 10.16-3. MAJOR AND MINOR STREET FACADE MATERIALS
Major STREET Facade Materials
minimum 70% of facade
NOTE: Street Facade Materials shall extend around corners per 10.16.4.C.3
Major
NON-Street Materials minimum 70%
of facade
Minor Facade Materials
maximum 30% of facade
MATERIAL (alphabetical)
STOREFRONT, GENERAL- OFFICE & ROW-OFFICE
Building
GENERAL- RESIDENTIAL
Building
ROW- RESIDENTIAL
Building
All Building Types
STOREFRONT, GENERAL- OFFICE & ROW-OFFICE
Building
GENERAL- RESIDENTIAL & ROW- RESIDENTIAL
Building
A
Brick
full dimensional, unit, face brick
4
4
4
4
4
4
Brick
economy size
4
Brick
thin, veneer
B
Concrete Masonry Units architectural, minimum 3” depth, “artisan stone” look, varied sizes, (Eschelon Masonry or approved equal)
4
4
4
4
4
4
C
Concrete Masonry Units architectural, minimum 3” depth, “stone” face, “hewn stone”, rock cut
Limited to basement facades and bottom half of ground story
Concrete Masonry Units
split-faced, burnished/ground face, glazed, or honed, minimum 3” depth
4
4
4
Concrete Surfaces
unfinished
Concrete Surfaces
finished, stained, painted, treated
4
D
Fiber Cement Board, Composite
finished panels
4
4
4
E
Fiber Cement Board
finished lap siding or shingles
4
4
F
Glass
curtain wall system
4
4
G
Metal
architectural panel system
4
Metal, Corten
panels or panel systems, not ribbed or corrugated
Metal, Composite
aluminum composite materials (ACM) or panels (ACP)
Stone
natural, units
4
4
4
4
4
4
H
Stucco
cement-based, 2- 3 layer hard coat
4
4
4
Stucco
synthetic or with elastomeric finishes
Limited to 3rd or higher stories only.
Terra Cotta or Ceramic
tiles or panels
4
4
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.C. Major Facade Materials
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 47
16-3. MAJOR AND MINOR STREET FACADE MATERIALS
Major STREET Facade Materials
minimum 70% of facade
NOTE: Street Facade Materials shall extend around corners per 10.16.4.C.3
Major
NON-Street Materials minimum 70%
of facade
Minor Facade Materials
maximum 30% of facade
MATERIAL (alphabetical)
STOREFRONT, GENERAL- OFFICE & ROW-OFFICE
Building
GENERAL- RESIDENTIAL
Building
ROW- RESIDENTIAL
Building
All Building Types
STOREFRONT, GENERAL- OFFICE & ROW-OFFICE
Building
GENERAL- RESIDENTIAL & ROW- RESIDENTIAL
Building
I
Wood
natural, aged lap siding, shingles, rainscreen system
4
4
Wood
painted, stained, or treated siding, shingles, rainscreen system
4
4
J
Wood, Composite
rainscreen system
4
4
4
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.C. Major Facade Materials
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 48 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
TABLE 10.16-4. ALLOWED DETAIL & ACCENT
MATERIALS (all facades)
All permitted major and minor facade materials may
be used for details, trim, and accents.
K
Concrete Details
precast stone ornamentation, lintels, sills, banding,
columns, beams
Fiber Cement Details
trim, soffits
L
Metal Details
trim, ornamentation, lintels, beams, columns
Wood and Wood Composite Details
painted/treated trim, soffits, other approved details
M
Vinyl Details
limited to soffits, window trim; minimum .05 inches
thick
TABLE 10.16-5. PROHIBITED MATERIALS
N
Concrete, Unfinished
untreated, unstained, unpainted
Fiberglass and Acrylic Panels
all
O
Glass Block
P
Metal Panels
corrugated or ribbed panels
Q
Plastic Panels
all, including high-density polyethylene and
polycarbonate panels
R
Stucco or Synthetic Stucco Mouldings
trim, sills, cornices, banding, columns, pilasters or other
3 dimensional details
Vinyl Siding
all vinyl except detail materials noted in table
Wood
Unfinished, untreated plywood and wood panels
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.D. Minor Facade Materials
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 49
2. Building Type
Some materials are further limited by building type. See Section 10.16.3.3 .
3. Side and Rear Facades
Permitted Major Materials shall continue around the corner of a building from the street facade onto the side or rear facade for no less than 20 feet along the side or rear facade. Refer to 10.16.3.C.3 for building requirements on corners.
4. Other Materials
A design exception may be approved for materials not listed as permitted major materials, with the exception of those materials listed in Table 10.16-5.5 as prohibited materials. Refer to 10.16.1.F for design exceptions process.
D. MINOR FACADE MATERIALS
1. Maximum Minor Materials for Surface Areas
A maximum of 35 percent of each facade surface, not including window and door areas, may be composed of minor facade materials per Table 10.16-3.3.
2. Accents and Details
Additional materials are permitted for trim, accents, and details per Table 10.16-4.4, not included in the maximum surface area.
3. Other Materials
A design exception may be approved for materials not listed as permitted minor materials or accent and detail materials, with the exception of those materials listed in Table 10.16-5.5 as prohibited materials. Refer to 10.16.1.F for design exceptions process.
E. PITCHED ROOF MATERIALS
Allowed pitched roof materials include dimensional asphalt composite shingles, wood shingles and shakes, metal tiles or standing seam, slate, and ceramic tile. Engineered wood or slate may be approved during the Stage II Development Approval process with an approved sample and documented examples of successful, high quality local installations.
F. MATERIALS INSTALLATION QUALITY
1. Intent
The intent of the materials installation quality requirements is to advance the quality of construction, durability, and aesthetics of new buildings, specifically related to application and detailing of facade materials.
2. Changes in Material
Changes in vertical surface materials for buildings shall meet the following standards:
a. Changes in Surface Materials. Changes in surface materials, whether major materials or minor materials, shall occur only at concave corners, minimum 12” deep. Surface materials are materials intended to cover the facade surface (such as unit materials, siding, stucco, panels) and do not include detail materials, such as but not limited to cast stone for lintels or cornices, exposed metal beams, or any material used to create an shadow line. See Figure 10.16.4-35.
b. Materials Hierarchy. Unit materials shall be elevated from the face of the building above less detailed, surface materials. For example, stucco, as a constant surface material, shall be recessed behind a bricked surface. See Figure 10.16.4-35 for an example, where Material A is brick, Material B metal panels, and Material C stucco.
3. Shadow Lines on Surfaces
Shadow lines shall be created at changes in materials with solid materials of a thickness that is greater than 2 inches, such as cast stone, masonry, or stone. For example, cast stone pieces may be offset to create a shadow, where the convex corner of the piece is used to create the corner of the detail.
4. Appropriate Grade of Materials
Except the Row building type, all doors, windows, and hardware shall be of commercial grade quality.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.G. Windows
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 50 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
5. Applique Materials
Materials with thickness of less than 2.5 inches, including but not limited to stucco, shall not be used or formed to create shadow lines.
6. Stucco Installation
Any stucco construction shall be of the highest installation quality, meeting the following criteria:
a. Jointing. All stucco joints shall be aligned along the facade in the pattern shown on the elevations submitted for the site plan approval. Joints shall also align with the locations of windows and doors and other changes in material.
b. Construction. The stucco wall assembly shall be indicated on the plans specifying stucco type and construction.
7. Exception
Modification to these material installation requirements may be approved through a design exception.
G. WINDOWS
Windows on street and public way facades of all buildings shall be constructed consistent with the following requirements:
1. Amount
Each building shall meet the transparency requirements applicable to the building type. See 10.16.3.
2. Recessed
All windows, with the exception of ground story storefront systems and glass curtain wall systems, shall be recessed with the glass a minimum of 2 inches back, measured from the facade surface material or adjacent trim.
3. Vertically Oriented
All windows shall be vertically oriented unless the following standards are met:
a. Flat Cap Type. When the flat cap type is used, horizontally oriented windows may be used for up to 30 percent of the total transparency area of each upper story.
4. Visibility Through Glass
Reflective glass and glass block are prohibited on street and public way facades. Windows shall meet the transmittance and reflectance factors established in the transparency definition (see Section 10.16.6.A).
5. Expressed Lintels
For masonry construction, the expression of lintels shall be included above all windows and doors by a change in brick coursing or by a separate detail or element. See Figure 10.16.4-36 for illustrations of expressed lintels.
H. SHUTTERS
When shutters, whether functional or not, are utilized on a street or public way facade of any building type, the shutters shall meet the following requirements. See Figure 10.16.4-37 for examples of shutters.
1. Size
All shutters shall be sized for the windows, so that, if the shutters were to be closed, they would not be too small for complete coverage of the window.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.H. Shutters
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 51
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.I. Awnings, Canopies, & Light Shelves
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 52 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
2. Materials
Shutters shall be wood, metal, or fiber cement. Other synthetic and engineered woods may be approved through a design exception provided that the applicant submits a sample and examples of high quality, local installations of the material.
I. AWNINGS, CANOPIES, & LIGHT SHELVES
Awnings, canopies, and light shelves on all buildings shall be constructed consistent with the requirements of this subsection. See Figure 10.16.4-38 for examples of awnings.
1. Encroachment
Awnings, canopies, and light shelves shall not extend into a right-of-way, easement, or street (as defined for the MX districts), except as otherwise approved by the City.
2. Attached Awnings & Canopies
Awnings and canopies that are attached to the building and could be removed shall meet the following standards:
a. Material. All awnings and canopies shall be canvas or metal. Plastic awnings are prohibited. Other materials may be approved with a design exception.
b. Shapes. Waterfall or convex, dome, and elongated dome awnings are permitted only with an approved design exception.
c. Lighting. Backlit awnings are prohibited.
d. Structures. Frames shall be metal and shall be wall mounted. Support poles from the ground are prohibited unless the awning is over 8 feet in depth and utilized for outdoor eating areas or entrances.
e. Multiple Awnings on the Facade. When more than one awning is mounted on a facade, the awning types and colors shall be coordinated.
3. Canopies & Light Shelves
Permanent canopies, projections, or overhangs used as architectural features, light shelves, or shading devices are permitted.
4. Clearance
All portions of any awning, canopy, or light shelf shall provide at least 8 feet of clearance over any walkway and 15 feet of clearance over vehicular areas.
5. Signage
Refer to Article XIV for signs on awnings and canopies.
J. BALCONIES
Balconies on a facade facing any street, courtyard, open space, or public way shall be consistent with the requirements of this subsection. See Figure 10.16.4-39 for examples of balconies.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.K. Principal Entryway
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 53
1. Definition
For the purpose of this subsection, balconies shall include any roofed or un-roofed platform that projects from the wall of a building above grade that is enclosed only by a parapet or railing. This definition does not include false balconies, Juliet balconies, or balconettes.
2. Balconettes
Sometimes referred to as juliet balconies, balconettes are false balconies consisting of a rail and door, either without an outdoor platform or with an outdoor platform less than 18 inches in depth. Balconettes are permitted with an approved design exception.
3. Location
Balconies are not permitted on primary frontage facades on the Storefront building.
4. Size
Balconies shall be a minimum of 4 feet deep and 5 feet wide.
5. Integrated Design
Balconies are intended to be integrated with the design of the facade, avoiding tacking the balconies onto the facade after the elevation has been designed.
a. A minimum of 50 percent of the perimeter of each balcony shall abut an exterior wall of the building, partially enclosing the balcony.
b. The balcony support structure shall be integrated with the building facade; separate columns or posts supporting any balcony from the ground are prohibited.
6. Platform
The balcony platform shall be at least 3 inches thick and any underside of a balcony that is visible from any public way shall be finished.
7. Facade Coverage
A maximum of 25 percent of the public way frontage facades, calculated separately for each facade, may be covered by balconies. The balcony area is calculated by drawing a rectangle around the following: the platform or floor of the balcony; any rails, walls, columns or indentations; and any ceiling, roof, or upper balcony.
8. Build-to District Requirement
The portion of the facade occupied by an upper story balcony is exempt from meeting the build-to district requirement.
9. Street Encroachment
Balconies shall not extend into any right-of-way, easements, or street (as defined for MX districts) except as otherwise approved by the City.
10. Exception
A design exception may be submitted for an alternate balcony design per Section 10.16.1.F.
K. PRINCIPAL ENTRYWAY
See Figure 10.16.4-40 for examples of defined principal entryways. Principal entrances to all buildings or units shall be clearly delineated through one or more of the following design features:
1. Roof or Canopy
The entryway is covered by a roof or canopy differentiating it from the overall building roof type.
2. Porch
The entryway is through a porch.
3. Sidelights and Transom
Sidelights or transom windows are included around the entryway.
4. Extended Articulation
The entryway is included in a separate bay of the building that extends up at least 2 stories.
5. Other Design
A design that does not meet the above standards maybe approved with a design exception if it is determined that the design adds emphasis and draws attention to the entryway
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.K. Principal Entryway
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 54 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.L. Building Articulation
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 55
L. BUILDING ARTICULATION
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.M. Garage Doors
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 56 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
The following applies to all building types. See Figure 10.16.4-41 for examples of building facade variety and articulation of stories.
1. Building Facade Variety
Buildings 120 feet in length or greater, as measured along any street or public way frontage shall fulfill the following requirements:
a. Increments. Each public way facade shall be varied in segments less than or equal to 90 feet.
b. Requirements. Each facade segment shall vary by the type of dominant material or by color, scale, or orientation of that material, and by at least 2 of the following:
(1) The proportion of recesses and projections. within the build-to district.
(2) The location of the entrance and window placement, unless storefronts are utilized.
(3) Roof type, plane, or material, unless otherwise stated in the building type requirements.
(4) Building heights.
c. Design Exception. A design exception may be approved for a facade design that does not meet requirements of this subsection if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed design achieves the intent of the building articulation requirements without meeting the building facade variety requirements. Refer to Section 10.16.1.F.
2. Articulation of Stories
Stories shall be articulated on street and public way facing facades.
a. Fenestration. Fenestration or window placement on street facades shall be organized by stories.
b. Shadow Lines. Horizontal shadow lines and lintels over openings may be used to delineate stories with minimum shadow lines required per building type.
c. Mezzanines. Mezzanines that fall within the range of floor to floor heights of the building type shall be articulated on the
facade and require separate calculation for transparency per Section 10.16.6.8.f: Tall Stories.
d. Taller Spaces. Spaces exceeding the allowable floor to floor heights of the building type shall be articulated as multiple stories on the street facade.
M. GARAGE DOORS
The following requirements apply to garage doors provided on any street facade.
1. Location.
a. Primary Frontages. Garage doors are permitted on primary frontage facades only when utilized for patio access, open air dining, or display and not utilized for vehicular access.
b. Non-Primary Frontages. Garage doors are permitted on non-primary frontage facades with direct access to the street.
c. Interior Lot Facades. The preferred location is on interior lot facades.
2. Recessed from Facades
Garage doors located on street-facing facades shall be recessed a minimum of 3 feet from the dominant facade of the principal building facing the same street.
3. Design
a. Garage doors facing a non-primary street and intended to be closed during business hours shall be clad with materials consistent with the design of the building.
b. Carriage-style, windows in the door, or upgraded architectural doors are required on the Row building type.
N. ARCADE DESIGN
See Figure 10.16.4-42 for an illustration of an arcade. The following requirements apply to arcades. An arcade is a covered pedestrian walkway within the recess of a ground story.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.O. Ground Story at Sloping Facades
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 57
1. Depth
An open-air public walkway shall be recessed from the principal facade of the building a minimum of 8 feet and a maximum of 15 feet.
2. Build-to District
When the arcade is utilized, the the outside face of the arcade shall be considered the front facade, located within the required build-to district.
3. Column Spacing
Columns shall be spaced between 10 feet and 12 feet on center.
4. Column Width
Columns shall be a minimum of 1 foot 8 inches and a maximum 2 foot 4 inches in width.
5. Arcade Openings
Openings shall not be flush with interior arcade ceiling and may be arched or straight.
6. Horizontal Facade Division
A horizontal shadow line shall define the ground story facade from the upper stories.
7. Visible Basement
A visible basement is not permitted.
8. Exception
A design exception may be submitted for approval of an alternate arcade design.
O. GROUND STORY AT SLOPING FACADES
See Figure 10.16.4-43 for examples of ground story treatments.
1. Storefronts
The following regulations apply to storefront facades along sloping streets:
a. Grade transitions on the building along the sidewalk should be designed to maximize active pedestrian-scale frontages between waist and eye level while minimizing blank walls.
b. The interior floor level shall step to match the exterior grade within 3 feet. With approval of a design exception, changes in grade may be accommodated by a storefront window display space.
c. Knee wall and retaining walls shall not exceed 30 inches in height except along a maximum 15 foot section of facade length.
d. If grade change is more than 9 feet along a single block face, entrance requirements may be increased to one entrance per 90 feet of building frontage.
e. If grade change is more than 9 feet along a single block face, building entrances adjacent to the street shall be within 3 feet of the elevation of the adjacent sidewalk.
2. Non-Storefronts
The following regulations apply to all non-storefront facades along sloping streets:
a. Grade transitions at the building along the sidewalk shall be designed to minimize blank walls. Multiple front entrances along the street activate each segment of building section at each grade.
b. The interior floor level shall step to match the changes in exterior grade within a 3-foot range. With a design exception approval, deeper transition districts between the sidewalk and building facade of porches, terraces, and landscape areas may be used assist with grade changes.
c. Changes can be accommodated by terraced planters and retaining walls. Retaining walls shall not exceed 30 inches in height except along a maximum 15-foot section of frontage.
d. When the elevation of the first floor is more than 3 feet above grade, windows should be provided into the basement or lower floor elevations.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.P. Mechanical Equipment & Appurtenances
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 58 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
P. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT & APPURTENANCES
1. Intent
Mechanical equipment and appurtenances can have a negative visual impact and detract from the quality of the design of a building. The purpose of the standards of this section is to ensure that the visual impact of mechanical equipment and appurtenances is minimized.
2. Mechanical Equipment in Building
Mechanical equipment shall be located within the building, unless the applicant demonstrates the equipment is necessary for the function of the building and locating the equipment within the building would conflict with the equipment’s function.
3. Rooftop Mechanical Equipment
Any rooftop mechanical equipment, such as but not limited to vents, ducts, condensers, and ventilators, shall be located consistent with one of the following methods:
a. Incorporate equipment into the roof design consistent with the applicable standards of Section 10.16.3.H. Cap Types. Refer to Figure 10.16.4-44 for an example of appropriately mounted rooftop equipment.
b. Set the equipment back a minimum of 20 feet from any street or public way facade.
c. To the extent practicable, all rooftop mechanical shall be painted to blend with the structural roof and limit its visibility.
d. Rooftop mechanical equipment visible from adjacent highways shall be screened with materials consistent with the building design.
e. Refer to Section 10.16.4.P.6 for solar panels and wind energy systems.
4. Mechanical Equipment and Utility Appurtenances on Facades
Mechanical equipment and utility appurtenances shall not be located on a facade unless the applicant demonstrates that locating the equipment in a different location would conflict with the equipment’s function. Refer to Figure 10.16.4-45 for an example images of equipment on facades. Any
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.P. Mechanical Equipment & Appurtenances
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 59
equipment or appurtenance approved on a facade, such as but not limited to dryer vents, gas meters, and air conditioners, shall be located consistent with the following standards:
a. Facade. The mechanical equipment may be located on a primary facade only if the following requirements are met:
(1) The equipment is located on a surface perpendicular to any right-of-way;
(2) The equipment extends from the facade surface no more than 3 inches; and
(3) The equipment is screened from the sidewalk.
b. Alignment. Multiple pieces of mechanical equipment shall be organized on the facade in a regular pattern and aligned. Compliance with this standard must be illustrated on the drawing elevations submitted as part of the application.
c. Material Coordination. To the extent practicable, facade-mounted mechanical appurtenances shall be located on a material that limits their visibility. For example, dark colored vents will be more visible on light colored stucco than a textured, darker surface such as brick.
5. Mechanical Equipment and Utility Appurtenances on Other Horizontal Surfaces
Mechanical equipment located on the ground, decks, or horizontal surfaces other than the roof, such as but not limited to electrical equipment and air conditioners, shall be located consistent with the following standards:
a. No Encroachment. Mechanical equipment shall not extend into any right-of-way, easement, or street.
b. Yard Location.
(1) No mechanical equipment shall be located in a street (primary or non-primary frontage) yard. A design exception may be approved for equipment in a non-primary frontage yard with approved screening. Refer to Figure 10.16.4-46 for examples of
inappropriately located equipment on primary streets.
(2) Mechanical equipment may be located in a side yard provided the side yard does not contain or abut a public way or open space.
c. Screening from Public Way.
(1) All equipment shall be screened from view from any public way with landscaping, fencing, or walls consistent with the building design, colors, and materials.
(2) Where landscaping only is employed, a single row of evergreen shrubs shall fully screen the equipment within 1 year of installation. The zoning administrator may require additional landscape materials. Refer to Section 9.17 for landscape requirements.
(3) Where landscaping is employed, the utility shall be located in a larger landscape area and the landscape screen shall be designed as part of the bed design.
d. The zoning administrator may approve appurtenances located in a primary street yard only if the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that the equipment cannot be located in a rear yard, non-primary street yard, or in a side yard.
(2) No utility cabinets, boxes, or other appurtenances are within 200 feet along the same side of the street as the proposed utility appurtenance.
(3) The appurtenance is fully screened in a manner that is consistent with the building design, colors, and materials and of a height that is the minimum to adequately screen the appurtenance and that does not prevent the facade from fulfilling any transparency requirements. See Figure 10.16.4-46 for
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.P. Mechanical Equipment & Appurtenances
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 60 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
examples of poorly located, unscreened equipment on primary streets.
(4) The appurtenance is located a minimum of 35 feet from a street intersection.
(5) The appurtenance does not impact the sight vision clearance at intersections per Section 9.17.
6. Solar Panels and Small Wind Energy Systems
Roof-mounted solar panels and roof-mounted small wind energy systems (maximum 3kW rated capacity) are allowed with approval of a design exception per Section 10.16.1.F.
(1) The intent for the energy shall be generated for on-site use only, with the potential for selling excess energy back to the local energy provider.
(2) The area of the solar panels may not extend beyond the perimeter of the roof surface.
(3) The solar panels shall not extend more than 3 feet parallel above a pitched roof surface or 4 feet parallel above a flat roof surface
(4) Small wind generators are limited to no more than 2 per 1500 feet of roof surface and may not extend more than 5 feet above the highest peak of a pitched roof and no more than 15 feet in overall height above the roof’s surface.
(5) The solar panels and small wind energy systems shall be integrated with the building design and shall not detract from the design and character of the area.
(6) The solar panels and small wind energy systems shall not be visible from the pedestrian on the street, the windows of adjacent developments, nor any civic space type.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.4.P. Mechanical Equipment & Appurtenances
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 61
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.A. Streetscape
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 60 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
10.16.5. GENERAL SITE DESIGN
A. STREETSCAPE
For all developments in MX districts, the following streetscape is required to be installed by the applicant, unless otherwise determined by the zoning administrator.
1. Streetscape Location
Streetscape occupies the full pedestrian area of any street and the street yards, from the back of curb to the building facade, of all developments per Section 10.16.5.A.2 and Section 10.16.5.A.3, below.
2. General, Row, & Civic Buildings
For all General, Row, and Civic buildings, the following minimum landscape is required on all street frontages.
a. Parkway Planting. The parkway area between the back of curb and the sidewalk shall be planted with street trees and ground plane vegetation per Section 10.16.5.C.
(1) Stormwater accommodations and lighting may be located in the parkway area.
(2) Signs may be located in the parkway area per Section 10.16.5.B.
b. Street Yards. The primary and non-primary frontage yards shall be planted with a minimum of 40 percent planting bed. The remaining area may be grass or patio area.
3. Storefront Buildings
For all Storefront buildings, the following streetscape and landscape is required along all street frontages.
a. Streetscape Required. The entire area from building face to back of curb shall be designed as a combination of hardscape, tree wells, and/or planters.
b. Standard Specifications. Streetscape shall meet any standards defined by the City for sidewalk, curb, access, and parkway construction, unless otherwise stated. The zoning administrator, at his/her discretion,
may request additional requirements or waive any requirements.
4. Streetscape Design Submittal
A streetscape design shall be submitted for approval for use throughout the entire or phases of the master development area . At a minimum, the streetscape design submittal shall include the following:
a. Street Trees. Trees meeting the minimum requirements of Section 9.17 shall be included in the streetscape design with details related to tree pits, tree wells, tree accessories (grates, guards), and tree planting.
b. Pavement Surface Design. Paving material pattern and design shall be defined for each street. Pavement design shall include the minimum sidewalk widths required (refer to Section 10.16.2.E for minimum street sections) and all other hardscape within the streetscape area.
c. Street Furnishings. Street furnishings including such items as benches, seatwalls, planters, planter fences, tree grates, tree guards, and trash receptacles shall be specified and quantities and locations listed for each street. For each 300 linear feet of block face, a minimum of two benches and one trash receptacle is required.
d. Bicycle Racks. Bicycle racks shall be supplied to meet the minimum bicycle parking requirements of the blockface uses per Section 10.16.5.E for required bicycle parking spaces. If rear bicycle parking is utilized, a minimum of 50% of the required ground floor use bicycle parking shall be supplied within the streetscape, coordinated with the zoning administrator.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.A. Streetscape
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 61
e. Landscape Design. Ground plane vegetation
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.B. Signs
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 62 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
per Section 10.16.5.C shall be designated for any landscape bed areas, planter areas, and open tree wells.
f. Lighting. Pedestrian and vehicular lighting shall be specified and locations and quantities noted. All lighting shall meet any requirements of the City. Cut sheets and samples shall be submitted upon request of the zoning administrator.
5. Streetscape Extension
The approved streetscape design for each street may be utilized by the City for the extension of any street outside the development to provide continuity, where appropriate.
B. SIGNS
Refer to Article XIV for general sign regulations. The following additional requirements apply to the MX districts and shall supercede any of the general sign regulations.
1. Master Signage Plan and Sign Permits
A master signage plan is required for all applicable sites per Section 14.14. Sign permits are required per Section 14.15.
2. Total Signage
The following total square feet of signage applies to all MX districts, unless otherwise stated.
a. For Storefront and General-Office buildings developed on Dixie Highway, Turkeyfoot Road, and Thomas More Parkway, the total square feet of monument signage for each street frontage shall not exceed .5 (one half) square feet per linear feet of street frontage.
b. For Storefront, General-Office, and Row-Office buildings developed on all streets, the total square feet of all signage, not including monument signs permitted in Section 10.16.5.B.2.a, above, shall not exceed 3 square feet per linear feet of building frontage, with a maximum of 200 square feet for any one sign, unless otherwise limited.
c. For General-Residential and Row-Residential buildings, no more than 2 signs are permitted per building with a maximum of 200 square feet total.
d. Additional sign area may be approved through the design exception process per Section 10.16.1.F.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.B. Signs
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 63
3. Electronic and Changeable Copy Signs
Any type of electronic messaging or changeable copy signs are prohibited within the MX districts.
4. Sandwich Board Signs
Sandwich board signs are permitted per the following:
a. Definition. A set of 2 signs hinged or connected at the top to form a triangular shape. I- or T-shaped configurations are not permitted.
b. Location. Sandwich board signs may be located on sidewalks abutting Storefront and General-Office buildings for any retail and service category of use (per Section 10.16.3.I) under the following conditions:
(1) The sign is located within 15 feet of the entrance to the business;
(2) The sign is located in the furnishings (tree planting) district near the back of curb or within a pedestrianway with a clear sidewalk area of at least 5 feet; and
(3) The sign is located a minimum of 10 feet from an intersection or crosswalk.
c. Master Signage Plan. A sandwich board protocol shall be included in the master signage plan to prevent the over burden of signs on sidewalks.
d. Temporary. Sandwich board signs shall not be permanently attached to the sidewalk or any item within the street right-of-way (public or private).
e. Display Time. Signs shall be displayed only during business hours and must be removed by close of business each day. Signs shall not be displayed when wind gusts are predicted to exceed 20 miles per hour.
f. Size and Quantity. One sandwich board is permitted per business, maximum size 3 feet in height and no more than 6 square feet in area per sign face.
g. Materials. Signs shall be constructed of wood, metal, or other durable materials to withstand the elements. Signs shall not be reflective or shall not have separate lighting.
5. Back-Lit Box Signs
Back-lit box signs are prohibited, whether projecting, wall, or freestanding signs. Back-lit box
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.C. Landscape Requirements
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 64 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
signs include any sign with a box configuration and lighting within the box, shining through the front panel, whether the panel is opaque or translucent.
6. Pole-Mounted Signs
Pole-mounted signs are prohibited on all streets in the MX districts.
7. Plastic
Plastic is permitted only to be utilized for separate alphanumeric characters or logos on any sign type. Translucent or plastic panels are prohibited for all sign types.
8. Monument Signs
A monument sign includes a base with a sign panel mounted directly upon the base. The base height shall be less than 30 percent of the overall sign height.
a. Major Road Frontages.
(1) Development-Wide Signs. On Dixie Highway and Turkeyfoot Road, multi-tenant, development-wide monument signs are permitted with a maximum overall height of 12 feet, located a minimum of 10 feet from a sidewalk and 15 feet from any building. These signs have a separate total maximum amount established in Section 10.16.5.B.2.a
(2) Storefront, General and Civic Building Signs. On Dixie Highway, Turkeyfoot Road, and Thomas More Parkway, monument signs for single Storefront, General, and Civic buildings are permitted with a maximum overall height of 10 feet, located a minimum of 8 feet from any sidewalk and building.
b. Other Street Frontages. The following applies to monument signs on any street other than the major road frontages defined above in Section 10.16.5.B.7.a
(1) Monument signs are not permitted on Storefront buildings on street frontages other than major road frontages.
(2) For buildings on any street other than major road frontages, monument signs are permitted with a maximum overall
height of 6 feet, located anywhere on the site.
(3) A minor exception for Storefront monument signs may be requested for unique building locations with additional landscape area in front of the building.
9. Projecting Signs
Projecting signs in all MX districts shall be oriented to the pedestrian on the sidewalk.
a. Projecting signs are limited to a maximum of 8 square feet for each sign face.
b. Projecting signs may be mounted no higher than 16 feet from the sidewalk elevation.
c. A maximum of one two-sided pedestrian-scaled projecting sign is permitted for every 30 feet of storefront facade.
10. Wall Signs
On any street except Dixie Highway, Turkeyfoot Road, and Thomas More Parkway, wall sign letters for all building types in the MX districts are limited to a maximum of 2.5 feet in height.
a. In no case shall wall signs cover any architectural detail on the building.
b. Separate letters, each pin-mounted, are preferred to panels.
c. A minor exception up to 3.5’ in wall sign height may be approved for one or more unique locations within the site, such as the top story on the corner of a 4 story or taller building, a prominent street terminus, or dominant, unique (only one on the site) use (i.e. cinema, theater, community center, city hall, grocery store).
C. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Refer to the general landscape requirements of Section 9.17. The following establishes additional landscape requirements applicable to all building types in the MX districts.
1. Buffer Requirements
The buffer requirements in Section 9.17 do not apply between different building types within the MX districts.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.C. Landscape Requirements
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 65
2. Single-Family District Buffer Required
A planting buffer of 45 feet is required where any MX district or new street abuts any existing single-family district. One of the following planting configurations shall be utilized. All lists are from the Planting Manual and Landscape Regulation Guidelines.
a. Shade Trees and Hedge. One tree per 35 linear feet, or fraction thereof, from List A (shade trees) plus a double row hedge from List E (evergreen/broadleaf shrubs).
b. Small Trees and Hedge. One tree per 20 linear feet, or fraction thereof, from List B (flowering and non-flowering trees) plus a double row hedge from List E (evergreen/broadleaf shrubs).
c. Trees, Hedge, and Fence. One tree per 40 linear feet, or fraction thereof, from List A or B plus a hedge from List D plus a 6-foot wall or fence.
d. Double Row of Trees. A double row, staggered of trees from List C at the rear of Storefront, General-Office, and Civic buildings, or from List A, B, or C at the rear of General-Residential and Row buildings, at 15 feet on center.
3. Ground Plane Vegetation Requirements
All unpaved areas on the lot shall be covered by one of the following.
a. Planting Bed. Planting beds shall include shrubs, ornamental grasses, ground cover, vines, or perennials. A minimum of 60 percent of the bed area shall be covered in plant material. The remaining portion of the bed shall be covered with non-living permeable materials, such as naturally colored mulch or landscape aggregate.
b. Grass. Seeded, plugged, or sodded grass shall be established within 90 days of planting or the area must be reseeded, replugged, or resodded.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.C. Landscape Requirements
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 66 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
4. Frontage Buffer
In lieu of any buffer required between vehicular use areas (VUAs) and a street, the frontage buffer is required in all locations in the MX districts. The frontage buffer is not required at alleys, unless adjacent to a residential district. Refer to Figure 10.16.5-51 Frontage Buffer and Table 10.16.5-A for Frontage Buffer Requirements.
TABLE 10.16.5-A. FRONTAGE BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
A. BUFFER DEPTH & LOCATION
DEPTH
Minimum 7’ from street facing boundary line for parking areas or minimum 7’ from the sidewalk for other uses covered by this section.
DRIVEWAYS/ WALKWAYS
This screening requirement does not prohibit the installation of or provision for openings necessary for allowable access drives and walkways connecting to the public sidewalk.
B. BUFFER LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
USES & MATERIALS
Uses and materials other than those indicated are prohibited in the buffer
TREES
Tree (List A, B, or C) required at least every 40’, located on the street side of the fence. Spacing should alternate required or existing street trees.
HEDGE
Required continuous hedge (List D or E) on street side of fence, between shade trees & in front of vehicular areas
HEDGE COMPOSITION
Individual shrubs with a minimum width of 24”, spaced no more than 36” on center, height maintained no more than 48”.
EXISTING VEGETATION
May be credited toward buffer area per zoning administrator
C. FENCE
LOCATION
2’ from back of curb of vehicular area for parking areas or 3’ from hedge trunk for other uses covered by this section.
MATERIALS
Black, gray, or dark green steel; stone; or masonry; or combination steel with masonry columns (maximum width 2’6”) and/or base (maximum 18” height) permitted
MINIMUM HEIGHT
3’
TABLE 10.16.5-A. FRONTAGE BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
3.5’
GATE/ OPENING
One gate permitted per street frontage; opening width maximum 6’
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.D. Screening of Refuse & Recycling Areas
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 67
D. SCREENING OF REFUSE & RECYCLING AREAS
The intent of the following regulations is to reduce the visibility of open storage, refuse areas, loading, and utility appurtenances from public areas and adjacent properties. See Figure 10.16.5-52 Screening of Refuse Area.
1. Applicability
All dumpsters, loading areas, and other refuse/recycling areas in the MX districts.
2. Location on Site
The permitted yard location of refuse areas and loading are defined by building type in Section 10.16.3.3. Loading areas shall not terminate a street vista per Section 10.16.2.J
3. Concrete Pad
For all loading and refuse, a concrete pad is required.
4. Screen Wall
A masonry screen wall is required per the following:
a. Material. The wall shall be constructed of an allowed major or minor material per Section 10.16.4.C and Section 10.16.4.D used on the building. For walls not visible from any street or public way, a minor exception may be approved for a different material; however, use of a wood or steel fence requires approval of a design exception.
b. Enclosed. The wall shall enclose the area around at least 3 sides.
c. Height. The height of the screen wall shall be tall enough to screen the use inside, and a minimum of 6 feet. The zoning administrator may request additional height as needed for complete screening.
d. Openings. Openings shall not be visible from any primary street. Openings visible from any non-primary street or any public area shall include steel gates with opaque screens.
5. Landscape
If the area is located within a larger paved area, such as a parking lot, the following applies:
a. Landscape Area. A landscape buffer at least 3 feet in depth shall be located along all 3 sides.
b. Shade Tree. One shade tree shall be provided within the landscape buffer. The shade tree shall be located within a landscape area that provides at least 240 square feet of permeable surface.
c. Plantings. Ornamental grasses, shrubs, or similar landscape material per the City’s Plant List D and/or E shall cover a minimum of 50% of the buffer area.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.E. Parking
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 68 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
E. PARKING
Refer to Articles XI and XII for off-street parking and loading requirements. The following additional parking regulations apply to the MX districts.
1. Multiple Use Reduction
When 2 or more categories of non-single unit residential uses share a parking lot and are located on the same lot or proximate lots, a multiple use reduction may be approved in accordance with the following.
a. For each applicable land use category, calculate the number of spaces required as if it were the only use.
b. Use the figures for each individual land use to calculate the number of spaces required for that use for each time period specified in Table 10.16.5-B Parking Time Periods per Use. This table establishes 6 time periods per use.
c. For each time period, add the number of spaces required for all applicable land uses to obtain a grand total for each of the 6 time periods.
d. Select the time period with the highest total parking requirement and use that as the total number of parking spaces required and use that as the total number of parking spaces required for the site on a share parking basis.
2. Off-Site Parking Agreement
An agreement providing for shared use of off-site parking spaces or parking for different buildings on different lots, executed by the parties involved, shall be reviewed and may be approved by the zoning administrator during review of the development plan.
a. Off-site cooperative parking allowance shall be permitted on the site only as long as the agreement remains in force.
b. If the agreement is no longer in force, then parking must be provided as otherwise required in this section.
3. Parking Lot Design
The following applies to any parking lot within a MX districts.
a. Pavement Design. Refer to Article XI for parking lot design requirements. Additionally, pavement areas shall consist only of necessary drives, walkway paths, and parking spaces; all other areas shall be landscaped. Excessive pavement shall be avoided.
b. Pedestrian Access. All parking lots with 2 or more double-loaded aisles shall provide internal pedestrian pathway(s) within the parking area and outside of the parking drive aisle.
(1) Dimension. The pathway shall be a minimum of 6 feet in width.
(2) Quantity. One pathway is required for every 2 double-loaded aisles.
TABLE 10.16.5-B. PARKING TIME PERIODS PER USE
Use Category
Weekdays
Weekends
10:00 pm-
7:00 am
7:00 am-
6:00 pm
6:00 pm-
10:00 pm
10:00 pm-
7:00 am
7:00 am-
6:00 pm
6:00 pm-
10:00 pm
Residential
100%
40%
80%
100%
80%
80%
Retail & Service
0%
100%
70%
0%
100%
70%
Hotel
100%
65%
100%
100%
65%
100%
Assembly
0%
30%
50%
0%
100%
75%
Eating & Drinking Establishment
0%
70%
100%
20%
80%
100%
Office
5%
100%
5%
5%
5%
5%
theater / Entertainment
5%
30%
100%
5%
80%
100%
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.E. Parking
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 69
(3) Location. The pathway shall be centrally located within the parking area to serve a maximum number of parking stalls.
(4) Pathways shall provide direct connections to the principal structure(s) entrances from the spaces furthest from the entrance.
(5) Pathway Delineation. Pedestrian pathways should be clearly marked through the use of alternative materials, such as pavers.
4. Bicycle Parking
Minimum long-term and short-term bicycle parking spaces for specified land uses are set forth in Table 10.16.5-C. Bicycle Parking.
a. Required Showers and Changing Facilities. For new office uses, hospital and hospital-related uses, colleges, and universities, one shower and changing facility shall be provided for one for 100 full-time occupants and, for more than 100 full-time occupants, 0.5 percent times the number of full-time occupants, rounded up to the nearest 1. For example, a site with 100 employees must provide one shower and changing facility; a site with 1,000 employees must provide 5 shower and changing facilities.
b. Bicycle Parking Design
(1) Location. Bicycle parking should be located within 50 feet of the entrance of the use on the same zoning lot as the use.
(2) Short-term bicycle parking may be indoors or outdoors.
(3) Long-term bicycle spaces must be located in a limited-access enclosure protecting bicycles from precipitation and theft, such as: enclosed indoor bicycle rooms, bicycle sheds, bicycle lockers, and weather-protected bicycle parking spaces that are monitored by an attendant or security system, such as bike boxes.
(4) Aisle. An aisle a minimum of 5 feet wide shall be provided adjacent to any bicycle parking facilities to allow for maneuvering.
(5) Racks. Racks shall be installed a minimum of 2 feet from any wall or other obstruction, except for wall-mounted bicycle racks, which may be mounted directly on a wall.
(6) Spaces located within individual dwelling units may not be counted toward bicycle parking requirements.
(7) Bicycle parking facilities shall be separated from vehicular parking areas to protect parked bicycles from damage. The separation may be accomplished through grade separation, distance or physical barrier, such as curbs, wheel stops, poles or other similar features.
(8) Racks and Structures. Racks and structures shall be provided for each unprotected parking space and shall be designed to accommodate both chain and U-shaped locking devices supporting the bicycle frame at 2 points. Racks may be floor-mounted or wall-mounted, and they must be securely affixed or bolted to the floor or wall.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.5.E. Parking
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 70 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
c. Surface. The parking surface shall be designed and maintained to be mud and dust free. The use of rock or gravel areas for bicycle parking is permitted provided that edging materials, so that the bicycle parking area is clearly demarcated and the rock material is contained.
d. Signage. If required bicycle parking for public use is not visible from the street, signs must be posted indicating their location.
TABLE 10.16.5-C. BICYCLE PARKING
Use
Minimum Long-Term Bicycle
Spaces
Minimum Short- Term Bicycle Spaces
Residential Dwelling
No minimum requirement
No minimum requirement
Assembly
1 per every 500 seats
1 per every 50 seats
College or university, trade School
1 per every 15,000 square feet of building area
1 per every 5,000 square feet of building area
Parks & Recreation
1 per every 15,000 square feet, with 15 minimum
1 per every 15,000 square feet, with 15 minimum
All Other Civic & Institutional uses
1 per 15 employees
1 per every 10,000 square feet, with 10 minimum
Hotel
1 per every 60 sleeping rooms
1 per every 30 sleeping rooms, with 4 minimum
Retail & Service uses
No minimum requirement
1 per every 3,000 square feet
Office, Research & Laboratories
1 per 15 employees
1 per every 10,000 square feet
Commercial parking lots and garages
1 per every 30 automobile parking spaces
1 per every 15 automobile parking spaces
Principal use parking lots and garages
1 per every 30 automobile parking spaces
1 per every 15 automobile parking spaces
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.A. General Definitions.
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 71
10.16.6. DEFINITIONS & MEASURING
A. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of the MX districts, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
1. Boundary Line
Boundary lines are delineations on the master development plan defining the limits of a street, civic space site, or building site.
2. Building Site
For the purposes of Section 200, a building site is defined by boundary lines on the master development plan and designated with a building type.
3. Courtyard.
An outdoor area enclosed by a building or buildings on at least three sides for at least 75 percent of the length of each side, and open to the sky. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-54 for an example of a courtyard.
4. Frontage
The yard and building facade abutting a public way or open space.
5. Occupied Space
Interior building space regularly occupied by the building users. It does not include storage areas, utility space, or parking. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-61 for an example of occupied space on a primary frontage facade.
6. Pedestrianway
A pathway designed for use by pedestrians; it can be located mid-block allowing pedestrian movement from one street to another without traveling along the block’s perimeter. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-58 for examples of pedestrianways.
7. Porch
A roofed, open-air platform at the entrance to a building, with or without steps, usually with space for seating. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-56 for an illustration of a porch.
8. Primary Frontage
The building site or lot frontage abutting a primary street.
9. Primary Frontage, Non-
The building or lot frontage abutting a non-primary street.
10. Primary Frontage Façade
The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view from a primary street, including return walls as illustrated in Figure 10.16.6-54. Also referred to as a primary facade or more generally as a street facade.
11. Primary Frontage Facade, Non-
The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view from a non-primary street, including return walls as illustrated in Figure 10.16.6-54. Also referred to as a non-primary facade or more generally as a street facade.
12. Primary Street
A street that receives priority over other streets in terms of pedestrian orientation and setting fronts of buildings. Driveway entrances are not located off primary streets, unless no other option exists. Primary streets are delineated on the master development plan. Refer to Section 10.16.2.G for explanation of primary streets related to the master development plan and Section 10.16.3.B.3 for explanation of primary streets related to building types.
13. Public Way
Any street, lane, drive, pedestrianway, trails, or multi-use path, but not alley.
14. Shadow line
An architectural feature consisting of a decorative, three-dimensional, linear element, horizontal or vertical, protruding or indented a minimum depth from the exterior facade of a building, typically utilized to delineate the top or bottom of floors or stories of a building, and intended to create a linear shadow. Examples may include cast stone cornices, pilasters, or stepped brick coursing. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-60 for examples of shadow lines.
15. Stoop
An open-air platform or flat, paved area at the entrance to a building, with or without steps and with or without a projecting canopy, typically unroofed. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-57 for an illustration of a stoop.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.A. General Definitions.
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 72 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
16. Street
For the purposes of Section 200, a street includes all of the components of a complete street as defined in Section 10.16.2.E.
17. Street Façade
Either a primary or non-primary frontage facade. Refer to the definition of a primary or non-primary street facade.
18. Transparency
The measurement of the percentage of a facade that has highly transparent, low reflectance windows. For example, mirrored glass would not fulfill transparency requirements. Refer to Section 10.16.6.B.8 for explanation of measuring transparency.
19. Yard
The space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky by the principal building. Refer to Figure 10.16.1-4 Illustration of Yards. Note that the rear yard is fully screened from the street by the structure.
a. Yard, Non-Primary Frontage. For the MX districts, a yard extending from the non-primary frontage building facade along a non-primary street boundary or lot line between the primary
frontage yard and rear boundary or lot line. Also referred to as a corner side or street yard.
b. Yard, Primary Frontage Yard. For the MX districts, a yard extending from the primary frontage facade of the principal building along the full length of the primary frontage boundary line between the side boundary or lot lines, or side and any street boundary lines. Also referred to as a front or street yard.
c. Yard, Rear. For the MX districts, a yard extending from the rear building facade along the rear boundary or lot line between the side yards or, on a corner building site, the street and side yards.
d. Yard, Side. For the MX districts, a yard extending from the side building facade along a side boundary or lot line between the primary frontage yard and rear boundary line.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.A. General Definitions.
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 73
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.B. Measuring
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 74 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
B. MEASURING
The following explains the standards outlined on the tables in 10.16.3. Building Types & Uses, specific to each building type, refer to Section 10.16.3.D through Section 10.16.3.G.
1. Minimum Primary Frontage Coverage
The minimum percentage of building facade along the primary frontage of a lot is designated on each building type table.
a. Measurement. The width of the principal structures (as measured within the build-to zone along the frontage edge) is divided by the length of the frontage parallel to the boundary line, right-of-way line, or property line following the street. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-62 Minimum Primary Frontage Coverage. A boundary line is designated on the master development plan to delineate the space of a street or building site.
b. Courtyards.
(1) Definition. A courtyard is an outdoor area enclosed by a building or buildings on at least three sides for at least 75 percent of the length of each side, and open to the sky.
(2) Applies to Coverage. Where noted by building type, courtyards maximum of 30% of facade width or 30 feet wide, whichever is less, may count towards the minimum primary frontage coverage.
c. Civic Space Type. Open spaces per civic space type requirements are exempt from minimum primary frontage coverage.
2. Build-to Zone
The build-to zone is designated separately for each frontage of the building types per the building type table regulations. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-63 Build-to zones.
a. Definition. Build-to zone is an area in which the front or corner side facade of a building shall be placed; it may or may not be located directly abutting a boundary or lot line. The district dictates the minimum and maximum distance a structure may be placed from a boundary or lot line.
b. Measurement. The build-to zone for all frontages is measured from the boundary or lot line
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.B. Measuring
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 75
parallel to the frontage, unless otherwise noted. When additional streetscape area is required beyond the street boundary line, the build-to zone is measured from the edge of the required streetscape onto the site.
c. Height. All primary frontage facades must be located within the build-to zone.
d. Encroachments. Awnings, balconies, and building mounted signage may extend up to 3 foot beyond the build-to zone into any yard area, but may not extend beyond a street boundary line or right-of-way unless otherwise expressly approved by the City.
3. Setbacks
Building setbacks are designated separately for each building type per the building type table regulations. Setbacks are typically defined to establish minimum interior side and rear yards, but in some cases, are utilized to establish minimum street yards along primary and non-primary frontages.
a. Definition. Setback is the minimum horizontal distance from a boundary line, property line, or other building into the lot or building site, beyond which a building may be placed.
b. Measurement. The setback is measured
perpendicularly from the boundary line, property line, or other building into the lot or building site.
4. Impervious and Semi-Pervious Site Coverage
Site impervious coverage and additional semi-pervious coverage shall be calculated and measured as follows. Refer to Figure 10.16.3-18.
a. Definitions.
(1) Impervious Site Coverage. The percentage of a lot or building site developed with principal or accessory structures and impervious surfaces, such as driveways, sidewalks, and patios.
(2) Pervious Surface. Also referred to as pervious material. A material or surface that allows for the absorption of water into the ground or plant material.
(3) Semi-Pervious Surface. Also referred to as semi-pervious material. For the purposes of this Section 200, a material or surface that allows for at least 40% absorption of water into the ground or plant material, such as pervious pavers, permeable asphalt, permeable concrete, and gravel, and including vegetated or green roofs. Refer to the Kenton County Subdivision regulations for details for pervious paving.
b. Measurement.
(1) Maximum Site Impervious Coverage. The
maximum site impervious coverage is calculated as the maximum percentage of the area of a lot or building site covered by
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.B. Measuring
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 76 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
structures, pavement, and other impervious surfaces.
(2) Additional Semi-Pervious Coverage. In addition to the allowable impervious coverage on a site, a maximum percentage of the lot or building site of additional semi-pervious coverage is permitted.
5. Limited Parking
Limited side yard parking means one double or single loaded aisle, perpendicular to the street, maximum 65’ in width as measured along the primary frontage boundary or lot line. Refer to Figure 10.16.6-65 for an illustration of limited side yard parking.
6. Ground Story and Upper Stories, Minimum and Maximum Height
(Refer to Figure 10.16.3-19 Measuring Stories with Floor-to-Floor Height).
a. Definitions.
(1) Story, Ground. Also referred to as ground floor. The first floor of a building that is level to or elevated above the finished grade on the front and corner facades, excluding basements or cellars.
(2) Story, Half. A story either in the base of the building, partially below grade and partially above grade (“basement”), or a story fully within the roof structure with transparency facing the street.
(3) Story, Upper. Also referred to as upper floor. The floors located above the ground story of a building.
(4) Visible Basement. A half story partially below grade and partially exposed above with required transparency on the street facade.
b. Minimum Overall Height. Minimum heights require a minimum number of stories on the primary frontage facades of the building.
(1) The building must meet the minimum required height for the first 30 feet of occupied building space measured from the primary frontage facade into the building.
(2) False stories are not permitted.
c. Maximum Overall Height. Maximum heights are specified both in number of stories and overall dimension. This requirement applies to the entire building.
d. Towers. Where noted, towers may exceed the overall maximum height per 10.16.3.I Cap Types.
e. Cap Type. Where noted, certain cap types may allow additional height.
f. Two Half Stories. Refer to 10.16.6.B.6.a, above, for definition of a half story. A building incorporating both a half story within the roof and a visible basement shall count the height of the two half stories as one full story.
7. Minimum & Maximum Height per Story
Each story is measured with a range of permitted floor-to-floor heights. Refer to Figure 10.16.3-21 Measuring Minimum Facade Transparency.
a. Measurement. Floor height is measured in feet between the floor of a story to the floor of the story above it. Minimum and maximum floor-to-floor heights are required to be met on floors along facades, a minimum of 80 percent of each story.
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.B. Measuring
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018 77
b. Single Story Buildings & Top Floor Measurement. For single story buildings and the uppermost story of a multiple story building, floor-to-floor height shall be one foot less than noted per building type and measured from the floor of the story to the ceiling.
c. Mezzanines. Mezzanines may be included within the floor-to-floor height of any story, included in the calculation of stories. Mezzanines occupying more than 30 percent of the floor area below and extending above the story’s allowable floor-to-floor height shall count as an additional story, including articulation of the story per Section 10.16.4.L.
d. Taller Spaces. Spaces exceeding the allowable floor-to-floor heights of the building are not permitted on primary frontage facades. These spaces are unlimited on interior lots and non-primary frontage facades, but shall be counted as the number of stories that would fit within their height.
8. Minimum Required Transparency
Per the requirements of each building type, a minimum amount of transparency is required on all stories of all facades.
a. Degree of Transparency. Highly transparent, low reflectance windows means a minimum of 50 percent transmittance factor and a reflectance factor of not greater than 0.25.
b. Measurement. Minimum facade transparency is measured from floor-to-floor of each story separately. Refer to Figure 10.16.3-21 Measuring Minimum Facade Transparency. Transparency, defined in 10.16.1.I. Definitions, includes windows and any glass in doors that is highly transparent with low reflectance. The measurement may include the frame, mullions, and muntins, but shall not include trim or casing.
c. Blank Wall Segments. No more than a 15-foot wide section, measured horizontally, and no more than 30 percent of any story shall be without transparency.
d. Exception. When a facade of any story is located within 3 feet of a parallel building facade, no minimum transparency is required for that story.
e. Minimum Ground Story Transparency. When required by the building type, ground story
10.16 Mixed-Use (MX) Zones
10.16.1.B. Measuring
CITY OF CRESTVIEW HILLS 78 ADOPTED NOVEMBER 8, 2018
transparency shall be measured between 2 feet and either 8 or 10 feet, as noted, from the average grade at the base of the facade. Minimum ground story transparency supersedes the overall minimum transparency required for the building type.
f. Tall Stories. Stories that are 18 feet or taller in height shall be counted as 2 stories for the purpose of calculating minimum facade transparency, with each horizontal half of the story calculated separately.
g. Half Stories. All half stories located within roof structure and visible basements are required to meet the minimum transparency.
9. Minimum Number of Required Entrances
Entrances shall be provided consistent with the entrance location and number requirements established for the building type and consistent with Figure 10.16.3-20.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
ARTICLE XI
OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
In all zones, off-street parking facilities for the storage or parking of motor vehicles for use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the building hereafter erected, altered, or extended, and all uses of the land after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, and provided that construction has not begun within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days of such effective date, off-street parking facilities in the amounts required by this ordinance shall prevail.
SECTION 11.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACES: In determining the number of parking spaces required, if such spaces result in fractional parts thereof, the number of said spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number.
B. ADDITIONAL TO BUILDINGS: Whenever the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein, additional parking spaces shall be provided in the amounts hereafter specified for that use, if the existing parking space is inadequate to serve such increase in intensity of use.
C. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES: All off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or zoning lot as the building served, except for the following:
1. Multi-family dwellings, where permitted in this ordinance, and any use permitted in an industrial zone may supply off-street parking within three hundred (300) feet from such lot or zoning lot served, upon approval of the zoning administrator, providing that such off-street parking is located within the same zone as the establishment being served and that off-street parking requirements of this ordinance are complied with at all times. Further, the applicant must also show sufficient proof that such off-street parking facilities would be impossible to provide the required off-street parking space, as required herein, on the same lot or zoning lot or contiguous to the same lot or zoning lot as the building being served.
2. Where single, two, or multi-family dwellings, which are permitted herein, are existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, occupy a lot of such size that off-street parking could not be provided on the same lot or zoning lot as the use being served, said off-street parking may be permitted to
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
locate within a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from said dwelling or dwellings, upon approval of the zoning administrator. In addition, said off-street parking lot shall be located in the same zone as the use being served and constructed in accordance with Section 11.0 of this ordinance.
3. Off-street parking, as required for conditional uses permitted in the Residential (R) Zones, may be permitted to locate on another lot or zoning lot than the building or use being served is located, when approved by the Board of Adjustment, provided that said parking is located within reasonable walking distance of the use or building being served and available at all times without restrictions for said purposes.
4. In the MX zones, the location of off-street parking may be determined by the Master Development Plan Process.
D. COLLECTIVE PARKING PROVISION: Collective off-street parking facilities may be provided, however, such facilities shall be no less than the sum of such facilities as would otherwise be individually required.
E. DRIVEWAY PROVISIONS: Except for Residential (R-1) Zones, parking lots or areas adjacent to streets, roads, highways, or deeded right-of-ways, shall have driveways or openings not less than twelve (12) feet in width and no more than forty-eight (48) feet in width at the curb, excluding curve radius. These curb cuts shall be so located as to minimize traffic hazards and congestion. All such parking lots or areas shall have a protective wall or bumper blocks around each parking lot and said parking lots shall be so designed that all vehicles leaving the facility will be traveling forward to approaching traffic. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces for each single-family residential unit shall be provided.
No single-family residential driveway width at street, road, highway, or deeded right-of-way junctions shall be less than nine (9) feet nor more than twenty (20) feet, excluding curb radius, providing that this width may be increased if sufficient proof can be demonstrated after review and approval of the zoning administrator.
F. APPROVAL OR MODIFICATION OF CURB CUTS REQUIRED: Detailed plans shall be submitted to the city, or its duly authorized representative, in the form of a site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, for approval of all curb cuts, driveway openings, including modifications thereto, before a permit may be obtained therefore.
For the purpose of minimizing the interference of traffic and congestion on the major street system, as identified on that portion of the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan, as it pertains to Crestview Hills, the city shall limit the number of curb cuts along said streets. The number of curb cut intersections
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
with major streets shall be spaced at a distance of not less than eight hundred (800) feet apart. Access to abutting properties fronting on said major streets shall be provided by a frontage or service road connecting to the curb cut intersection. If the developer can show sufficient proof, in the form of a development plan, that spacing of curb cuts less than eight hundred (800) feet apart will not impede the movement of traffic flow along said major street, then the city may vary these requirements accordingly.
G. DRIVEWAYS NOT COMPUTED AS PART OF PARKING LOT: Entrances, exits, or driveways shall not be computed as any part of a required parking lot or area.
H. OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE AND ACCESS DRIVES DEFINED: For the purposes of this ordinance, one (1) parking space shall be a minimum of one hundred and sixty-two (162) square feet in area, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. Parking spaces within a garage or parking deck shall be one hundred seventy-one (171) square feet in area, and be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in depth. Such parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven (7) feet. Each parking space shall be approximately dimensioned for automobile parking. All parking lots shall be laid out with the following minimum aisle or access widths:
1. Ninety (90) degrees (perpendicular) parking -- Twenty-four (24) feet (either one or two way circulation)
2. Sixty (60) degree (angle) parking -- Eighteen (18) feet (one way circulation only)
3. Forty-five (45) degree (angle) parking -- Thirteen (13) feet (one way circulation only)
4. Thirty (30) degree (angle) parking -- Eleven (11) feet (one way circulation only)
5. Zero degree (parallel) parking -- Twelve (12) feet (one way circulation)
When any combination of these types of parking is used (facing the same aisle) the most restrictive aisle or access width requirements shall prevail.
I. OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE TO BE USED FOR PARKING ONLY: Any vehicle parking space shall be used for parking only. Any other use of such space, including repair work or servicing of any kind, other than in an emergency, or the requirement of any payment for the use of such space, shall be deemed to constitute a separate commercial, use in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
J. NO BUILDING TO BE ERECTED IN OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE: No building of any kind shall be erected in any off-street parking lot except a parking garage containing parking spaces equal to the requirements set forth in this
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
section of the ordinance or a shelter house/booth for a parking attendant, providing the number of required spaces are not reduced.
K. OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE SHALL NOT BE REDUCED: The required parking area on any lot, as set forth and designated in this ordinance, shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
L. PARKING PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED: Plans for all parking lot facilities, including parking garages, excepting that required for single and two-family development, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and such other pertinent ordinances of the city. Such plans shall show the number of spaces and arrangements of parking aisles, location of driveway entrances and exits, provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, location of sidewalks and curbs on or adjacent to the property, utilities, location of shelters for parking attendant, locations of signs, typical cross-sections of pavement, base and sub-base in accordance with Article XI, Section 11.0, M., of this ordinance, proposed grade of parking lot, storm drainage facilities, location of lighting facilities, and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant.
M. SURFACING OF NEW OFF-STREET PARKING: All new off-street parking facilities, available for public use, shall be surfaced with asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and procedures herein established.
1. Asphalt Concrete Pavement
a. General Design Requirements
(1) Asphalt concrete pavements shall consist of specified thickness of asphalt concrete surface course and a base course, or courses, all constructed on prepared subgrade. Pavement thickness required shall be determined from Table 11-1 of this ordinance of the appropriate subgrade soil and traffic use.
(2) Paved areas shall be so designed and constructed that water will quickly drain from the surface and be conducted away from the area through approved systems. Transverse and/or longitudinal slopes of not less than 5/8 inch in 10 feet shall be provided. For large paved areas, approved catch basins and storm drainage systems shall be provided.
(3) When the pavement includes a granular base, and the pavement is not constructed over granular subgrade,
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
perimeter subsurface drainage shall be provided to prevent lateral flow of water into the base course and to provide for removal of seepage water that may enter the base.
(4) Successive layers of the pavement shall be offset from the edge of the underlying layer a distance equal to the course thickness of the lower layer, except when abutting existing construction. When the asphalt layers of the pavement abut a building foundation, barrier curb, or similar vertical surface, the abutting surface shall be heavily painted with asphalt prior to construction of the asphalt course. The surface course shall be finished 1/4 inch above adjacent flush construction to permit proper compaction.
b. Construction Materials and Procedures
(1) Subsurface Drainage
(a) Drainage tile, 6 inch perforated tile or other approved types of similar capacity, where required by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall be bedded at a depth of not less than 12 inches below the bottom elevation of the granular base course. Aggregate for bedding and backfill shall all pass a 3/8 inch sieve and have not more than 5 percent passing a No. 200 sieve. The slope of subsurface drains shall be not less than 6 inches per 100 feet. All such drains shall be properly connected to outlet drains or to open ditches.
(b) All catch basins, in pavement with granular base, shall be constructed with weep holes, at subbase level, to provide for drainage of seepage water from the granular layer. Weep holes shall be constructed of pipe, or other material, having an opening not less than 1.5 inches clear opening. Suitable provision shall be made to prevent clogging of the opening. Three or more weep holes shall be suitably located around the perimeter of each catch basin.
(2) Base courses shall consist of one or more of the following materials. Construction procedures shall conform to the requirements applicable to the base course selected.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(a) Asphalt Concrete Base Course - Materials and construction shall conform to the current requirements of the Kentucky Bureau of Highways' Specifications for Asphalt Concrete Base Course, Class I, except as noted herein.
(aa) Composition requirements of the mixture shall conform to the gradation limits for asphalt concrete base course I or II, set forth in Table 11-2 of this ordinance. Asphalt content used shall fall within the range shown and shall be approved by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative.
(bb) Uncrushed gravel and natural sand may be used as aggregate, provided all other requirements of the specification are complied with.
(b) Asphalt Treated Base Course - Materials and construction procedures shall conform to the following requirements:
(aa) Aggregates may be crushed or uncrushed material conforming to the gradation requirements, shown in Table 11-2 of this ordinance, for either Base III or Base IV. The aggregate shall be composed of hard durable particles and shall contain no more than a total of 5 percent deleterious substances. In addition, the sand equivalent of the aggregate shall not be less than 25 when tested in accordance with AASHO Designation: T 176-56. The contractor shall set a single gradation and asphalt content, within the specified limits, as the job mix formula to be used on the project. This formula must be approved by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, prior to use. Gradation and asphalt content may vary during construction within the following tolerances.
% Passing 3/4" or 3/8" Sieve + 10%
% Passing No. 8 Sieve + 8%
% Passing No. 50 Sieve + 6%
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
% Passing No. 100 Sieve + 3%
% Asphalt + .4%
(bb) Other construction requirements shall conform to those specified by the Kentucky Bureau of Highways' for Asphalt Concrete, except that a gradation unit on the plant shall not be required provided the aggregate can be controlled by other means to produce a consistently uniform gradation.
(c) Crushed Stone Base Course
(aa) Crushed stone base course shall conform to all the current requirements of the Kentucky Bureau of Highways for Dense Graded Aggregate Base Course.
(3) Asphalt Concrete Surface Course - Materials and construction shall conform to the current requirements of the Kentucky Bureau of Highways for Asphalt Concrete Surface, Class I. Surface course mixture composition may conform to requirements of either Surface Course I or II, as set forth in Table 11-2 of this ordinance. Minimum course thickness shall be as stated in Table 11-1 of this ordinance.
(4). Asphalt Prime and Tack Coat
(a) Asphalt Prime shall conform to the Kentucky Bureau of Highways' requirements for Cutback Asphalt Emulsion Primer, Type L. Prime shall be applied to the surface of granular base course at a rate of 0.20 to 0.40 gallons per square yard, as directed by the city engineer, in conformance with requirements of the referred to specification.
(b) Tack Coat shall consist of SS-1h, meeting the current requirements of the Kentucky Bureau of Highways. It shall, when directed by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, be diluted with equal parts of water. Application equipment and procedure shall conform to the requirements of the Kentucky Bureau of Highways for Tack Coats. Tack coat shall be applied, upon direction of the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, to
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
the surface of asphalt courses that have become dusty or dry from traffic use before the subsequent course could be placed or in other circumstances when the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, so directs.
2. Soil - Cement Base Course (with Asphalt Concrete Surface
a. Description: Soil-cement base course shall consist of soil and cement uniformly mixed, moistened, compacted, finished, and cured in accordance with the specifications herein, and it shall conform to the lines, grades, thickness, and typical cross section shown on the plans.
b. Materials
(1) Cement: Cement shall comply with the latest specifications for cement, AASHO M85, M151, or ASTM C150, C175, C205, or Federal SS-C192b, SS-C-218 for the type specified. One cubic foot of portland cement shall be considered to weigh 94 pounds and 1 bbl. of cement shall be considered to weigh 376 pounds.
(2) Water: Water shall be free from substances deleterious to the hardening of the soil-cement.
(3) Soil: Soil shall consist of the material existing in the area to be paved, of approved selected soil, or of a combination of these materials proportioned as directed. The soil shall not contain gravel or stone retained on a 3 inch sieve or more than 45 percent retained on a No. 4 sieve.
c. Construction Methods
(1) Preparation: Unsuitable soil or material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable soil.
The subgrade shall be firm and able to support without displacement the construction equipment and the compaction hereinafter specified. Soft or yielding subgrade shall be corrected and made stable, before construction proceeds.
(2) Pulverization: The soil shall be pulverized that, at the completion of moist-mixing, 100 percent by dry weight
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-9
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
passes a 1 inch sieve, and a minimum of 80 percent passes a No. 4 sieve, exclusive of gravel or stone retained on these sieves.
(3) Cement Application, Mixing, and Spreading: Mixing of the soil, cement, and water shall be accomplished either by the mixed-in-place or the central-plant-mixed method.
No cement or soil-cement mixture shall be spread when the soil or subgrade is frozen or when the air temperature is less than 40 degrees F. in the shade.
The percentage of moisture in the soil, at the time of cement application, shall not exceed the quantity that will permit a uniform and intimate mixture of soil and cement during mixing operations; and it shall not exceed the specified optimum moisture content for the soil-cement mixture.
Any soil-and-cement mixture that has not been compacted and finished shall not remain undisturbed for more than 30 minutes. The soil-cement base course shall have a thickness of not less than 6 inches.
(4) Compaction: At the start of compaction, the percentage of moisture in the mixture and in unpulverized soil lumps, based on oven-dry weights, shall not be below or more than two percentage points above the specified optimum moisture content, and shall be less than that quantity which will cause the soil-cement mixture to become unstable during compaction and finishing. The specified optimum moisture content and density shall be determined in the field by a moisture-density test, AASHO T134-57 or ASTM D558-57, on representative samples of soil-cement mixture obtained from the area being processed.
Prior to the beginning of compaction, the mixture shall be in a loose condition for its full depth. The loose mixture then shall be uniformly compacted to the specified density within two hours. During compaction operations, shaping may be required to obtain uniform compaction and required grade and cross section.
(5) Finishing: After compaction, the surface of the soil-cement shall be shaped to the required line, grades, and cross section. If necessary, during shaping operations, the surface
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-10
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
of the base shall be lightly scarified to remove any tire imprints or smooth surfaces left by equipment. The resulting surface shall then be compacted to the specified density. Rolling shall be supplemented by broom-dragging if required.
The moisture content of the surface material must be maintained at not less than its specified optimum moisture content during finishing operations. Surface compaction and finishing shall be done in such a manner as to produce, in not longer than two hours, a smooth dense surface free of compaction planes, cracks, ridges, or loose material.
Any portion of the soil-cement that has a density of five pounds or more below that specified shall be corrected or replaced to meet these specifications.
(6) Curing: After the soil-cement has been finished as specified herein, it shall be protected against drying for seven days by the application of bituminous material. The curing material shall be applied as soon as possible but not later than 24 hours after the completion of finishing operations. The finished soil-cement shall be kept continuously moist until the curing material is placed.
The bituminous material specified shall be uniformly applied to the surface of the completed soil-cement at the rate of approximately 0.2 gallon per square yard with approved heating and distributing equipment.
At the time the bituminous material is applied the soil-cement surface shall be dense, shall be free of all loose and extraneous material, and shall contain sufficient moisture to prevent penetration of the bituminous materials. Water shall be applied in sufficient quantity to fill the surface voids of the soil-cement immediately before the bituminous curing material is applied.
The curing material shall be maintained by the contractor during the seven day protection period so that all of the soil-cement will be covered effectively during this period.
Sufficient protection from freezing shall be given the soil-cement for seven days after its construction and until it has hardened.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-11
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(7) Surfacing: Asphaltic concrete shall be applied to the soil-cement base course, as regulated in Section 11.0, M., Subsection 1., b., (3) of this ordinance.
3. Concrete Parking Area
a. General Requirements - Thickness of concrete parking shall be:
(1) A minimum of five (5) inches for passenger cars and panel or pickup truck parking.
(2) A minimum of six (6) inches for driveways accommodating light trucks and for light truck parking.
(3) A minimum of seven (7) inches for heavier commercial or industrial needs.
b. General Requirements - Concrete mix (for areas subject to freeze-thaw conditions):
(1) Minimum Cement Content - 564 lb./cu.yd. of concrete (6 U.S. bags).
(2) Maximum Size of Aggregate - 1-1/2 inches.
(3) Maximum Water Content - 0.49 lb./1 lb. of cement (5.5 gal./ bag).
(4) Maximum Slump - four (4) inches.
e. Strength of Concrete - The concrete shall attain a minimum expected strength of concrete at 28 days of 3,500 pounds per square inch compressive strength and/or 550 pounds per square inch flexural strength "modulus of rupture".
f. Air Entrainment
Maximum Size Entrained
Aggregate (inches) Air (Percent)
1-1/4 5 + 1
3/4, 1 6 + 1
3/8, 1/2 7-1/2 + 1
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-12
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
c. Construction Procedures:
(1) All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which will not compact readily when rolled or taped, shall be removed and replaced with suitable material, placed and compacted. The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted with suitable equipment so as to have uniform density at moisture contents of not less than standard optimum (AASHO-T98).
(2) Longitudinal joint spacing shall not exceed 12.5 feet.
(3) Transverse joint spacings shall be at regular intervals of twenty (20) feet.
(4) All transverse construction joints shall a depth equal to one-fourth of the pavement thickness.
(5) Form offsets at radius points shall be at least two (2) feet.
(6) Pavement joints must be continuous through the curbs.
(7) Where curbs are required, they shall be cast integrally.
(8) The pavement shall be struck-off, consolidated, and finished, to the grades shown on the plans. All catch basins and manhole castings shall be boxed out and separated from the pavement with expansion joint material. All except premolded or sawed joints shall be edged with a tool having a maximum radius of 1/8 inch. Sawed and formed joints shall be cleaned and sealed before opening to traffic. Final surface texture shall be that obtained with a burlap drag. Curing shall be that obtained with a uniform coverage of white membrane curing compound or by seven-day coverage of white polyethylene or waterproof paper. The completed pavement shall be closed to traffic seven (7) days.
N. DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE
1. Screening and Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residential zone by a solid wall, fence, or densely planted compact hedge, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. Ground cover shrubs and
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-13
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
trees shall be located and maintained so as to not interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the property or with sight distance clearance at entrances and exits.
2. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from adjoining properties in such a way as not to create a nuisance.
3. Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be limited to driveway entrances and exits specified in parking area plans, as approved by the zoning administrator. Each required parking space shall be connected with a deeded right-of-way (by means of adequate aisles, as required in Section 11.0, H.) which offers adequate ingress and egress for automobiles.
4. Parking lots, garages, and storage areas shall be so designed and constructed so that all maneuvering into and out of each parking space takes place entirely within property lines of lots, garages, and/or storage areas.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-14
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
SECTION 11.1 SPECIFIC OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS: The amount of off-street parking space required for uses, buildings, or additions thereto, shall be determined according to the following requirements, and the space, so required, shall be stated in the application for a zoning and building permit and shall be reserved for such use. Unless otherwise stated herein, where more than one use is located in the same building, each individual use shall be in accordance with the off-street parking requirements of this section of the ordinance.
TYPES OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
A. Airport, railroad passenger One (1) parking space for each four (4)
stations and bus terminal seating accommodations for waiting
passengers, plus one (1) parking space
for each two (2) employees on shift of
largest employment.
B. Automobile laundries One (1) parking space for each employee,
plus one (1) space per owner or manager,
and reservoir space equal to five (5) times
the capacity of the facility.
C. Automobile Service stations One (1) parking space for each gas pump island, plus two (2) parking spaces for each working bay, plus one (1) parking space for each employee at largest shift.
D. Beauty parlor and barber shops Two (2) parking spaces per barber and/or beauty shop operator.
E. Bowling establishments Five (5) parking spaces for each lane, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on shift of largest employment.
F. City and/or county government One (1) parking space for each two hundred
offices (200) square feet of gross floor area.
G. Commercial or trade schools One (1) parking space for each two (2) students, based on design capacity of the school, plus one (1) parking space for each employee.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-15
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TYPES OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
H. Convalescent homes, nursing One (1) parking space for each two (2)
homes, rest homes, homes for the beds, plus one (1) parking space for each
aged, and orphanages two (2) employees or staff members,
including nurses, on the shift of largest employment, plus one (1) parking space per doctor.
I. Dance halls, pool and billiard halls, One (1) parking space for each one
and exhibition halls without fixed hundred (100) square feet of floor area
seats used for dancing or assembly, or one (1) parking space for each four (4) persons, based on design capacity, whichever is greater, plus one (1) parking space for
each two (2) employees on shift of largest employment.
J. Dormitories, Fraternities, Sorority A. One (1) parking space per each resident
Houses, and other group housing capacity of the structure, plus one (1) parking space per owner or operator, plus
one (1) parking space per employee.
B. In addition to the parking required in A., above, parking will be required for the non-resident membership of the organization, as follows:
One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of the largest floor area used for assembly, social activity, or dining; or one (1) parking space for each on
hundred (100) square feet of the total of all floor area used for assembly, social activity, and dining; or one (1) parking space for each non-resident member anticipated in the fraternity membership, whichever is greater.
K. Dwellings: One-Family Two (2) parking spaces.
Two-Family Four (4) parking spaces, with individual access for each dwelling unit.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-16
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TYPES OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
L. Dwellings: Multi-Family Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
M. Establishments for sale and One (1) parking space for each two (2)
consumption on the premises of employees on shift of largest employment
alcoholic beverages, food, and plus one parking space for each:
refreshments, or for take home
food services A. Thirty (30) square feet of gross floor area
in a drive-in restaurant;
B. One hundred forty (140) square feet of gross floor area in a carry-out restaurant:
C. Forty (40) square feet of gross floor area or two (2) seating accommodations, based on maximum seating capacity, whichever is greater, in a combination restaurant:
D. Two (2) seating accommodations, based on maximum seating capacity, in a sit- down restaurant.
N. Fire stations One (1) parking space for each person on duty on largest shift.
O. Hospitals One (1) parking space for each two (2)
beds, plus one (1) parking space for each
two (2) employees or staff members,
including nurses, on the shift of largest employment, plus one (1) parking space
per doctor.
P. Laundromats One (1) parking space for each two (2) washing machines.
Q. Libraries, museums, and art One (1) parking space for each four (4)
galleries seats in rooms for public assembly or one
(1) parking space for each fifty (50) square
feet of gross floor area for use by the
public, whichever is greater, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees
on shift of largest employment.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-17
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TYPES OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
R. Medical offices and/or clinics One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area plus 5 overflow spaces for buildings less than 30,000 g.s.f. and 10 overflow spaces for buildings greater than 30,000 g.s.f.
S. Mortuaries or funeral homes One (1) parking space for each four (4)
seats in the main chapel or public
assembly area, based on maximum seating
capacity, plus one (1) parking space for
each funeral vehicle and employee, or in
the case of no fixed seats, one (1) parking
space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor
area in parlor or service rooms, or one (1)
parking space for each four (4) persons,
based on design capacity of the building,
whichever is greater, plus one (1) parking
space for each funeral vehicle and
employee.
T. Offices for professional, business, One (1) parking space for each two hundred
and financial, real estate, and fifty (250) square feet of gross leasable
business purposes, other than area.
medical offices and/or clinics
U. Post offices One (1) parking space for each four
hundred (400) square feet of gross floor
area, plus one (1) parking space for each
two (2) employees on shift of largest employment.
V. Private clubs, boarding houses, One (1) parking space for each guest
and lodge halls sleeping room, or one (1) parking space
for each four (4) fixed seats in the main assembly area, whichever is greater, plus
one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees, or in the case of no fixed seats, one (1) parking space for each two
(2) employees.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-18
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TYPES OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
W. Retail and personal service Four and one-quarter (4-1/4) parking spaces
stores for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross leasable area.
X. Schools - elementary, junior high, One (1) parking space per teacher and
and equivalent, private or administrator or one (1) space for each
parochial schools four (4) seats in the auditorium, stadium, and other places of assembly or facilities available to the public, based on maximum seating capacity, whichever is greater.
Y. Schools - senior high, trade and Six (6) parking spaces for each room to be
vocational, colleges and used for class instruction or administrative
universities, and equivalent, offices, or one (1) parking space for each
private or parochial four (4) seats in the auditorium, stadium,
and other places of assembly or facilities available to the public, based on maximum seating capacity, whichever is greater.
Z. Shopping centers Four and one-quarter (4-1/4) parking spaces
For each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross leasable area.
AA. Stadium and sports arenas One (1) parking space for each four (4)
seats, based on maximum seating
capacity, plus one (1) parking space for
each two (2) employees on shift of largest employment.
BB. Theaters, auditoriums, churches, One (1) parking space for each four (4)
and places of assembly with fixed seats, based on maximum seating
seats capacity, plus one (1) additional parking space for each two (2) employees on shift
of largest employment.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-19
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TYPES OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
CC. Theaters, auditoriums, churches, One (1) parking space per four (4) people
and places of assembly without in designed capacity of building, or one
fixed seats (1) parking space per one hundred (100)
square feet in main auditorium or assembly area, whichever is greater, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees
on shift of largest employment.
DD. Tourist homes, cabins, motels or One (1) parking space for each sleeping
hotels room or suite, plus one (1) parking space
for each two (2) employees on shift of
largest employment.
EE. Industrial establishments, including Two (2) parking spaces for each three (3)
manufacturing, research, and employees - the total number of parking
testing laboratories spaces being the total number of
employees on any two (2) consecutive
shifts having the largest number of
employees, based on design capacity, plus one (1) parking space for each company vehicle operating from the premises.
FF. Wholesale establishments, One (1) parking space for each employee,
warehouses, and storage plus one (1) parking space for each
buildings company vehicle operating from the
premises.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-20
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE 11-1
THICKNESS REQUIREMENTS OF SURFACE AND BASE COURSES
FOR AUTOMOBILE AND TRUCK PARKING FACILITY PAVEMENTS1
Thickness Of Surface And Base - Inches
Type Of Soil Asphalt Base
Vehicle Classification2 Type I Or II Type III Or IV Granular Base
Automobile A 1-4 2-4 3-4
Parking B 1-5 2-5 3-6
Facilities C 1-6 2-6 3-8
Truck A 1-6 2-6 4-6
Parking B 1-7 2-7 4-8
Facilities C 1-8 2-8 4-10
1 Thickness of surface and base is shown for each soil classification and street classification. The first number indicates the minimum thickness of asphalt concrete which may be comprised of asphalt concrete surface course, Type I or II, if the surface course does not exceed two (2) inches. When surface thickness is more than two (2) inches, asphalt concrete Base I or II, as specified in Table 11-2, may be used for all but the upper one (1) inch wearing course which must be asphalt concrete surface course I or II, as specified in Table 11-2. The second figure indicates the thickness of base course of the type indicated. For example, 1-4 indicates one (1) inch surface and four (4) inches base.
2 Soils are classified into three groups indicating their relative effectiveness as subgrade.
A Granular soils that drain well; sand, gravel, or combination of sand and gravel.
B Silty clays, or lean clays, that retain considerable strength when wet. These are average subgrade soils.
C Heavy clay soils that lose most of their strength when wet.
Article XI Off-Street Parking Regulations 11-21
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE 11-2
COMPOSITION LIMITS FOR ASPHALT MIXTURES
Percent Passing By Weight
Asphalt
Sieve Asphalt Concrete Treated Base
Size Base I Base II Surface I Surface II Base III Base IV
1-1/2" 100 - - - 100 -
1" 85-100 100 - - - -
3/4" - 80-100 - - 70-100 100
1/2" 50-80 - 100 100 - -
3/8" - 54-76 80-100 - 40-80 70-100
No. 4 30-50 37-57 55-75 75-95 - -
No. 8 25-45 25-45 35-60 60-85 25-60 40-100
No. 16 15-35 15-35 25-50 45-70 - -
No. 50 5-20 5-20 9-21 15-40 5-30 15-50
No. 100 3-10 3-10 5-14 5-25 3-15 5-25
No. 200 - - 3-7 4-10 - -
% Asphalt 3.5-6.0 4.0-7.0 5.0-8.0 6.0-9.0 3.5-6.0 4.0-8.0
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE XII
OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING REGULATIONS
SECTION 12.0 OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING REGULATIONS: For all buildings and structures erected, altered, or extended, and all uses of land established as specified herein, after the effective date of this ordinance, off-street loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations herein. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the adoption of this ordinance, and provided that construction has not begun within ninety (90) days of such effective date, off-street loading and/or unloading facilities in the amounts required by this ordinance, shall prevail.
SECTION 12.1 OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING - USE AND BULK REGULATIONS: Off-street loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations.
A. SPACES REQUIRED: Every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, department stores, wholesale stores, retail stores, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, mortuary, and other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, and having up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area, shall be provided with at least one (1) loading and/or unloading space. One (1) additional loading and/or unloading space shall be provided for every additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross floor area in the building.
If sufficient proof can be shown that less than these requirements (only that part which has to do with over five thousand (5,000) square feet) will be satisfactory for the operation in question, the zoning administrator may reduce these requirements.
B. SIZE OF OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: Each off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and at least sixty (60) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering spaces and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, provided, however, that when it is demonstrated that a particular loading and/or unloading space will be used by shorter trucks, the zoning administrator may reduce the minimum length to not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
C. LOCATION: All required loading and/or unloading spaces shall be located on the
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
same zoning lot as the use served. No loading and/or unloading space for vehicles over two ton capacity shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property in a residential zone unless completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or screen, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance. No loading and/or unloading space shall be located in any required yards, except as herein provided.
D. ACCESS: Each required off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be designed with direct access via an approved access drive, to a deeded right-of-way which offers satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. Access drives or aisles shall be laid out with a width of at least twelve (12) feet for one way circulation and at least twenty-four (24) feet for two way circulation.
Off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be so designed and constructed so that all maneuvering for loading and/or unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Such off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, road, highway, or deeded right-of-way.
E. ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDINGS: The off-street loading and/or unloading requirements, as listed in this article of the ordinance, shall apply at any time any building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding floor area.
F. DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE
1. Surfacing: All open off-street loading and/or unloading spaces shall be paved subject to the provisions in Article XI, Section 11.0, M., 3. of this ordinance.
2. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street loading and/or unloading areas shall be directed away from adjoining properties in such a way as not to create a nuisance.
3. Space Allocated To Any Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Space: Shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities, or portion thereof.
G. OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED: Plans for all loading and/or unloading facilities shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and such other pertinent ordinances of the city. Such plans shall show the exact proposed layout of all loading and/or unloading areas, drives and accessways, entrances and exits, type of surface to be used, typical cross sections of pavement, base and subbase, location of lighting facilities, storm drainage
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
facilities, proposed grade of off-street loading and/or unloading area, and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant.
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance October 2004 PDS
ARTICLE XIII
FENCES, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTION TO VIEW REGULATIONS
SECTION 13.0 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS: No fence, wall, hedge, or other structure, or other obstruction, above a height of thirty-six (36) inches, as measured above the curb level, shall be erected, placed, maintained, or continued in any zone, within that triangular portion of a corner lot formed by measuring fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or of the right-of-way line of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line and joining these points with a straight line. No type of tree or planting, or other obstruction, shall be planted, placed, maintained, or continued in such a manner which would obstruct the vision clearance at corners and railroad crossings.
SECTION 13.1 CLASSIFICATION OF FENCES AND WALLS
A. The following shall be the classification of fences and walls for this ordinance:
1. Masonry walls
2. Ornamental iron (eighty (80) percent open)
3. Woven wire (eighty (80) percent open)
4. Wood or other materials (more than fifty (50) percent open)
5. Solid fences, wood or other materials (less than fifty (50) percent open)
6. Hedges
7. Barbed wire or sharp pointed fences
8. Earthen or concrete walls intended to contain or redirect flooding waters
SECTION 13.2 CONSERVATION ZONE
A. Fences and/or walls within the conservation zone shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Section 13.0, except that in front yards class 2 or 3 fences may be erected up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches.
2. Side and rear yards, class 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 fences and/or walls may be erected up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches.
3. Class 8 walls shall be permitted, but shall conform to requirements of the Corps of Engineers and/or City Engineer, whichever is applicable.
SECTION 13.3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance October 2004 PDS
A. Fences and/or walls within the R-1BC, R-1Bd, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E, R-2a, R-2b, and R-PUD zones, shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The requirements for the R-1BC, R-1Bd, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E, R-2a, R-2b, and R-PUD Zones, are as set forth and depicted on Figure 1 of this ordinance, for residential uses only.
2. The location, height, and type of all fences and/or walls within any area zoned with R-PUD shall be as approved in the plan.
3. For all non-residential uses permitted or conditional uses permitted herein:
a. Fences of class 2, 3, or 6 only shall be permitted in front yards including the front yard of corner lots, as governed by Section 13.0. Said fences may be erected up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches.
b. Classes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 fences or walls may be erected in side or rear yards up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches, except for side or rear yards of corner lots, as governed by Section 13.0. In the case of these corner lots, class 2 or 3 fences, only, may be erected up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches.
SECTION 13.4 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
A. Except in the MX Zones, fences of class 2, 3, or 6 only shall be permitted in front yards including the front yard of corner lots, as governed by Section 13.0. Said fences may be erected up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches. Fences in the MX zones are not permitted in any front yard.
B. Class 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 fences or walls may be erected in side or rear yards up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches, except for side or rear yards of corner lots, as governed by Section 13.0. In the case of these corner lots, class 2 or 3 fences, only, may be erected up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches.
SECTION 13.5 STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF FENCES: Fences shall be constructed so that all structural members shall be located on the inside of the fence. The inside shall be the side which faces the property owned by the person building the fence.
SECTION 13.6 MEASUREMENT OF ALL FENCE AND/OR WALL HEIGHTS AND/OR LOCATIONS
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance October 2004 PDS
A. All fences and/or wall heights shall be measured along the fence or wall locations.
B. All locations for distance measurements shall be measured from lot lines.
SECTION 13.7 HEIGHT OF ANY BARBED WIRE OR SHARP POINTED FENCES: In zones, where permitted, barbed wire or sharp pointed fences shall not be less than a height of seventy-two (72) inches.
SECTION 13.8 HEIGHT OF FENCES ATOP RETAINING WALLS: A combination fence and retaining wall may be erected. The retaining wall portion may be erected up to the level of the higher finished grade. The fence portion must be of the class and height permitted within this ordinance for the applicable zone. Said measurement shall be made at and along the location of the fence and retaining wall.
SECTION 13.9 APPLICATION FOR A FENCE PERMIT
A. Application for a fence permit shall be made and submitted at the office of the zoning administrator on the appropriate forms furnished by said administrator.
B. No fence shall be erected, except as exempted or specified within this ordinance, until all required fees have been paid to the proper authorities, or their agents, and the necessary permits have been issued for such by the zoning administrator and the building inspector, in accordance with Sections 16.1 and 16.2 of this ordinance.
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance October 2004 PDS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
ARTICLE XIV
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION 14.1 SHORT TITLE: This Article shall be known as the Sign Article of the City of Crestview Hills.
SECTION 14.2 PURPOSE AND INTERESTS SERVED
A. The purpose of this Article is to establish a comprehensive scheme for the regulation of signs within the jurisdiction of the City of Crestview Hills. These regulations are designed to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare by controlling the type, number, location and physical dimensions of signs, to prevent the disruptions, obstructions and hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic that signs may cause, to enhance the quality of the environment in residential and nonresidential districts, and to protect and enhance the value of properties and to have signage appropriate to the planned character and development of each area in the City of Crestview Hills.
As a basis for adopting these regulations, the City of Crestview Hills finds:
1. Signs are an essential form of communication in the built environment, providing way-finding guides to residents, visitors, public safety officials, customers and potential customers of local businesses, delivery people and others.
2. Signs also provide communication on public issues, as the U.S. Supreme Court found in City of LaDue v. Gilleo: Signs that react to a local happening or express a view on a controversial issue both reflect and animate change in the life of a community. Often placed on lawns or in windows, residential signs play an important part in political campaigns, during which they are displayed to signal the resident's support for particular candidates, parties, or causes. They may not afford the same opportunities for conveying complex ideas as do other media, but residential signs have long been an important and distinct medium of expression.
3. Retailers and other businesses depend on signs to help people find their businesses.
4. Although signs thus serve many important purposes in society in general and in Crestview Hills in particular, there are other considerations that the City of Crestview Hills weighs heavily.
5. Signs may distract drivers and lead to deaths and injuries to pedestrians and cyclists as well as to drivers and passengers and to property damage. Moving, flashing and rapidly changing signs are particularly distracting to drivers. A proliferation of signs on a particular site can have the same
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
effect as moving signs, as drivers try to sort through the visual cacophony to find the information that they want or need.
6. The Crestview Hills City Council, with the advice of the Kenton County Planning Commission and its professional staff, and with input from residents through the Direction 2030: Your Voice. Your Choice. planning process, has placed an increasing emphasis on preserving the sense of place and the design of the built environment; limiting the size, height and number of signs is an important tool in preserving a sense of place, a tool that accompanies the County’s standards for landscaping.
7. Direction 2030: Your Voice. Your Choice. recommends that policies, regulations and incentives be developed and implemented that preserve and improve the existing community fabric.
8. Balancing these competing considerations is particularly difficult in residential areas, where people value both their pleasing and visually appealing environments and their ability to communicate their opinions regarding candidates and public issues through yard signs.
9. In updating its ordinance in 2016 after the Supreme Court’s landmark decision in Reed v. Town of Gilbert, the Crestview Hills City Council, working with PDS staff and an outside consultant, has made a major effort to limit content as a factor in its sign regulations. After due consideration, however, it has concluded that one way to leave room for extensive free expression through signs in residential areas while limiting total sign clutter is to maintain significant limits on commercial signs in residential areas. Recognizing the importance of “for sale” and “for lease” signs in maintaining the occupancy of healthy neighborhoods (see the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro), those signs must remain. There is a similar utility in providing for yard sale signs, which allow people to dispose of unwanted items without sending them to a landfill.
10. Although as the Court found in Reed v Gilbert, time limits on signs can be arbitrary, as the Court recognized in 2009 in Pleasant Grove v. City of Summum, a significant distinction between speakers expressing an opinion and signs is that “Speakers, however long-winded, will eventually come to the end of their remarks.” Members of the Crestview Hills City Council have long noted that signs for political campaigns as well as those advertising pancake breakfasts and spaghetti dinners for civic organizations are often abandoned after the events, contributing to clutter long after they have served their purpose. Although such signs were once typically paper or cardboard that would eventually decay, many today are plastic and will remain until removed. Thus, despite the expressed concern of the Supreme Court with time limits, the Crestview Hills City Council finds that it has a substantial governmental interest in clarifying the status of signs for past events that thus no longer serve a purpose so that there is a legal basis for the City of Crestview Hills to remove them or force their removal.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
11. The City of Crestview Hills has long allowed unlimited numbers of small signs bearing non-commercial messages to allow merchants and others to designate handicapped parking places, provide directions to ATMs and restrooms, warn of guard dogs and other hazards and provide a variety of other place-based information. With the prohibition of commercial messages on such signs, it has been the observation of Crestview Hills City Council members and their professional staff members that property owners are judicious and appropriate in posting such signs. The City of Crestview Hills thus finds that it has a substantial interest in allowing merchants and property owners freely to post necessary informational signs but without allowing an endless proliferation of commercial messages.
12. These are complex public policy issues, and the Crestview Hills City Council, with the help of its professional planners, attorneys and outside consultant, has attempted to balance the competing considerations in a way that it believes best protects the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Crestview Hills, including its many valued businesses and the tens of thousands of visitors who arrive or pass through the City of Crestview Hills each month.
SECTION 14.3 TEMPORARY SIGNS
A. One temporary sign will be permitted on each lot in a non-residential zone, subject to the following standards and conditions:
1. It shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area;
2. It shall be attached at all four corners or otherwise firmly affixed to a wall of the principal building or it may be freestanding;
3. If it is freestanding, it shall be supported by one or more posts or similar devices in the ground and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height;
4. In no case shall such a sign be affixed to a tree or other natural feature, a fence, a utility pole, or a fixture or structure on the property other than the principal building;
5. If freestanding, it shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line;
6. It shall not be separately illuminated;
7. If the message relates to an event, such sign shall be removed within three (3) days following the conclusion of the event;
8. Such a sign may bear any noncommercial message or a commercial message related to a commercial activity lawfully conducted on the lot where the sign is located; the sale or lease of the premises shall be considered a lawful use of any premises for purposes of this regulation.
9. Temporary banners may be allowed in the SC, RP-1, INST Zones or any legally operating institutional use in a residential zone that is located
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
adjacent to a State Highway, for up to 14 days. Such a banner requires a permit from the City.
10. Each use/business may be allowed to have a maximum of four (4) temporary banners per calendar year; however, such banners are not allowed on a concurrent basis.
SECTION 14.4 SCOPE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY
A. SCOPE: This Article is adopted pursuant to KRS 100.
B. AUTHORITY: This Article regulates signs, as defined herein, when mounted, located, or displayed on property located within the incorporated limits of the City of Crestview Hills, on land that is either private land or public land over which the City of Crestview Hills has land use regulatory authority.
C. APPLICABILITY, GENERAL: This Article shall apply to all signs erected, placed, painted, installed or otherwise made visible on private or public property in the City of Crestview Hills, except as otherwise provided herein. All signs displayed in the City of Crestview Hills shall comply with all requirements of this Article and all other applicable law. Permits shall be required for all signs in the City of Crestview Hills, except as specified herein. No sign, outdoor advertising, structure, billboard or display shall be erected, installed, located or maintained in any zoning district of the City of Crestview Hills, except in conformity with these regulations. New signs, additional signs, relocations or structural alterations of existing signs also require sign permits.
D. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any person to fasten, place, paint, or attach in any way: any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done in or upon any curb-stone, lamp post, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, culvert, public drinking fountain, public trash container, courtesy benches, rest room, bus stop kiosk or shed, station building, tree, or in or upon any portion of any public sidewalk, street, or sign, except as specifically allowed within this Article.
E. EXEMPTIONS: The following signs or sign elements are exempt from the provisions of this Article but are subject to any other applicable laws and regulations:
1. Any sign installed in a building or enclosed space and not legible from the public right-of-way or from private or public property other than the property on which it is located;
2. Any sign with a sign area of less than four square feet in area and less than four feet in height (if freestanding), that is not separately illuminated and that is not legible from the public right-of-way or from private or public property other than the property on which it is located;
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
3. Signs on mass transit vehicles operating in or passing through the City of Crestview Hills; and
4. Signs on vehicles and watercraft which are regularly used in the operation of a business; signs on vehicles which are parked for long periods of time, which are not operational and/or which are not regularly used in the operation of a business at the same location where the vehicle is most frequently parked shall be considered detached signs and subject to regulation under this Article. For purposes of this subsection, a “long period of time” shall be a continuous period of 30 days or separate periods that total 40 days or more out of any 60-day period.
F. SIGNS SUBJECT TO OTHER STANDARDS: Signs listed in this Section shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this Article; but, shall, to the maximum extent allowed by law, be subject to the other standards of this Article. Where a sign is erected pursuant to a statute or a court order, the sign may exceed the size standards of this Article or otherwise deviate from the standards set forth in this Article to the extent that the statute or court order expressly required the larger size or other deviation. In all other respects, such signs shall conform to the standards of this Article. This subsection shall apply to the following types of signs:
1. Signs conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and bearing no commercial message;
2. Signs bearing no commercial message and installed by employees or officials of the City of Crestview Hills, Kenton County, a state or federal agency in the course of their governmental duties;
3. Signs required by a state or federal statute;
4. Signs required by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
5. Signs installed by public utilities in their rights-of-way or on their facilities and bearing no commercial message other than such message is necessary to identify the use and/or provide contact information regarding the facility; and
6. Signs installed by a transit company with a franchise or other right to operate in the City of Crestview Hills, where such signs are installed along its routes and relate to schedules or other information about the transit route provided it is reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator prior to installation.
G. SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT: The following signs or sign-like devices are allowed in all zoning districts without a sign permit and are not to be included in determination of the allowable numbers, type and area of a sign that requires a sign permit. If a sign otherwise falling under this Section is electrified, it will require an electrical permit. Signs subject to this Section shall conform to the requirements specified:
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. Address Numbers used for the purpose of identifying the address of any building shall not be counted toward allowed sign area;
2. Detached signs smaller than four square feet in area and less than four feet in height, and containing no commercial message;
3. Detached signs smaller than seven square feet, allowed in residential and conservation zoning districts;
4. Temporary signs not greater than twelve (12) square feet, allowed in non-residential zones;
5. Wall signs containing no commercial message and not larger than four square feet in area;
6. Cultural decorations or displays of noncommercial nature, mounted on private residential property, which pertain to cultural observances;
7. Cornerstones, foundation stones and memorial signs or tablets when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material, provided that no such sign shall exceed six square feet in area nor shall any such sign be separately illuminated;
8. Symbols that do not bear or include any commercial message and that are integrated into the architecture of a building;
9. Gravestones, when erected in a lawful cemetery or graveyard; and
10. Graphic images which are visible only from aircraft flying above.
H. OTHER ACTIONS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT: The following signs and actions related to signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this Article but shall be subject to all other standards of this Article.
1. Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing painted or printed sign, marquee, changeable copy sign or a similar compliant sign, whether electrical, illuminated, electronic message center or non-illuminated painted message, provided that the copy on an electronic message board shall not change more frequently than allowed under Section 14.6, D.;
2. Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign not involving structural alterations;
3. Installation of permanent signs smaller than four square feet where such signs are allowed by this Article, and involve no electrical installation; and
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
4. Installation of temporary signs not larger than four square feet, where such signs are allowed by this Article and conform with this Article in all respects.
I. PRODUCT DISPLAYS, SALES DEVICES, MENU BOARDS
1. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit or limit the outdoor display of products where allowed under the zoning ordinance, although a particular product may be a thing which would be prohibited by this Article if used as a sign and although one or more such products may have on them permanent labels that might otherwise fall under this Article. This Article shall, however, apply to any sign, banner, pennant, or other attention-attracting device affixed to a product displayed outdoors. For example, the label “Chevrolet” on an automobile or “John Deere” on a tractor shall not be considered a sign for purposes of this Article, but a separate sign attached to such a product shall be considered a sign and subject to regulation.
2. Signs on gasoline pumps, vending machines, other automated retail kiosks, news racks and similar machines and devices used for the sale or dispensing of products shall be allowed without a sign permit if they do not flash and if they are either not legible from any public right-of-way, public property or private property other than the site on which the sign is located; or they consist entirely of letters, numerals or symbols that are less than four inches in height. All other signs on vending machines, gas pumps, news racks and similar machines and devices shall be considered “signs” and shall be subject to all of the regulations of this Article.
SECTION 14.5 PROHIBITED SIGN TYPES
A. Unless specifically authorized by another section of this Article, or by other law, the following sign types are prohibited at all times and in all zones.
1. New billboards;
2. Any freestanding sign of which the area exceeds 10 percent of the area of the site or parcel on which it is located; or two percent of the lawful, as-built floor area of the principal building on the site; note that this is intended as a circuit-breaker and that all signs are subject to other size and dimensional requirements in this ordinance;
3. Portable signs, including folding portable signs and flashing portable signs;
4. Pennants, streamers, balloons, wind sails, and similar devices;
5. Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving signs, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving or other movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
of changing degrees of intensity; automatic changeable copy signs that conform with Section 14.6, D. are not subject to this limitation;
6. Signs which are not traffic, control or safety signals, but by their shape, color, or manner of mounting or display, appear to be traffic, control or safety signals, and thus create confusion for drivers and pedestrians, as well as signs which create or constitute traffic hazards;
7. Signs on vacant lots in non-residential zones larger than 9 square feet in area;
8. Signs for which a separate structure is mounted on a roof or parapet; this provision does not prevent signs which are integral to the building; and
9. Signs using sounds, music, sound effects, noises, or other sound or noise-making or transmitting device or instruments.
SECTION 14.6 INSTALLATION, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. LOCATION
1. No sign shall be located closer than five feet to any property line.
2. No sign shall be located so that it obstructs access to or from a doorway, fire escape or required escape window.
3. No sign shall be located so that it blocks the free air flow through windows in residential units.
4. No sign located within a clear sight triangle shall obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians between a height of 30 inches and 108 inches off the ground.
5. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
6. No sign shall be located within eight vertical feet or four horizontal feet of overhead electrical or other wires.
B. NO PROJECTIONS OVER STREETS OR ALLEYS: Projecting signs are allowed in some zoning districts. No sign shall project over a public right-of-way unless the sign owner has obtained an encroachment permit for such sign. No sign shall project over any portion of a right-of-way used as a street, alley or other way for vehicular travel; encroachment permits are limited to allowing projecting signs to extend over sidewalks.
C. SIGN MAINTENANCE
1. The property owner shall be liable to maintain such sign, including its illumination sources, in neat and orderly condition and good working order at all times and to prevent the development of any deterioration in the safety of such sign. The property owner may assign such responsibility to
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-9
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a tenant or other party, but the property owner shall remain accountable for the maintenance. Peeling paint, corroding metal, faded sign copy or deteriorating condition of sign structure shall be cause for City to issue a code violation to property owner.
2. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the routine maintenance of any nonconforming sign or the changing of the copy or content of any nonconforming sign, except where such maintenance or change in copy would increase the degree of its nonconformity.
D. FLASHING SIGNS, MOVING SIGNS, AND CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS
1. General Rule: Signs that move, flash or simulate movement are prohibited except as allowed under this section. A changeable copy sign is considered a different classification of sign under this Article; conversion of an existing sign to a changeable copy sign or to add changeable copy elements to it is allowed only if the modified sign will conform with all standards in this Section and with all other applicable standards related to the location, height, size and other characteristics of the sign.
2. Rules for Changeable Copy Signs Allowed under this Article: Automatic changeable copy signs shall be allowed only in those districts in which “changeable copy sign, automatic” is listed as a permitted sign type and shall be subject to the following additional restrictions:
a. Such technology shall be programmed so that the message or image on the sign changes no more often than every eight seconds.
b. There shall be no effects of movement, flashing, scintillation, or similar effects in the individual images.
c. Changes of image shall be substantially instantaneous as seen by the human eye and shall not use fading, rolling, window shading, dissolving or similar effects as part of the change.
d. Video technology in signs shall use automatic level controls to reduce light levels at night and under cloudy or other darkened conditions, in accordance with the following standards.
(1) All electronic or digital display unit message boards shall have installed ambient light monitors, and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic board based on ambient light conditions.
(2) Maximum brightness levels for electronic or digital display boards shall not exceed 5,000 nits when measured from the billboard’s face at its maximum brightness, during daylight hours and 500 nits when measured from the board face at its
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-10
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
maximum brightness between dusk and dawn, i.e., the time of day between sunrise and sunset.
e. Any sign using electronic or electro-mechanical technology for changeable copy message boards, which malfunctions, fails, or ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed manner causing therein motion, movement, flashing or any other similar effects, shall be repaired or disconnected within 48 hours by the owner or operator of such billboard.
f. The area of a sign consisting of electronic or electro-mechanical message board elements shall not constitute more than 200 square feet of a sign.
g. The following limitations shall apply to the location of signs using electronic or electro-mechanical technology for a message board:
(1) A sign on which the electronic or electro-mechanical message board includes 100 or more square feet of sign area shall not be erected within 500 feet of property falling in one of the City of Crestview Hills or other jurisdiction’s residential zoning districts, although this restriction shall not apply to mixed use districts and commercial districts allowing residential uses.
(2) A sign on which the electronic or electro-mechanical message board includes 20 or more square feet of sign area but less than 100 square feet of sign area shall not be erected within 200 feet of property falling in one of the City of Crestview Hills or other jurisdiction’s residential zoning districts, although this restriction shall not apply to mixed use districts and commercial districts allowing residential use.
(3) A sign on which the electronic or electro-mechanical message board includes less than 20 square feet of sign area shall not be erected within 100 feet of property zoned and used exclusively for single family uses; it is the express intent of this provision to allow the use of such technology on signs for institutional uses located in residential districts, provided that the required separation is maintained between the sign and any property zoned and exclusively used for a single-family use.
SECTION 14.7 SIGNS ALLOWED IN CONSERVATION, AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DISTRICTS (CO Zone)
A. WALL SIGNS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-11
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. One wall sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, is allowed for each dwelling unit. Such sign may contain a noncommercial message or a commercial message related to an activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including a lawful home occupation. The sign shall not be illuminated.
2. For permitted uses other than single-family residences, one wall sign per use, not more than two (2) square feet in area is allowed, provided that such sign contains no commercial message and is not illuminated.
B DETACHED SIGNS
1. Each occupied lot shall be allowed a total of four detached signs, including not more than one permanent detached sign, and temporary detached signs (up to a total of four detached signs at any time), each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The only commercial messages allowed on such signs are messages related to commercial activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including the sale of agricultural products, the lawful, occasional sale of personal property (such as through a garage sale or yard sale) or the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
2. Signs related to the sale of personal property (not including agricultural products) shall be removed within twenty-four hours after the end of the sale. Signs related to the sale, lease or rental of the premises shall be removed no later than the date on which the deed, lease or other document representing the transaction is completed. Any such sign may contain any message other than a commercial message. If a message relates to an election or special event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of such election or other event.
C. TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS
1. As a temporary use accessory to the permitted activity of lawful subdivision development, one temporary sign at each principal entrance to a subdivision is allowed. There shall in no case be more than one such sign for each fifty (50) lots in a proposed subdivision. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed upon the earlier of the following:
a. Installation of a permanent neighborhood identification sign;
b. Sale of more than ninety percent (90%) of the lots in the subdivision; or
c. A period of two (2) years from the date of installation.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-12
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
D. PERMANENT ENTRANCE SIGNS
1. Permanent neighborhood, multi-family or mobile home park monument signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, are allowed. Such signs may include a masonry wall, landscaping or other similar materials or features. Such signs shall only be located at the principal entrance(s) to the neighborhood from a street classified on the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. There shall be a maximum total sign area of fifty (50) square feet which may be used in a single sign or may be divided between a maximum of two (2) signs located on opposite sides of the same entrance. Such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-13
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 80 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.8 SIGNS ALLOWED IN SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-1Bc, R-1Bd, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E, and R-2a Zones)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. One wall sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, is allowed for each dwelling unit. Such sign may contain a noncommercial message or a commercial message related to an activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including a lawful home occupation. The sign shall not be separately illuminated.
2. For permitted uses other than single-family residences, one wall sign per use not more than two (2) square feet in area is allowed, provided that such sign contains no commercial message and is not illuminated.
B DETACHED SIGNS
1. Each occupied lot in a residential district shall be allowed a total of four detached signs, including not more than one permanent detached sign, and temporary detached signs (up to a total of four detached signs at any time), each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The permanent sign shall not contain a commercial message, and no more than two (2) signs on a lot in a residential district at any one time, including all wall signs, detached signs, temporary signs, and others, may contain commercial messages. The only commercial messages allowed on such
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-14
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
signs are messages related to commercial activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including the lawful, occasional sale of personal property (such as through a garage sale or yard sale) or the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
2. Signs related to the sale of personal property shall be removed within twenty-four hours after the end of the sale. Signs related to the sale, lease or rental of the premises shall be removed no later than the date on which the deed, lease or other document representing the transaction is completed. Any such sign may contain any message other than a commercial message. If a message relates to an election or special event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of such election or other event.
C. TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS
1. As a temporary use accessory to the permitted activity of lawful subdivision development, one temporary sign at each principal entrance to a subdivision is allowed. There shall in no case be more than one such sign for each fifty (50) lots in a proposed subdivision. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six feet in height. Subdivisions that do not front an arterial or collector street as designated in the Kenton County Comprehensive Plan, may be allowed one off-premises sign subject to the following conditions:
a. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) foot in height.
b. Sign may be placed on private property adjoining the closest public arterial or collector street connecting to the subdivision.
c. Sign shall be setback from the public right of way at least ten (10) feet and no greater than twenty (20) feet.
d. Sign colors and materials shall be complimentrary to the principal building on the off-premises lot.
e. Subdivision developer must provide a written agreement proving either ownership or an easement for use of the off-premises property.
2. Temporary Subdivision Signs shall be removed upon the earlier of the following:
a. Sale of more than eighty percent (80%) of the lots in the subdivision; or
b. A period of three (3) years from the date of installation.
3. Temporary Subdivision Signs shall not be counted towards temporary or banner signs allowed on the off-premises lot utilized by the subdivision
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-15
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
and approval for the temporary sign shall not provide an additional temporary sign to the property owner.
D. PERMANENT ENTRANCE SIGNS
1. Permanent neighborhood, multi-family or mobile home park monument signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, are allowed. Such signs may include a masonry wall, landscaping or other similar materials or features. Such signs shall only be located at the principal entrance(s) to the neighborhood from a street classified on the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. There shall be a maximum total sign area of fifty (50) square feet which may be used in a single sign or may be divided between a maximum of two (2) signs located on opposite sides of the same entrance. Such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-16
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 60 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.9 SIGNS ALLOWED IN MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-2b Zone)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. One wall sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, is allowed for each dwelling unit. Such sign may contain a noncommercial message or a commercial message related to an activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including a lawful home occupation. The sign shall not be separately illuminated.
2. For permitted uses other than single-family residences, one wall sign per use not more than two (2) square feet in area is allowed, provided that such sign contains no commercial message and is not illuminated.
3. For any building containing three or more dwelling units sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance. Such sign shall bear no commercial message. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a commercial message.
B DETACHED SIGNS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-17
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. Permanent detached signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations. The principal detached sign may contain a commercial message related to the rental, lease or occupancy of the premises. No other commercial message is allowed on the permanent signs allowed under this table.
Principal
Directory
Additional
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance per building
Maximum size
25 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
6 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from front property line; 10 feet from any other property line
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
2. In addition to these permanent detached signs, each separately owned or controlled lot in such a residential district shall be allowed a total of four detached signs, including not more than one permanent detached sign, and temporary detached signs (up to a total of four detached signs at any time), each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The permanent sign shall not contain a commercial message, and no more than two (2) signs on a lot in a residential district at any one time, including all wall signs, detached signs, temporary signs, and others, may contain commercial messages. The only commercial messages allowed on such signs are messages related to commercial activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including the lawful, occasional sale of personal property (such as through a garage sale or yard sale) or the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
3. Signs related to the sale of personal property shall be removed within twenty-four hours after the end of the sale. Signs related to the sale, lease or rental of the premises shall be removed no later than the date on which the deed, lease or other document representing the transaction is completed. Any such sign may contain any message other than a commercial message. If a message relates to an election or special event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of such election or other event.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-18
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
C. TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS
1. As a temporary use accessory to the permitted activity of lawful subdivision development, one temporary sign at each principal entrance to a subdivision is allowed. There shall in no case be more than one such sign for each fifty (50) dwelling units in a proposed development. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed upon the earlier of the following:
a. Installation of a permanent neighborhood identification sign;
b. Sale of more than ninety percent (90%) of the lots in the subdivision; or
c. A period of two (2) years from the date of installation.
D. PERMANENT ENTRANCE SIGNS
1. Permanent neighborhood, multi-family or mobile home park monument signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, are allowed. Such signs may include a masonry wall, landscaping or other similar materials or
features. Such signs shall only be located at the principal entrance(s) to the neighborhood from a street classified on the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. There shall be a maximum total sign area of fifty (50) square feet which may be used in a single sign or may be divided between a maximum of two (2) signs located on opposite sides of the same entrance. Such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. This
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-19
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 60 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.10 SIGNS ALLOWED IN INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS (INST Zone)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 60 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-20
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
B. DETACHED SIGNS
1. Each institutional use may have one detached sign, not to exceed seventy (70) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. In addition, each institutional use may have one detached sign not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height and up to five (5) entrance signs, not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in area and four (4) feet in height. Such signs may be illuminated.
C. DETACHED SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. To improve wayfinding on institutional sites with multiple buildings, the following detached signs are allowed in addition to those allowed under subsection B of this Section. One detached sign not legible from the right-of-way, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and not exceeding six feet in height shall be allowed for each three separate buildings or per vehicle entrance, whichever is more. Such sign shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50) feet, from any other property line a minimum of thirty (30) feet, and from a residential zoning district a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Such sign shall not contain changeable copy and the sign may be internally illuminated or externally illuminated from an exposed or concealed source.
D. BANNERS
1. Any institutional use on a site larger than five acres may erect banners on the site, subject to the following conditions:
a. Such banners shall be anchored to a pole or building at the top and bottom, so that the end of the banner does not flap in the wind, like a flag or pennant;
b. Such banners may be attached to poles serving another purpose, such as supporting parking lot or street lights, or to separate poles used only for the banners;
c. If the banners are attached to separate poles, those poles shall not exceed 24 feet in height, and no two such poles shall be closer to one another than 75 feet, measured in a straight line;
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-21
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
d. Such banners shall not exceed 16 square feet in area on one side;
e. Each such banner may contain a message on each side. Messages on such banners may include messages related to the activities or services of the institution or other non-commercial messages. No such banner shall in any case include any commercial message unrelated to the institutional use;
f. Such banners shall not be separately illuminated; and
g. Such banners may be visible from the public right-of-way but shall not be legible from any location except the site used by the institution.
E. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.11 SIGNS ALLOWED IN OFFICE DISTRICTS (PO-1, PO-2, HLC, and RP-1 Zones)
A. WINDOW AND WALL SIGNS
1. Window and permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that building wall
See total
One (1) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Maximum number
Area limit only
One per building street frontage
N/A
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Indirect white light
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
For any building containing three or more offices or other tenants sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance. Such sign shall bear no commercial message related to activities, goods or services not offered on the premises. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-22
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
commercial message related to commercial activities not conducted on the premises.
B DETACHED SIGNS
1. Permanent detached signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations.
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
25 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
8 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from front property line; 10 feet from any other property line
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face
Not allowed
Only manual changeable copy is allowed; may cover entire sign face
C. DIRECTORY (WALL) SIGNS
1. One directory sign on a wall, not exceeding six square feet in area, is allowed per public entrance for a nonresidential building. Such sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way and shall be illuminated by direct white light only.
D. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. This may include
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-23
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 60 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
E. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.12 SIGNS ALLOWED IN GENERAL BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
A. WINDOW AND WALL SIGNS
1. SC and MX Zoning District
a. Window and permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
b. Refer to 10.16.5.B for additional requirements of window and wall signs in the MX zones.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that
See total
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-24
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Window
Wall
Total
building wall
building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Maximum number
Area limit only
See Total
One per building street frontage unless altered by development agreement.
Single-tenant outlot buildings are allowed one additional wall sign with a company logo on the primary entrance to the building, provided both signs do not exceed two (2) sq. ft. of sign area per lineal foot of building width on that side.
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Concealed source only
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of area of sign face
N/A
B. POLE OR GROUND SIGNS
1. SC and MX Zone District
a. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations.
b. Ground signs are permitted in the MX zone per 10.16.5.B.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-25
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Principal
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage
One per vehicle entrance
Maximum size
Two square feet per 1000 square feet of gross leasable area, not to exceed 300 square feet per sign
Eight square feet
Maximum height
30 feet
10 feet
Minimum setback from nearest right-of-way
15 feet
5 feet
Minimum setback, other
20 feet from any other property line; 50 feet from nearest single-family residential district
Five feet from any other property line; 15 feet from nearest single-family residential district
Permitted illumination
External or internal, exposed or concealed source
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face allowed
Not allowed
C. DETACHED SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. SC Zoning District
a. One detached sign not legible from the right-of-way, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and not exceeding six feet in height shall be allowed for each ten separate nonresidential uses or per vehicle entrance, whichever is less. One additional such sign shall be allowed for each two drive-through lanes. Such sign shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50) feet, from any other property line a minimum of thirty (30) feet, and from a residential zoning district a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Such sign shall not contain changeable copy and the sign may be internally illuminated or externally illuminated from an exposed or concealed source.
D. WALL SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. For any building containing three or more uses of any type sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance providing access to such uses. Such sign shall bear no commercial message related to activities, goods or services not offered on the premises. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a commercial message not related to commercial
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-26
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
activities on the premises.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. This
may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 60 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-27
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
G. AWNING/CANOPY SIGNS
1. Signs that may be mounted, painted, or otherwise applied on or attached to an awning or canopy, are permitted in general business and commercial districts. Signage may only be located on the vertical portion (valence) of the awning directly parallel to the building façade on which the awning is located. In the case of a semi-circular awning, signage may only be located on the vertical portion (valence) of the awning and may only extend to a point that measures 45 degrees from the façade on which the awning is located (see drawing below).
2. In no case shall signage be permitted on the side panels or slanted portion of an awning.
3. Maximum size: 40 square feet. All awning/canopy signage counts towards the total maximum permitted amount of wall signage for that business.
4. Awning/canopy signs may not be illuminated.
SECTION 14.13 SIGNS ALLOWED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (IP Zone)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. Permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
Not allowed
One (1) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
One (1) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Maximum number
Not allowed
One per street frontage
N/A
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-28
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Window
Wall
Total
Permitted illumination
Not allowed
Illumination from a concealed source only
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
B. POLE OR PRINCIPAL GROUND SIGNS
1. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations.
Principal
Directory
Maximum number
One per street frontage
One per vehicle entrance and one per public entrance per building
Maximum size
IP: 40 square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
IP: 10 feet
Six feet
Minimum setback from nearest right-of-way
15 feet
15 feet
Minimum setback, other
20 feet from any other property line; 100 feet from nearest single-family residential district
20 feet from any other property line; 50 feet from nearest single-family residential district
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face allowed
Not allowed
C. DETACHED SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. To improve wayfinding on multi-user sites, the following detached signs are allowed in addition to those allowed under subsection B of this Section. One detached sign not legible from the right-of-way, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and not exceeding six feet in height shall be allowed for each four separate nonresidential uses or per vehicle entrance, whichever is less. One additional such sign shall be allowed for each two drive-through lanes. Such sign shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50) feet, from any other property line a minimum of thirty (30) feet, and from a residential zoning district a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Such sign shall not contain changeable copy and the sign may be internally illuminated or externally illuminated from an exposed or concealed source.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-29
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
D. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
One and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 60 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Twenty-four (24) inches
E. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.14 MASTER SIGNAGE PLANS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-30
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. It is the purpose of the City of Crestview Hills to require owners, lessees and managers of sites containing multiple signs requiring permits to plan and design signs that are compatible with the buildings on the site, thus enhancing the appearance of the site and of the streetscape that includes it. This Section spells out specific criteria for review for compliance with the section, but the City of Crestview Hills recognizes that the consideration of issues of design necessarily requires some exercise of judgment, within the specific criteria set out in this Section. Although the City of Crestview Hills has provided a remedy of appeal for an applicant aggrieved by an action on a proposed master signage plan, it is the intent of the City of Crestview Hills that the primary remedy for such an applicant is the erection and installation of all of the signs allowed by right, under other sections of this Article. It is thus the intent of the City of Crestview Hills, that, to the extent that it can guide the scope of review of a court considering an appeal, a court considering an appeal under this Section reverse or remand the decision of the Zoning Administrator only if it finds that such action is arbitrary and capricious.
B. APPLICABILITY
1. The owner of any site that includes more than one tenant or occupant shall apply for approval of a Master Signage Plan before applying for a sign permit for any detached sign.
C. PROCEDURE
1. The submittal of a Master Signage Plan shall be considered a Stage II Development Plan.
2. The owner(s) shall apply to the planning commission’s duly authorized representative.
3. Where an application for approval of a Master Signage Plan is submitted simultaneously or as part of another Stage II Development Plan, the two shall be processed together. Where an application includes properties not under common ownership, all property owners shall sign the application or shall submit documents granting the applicant the authority to process such an application.
4. The planning commission’s duly authorized representative shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of this Section, for Master Signage Plans, other applicable elements of this Article, and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with any approved Stage I Development Plan for the property. In approving the Master Signage Plan, the planning commission’s duly authorized representative may authorize minor adjustments from the Stage I Development Plan.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-31
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
5. If a Master Signage Plan application is denied, the applicant may submit a new application with a revised plan at any time.
6. Any person aggrieved by the action of the planning commission’s duly authorized representative on a Master Signage Plan may appeal the decision by filing an application with the Planning Commission.
D. APPLICATION CONTENTS
1. The application for approval of a Master Signage Plan shall contain at least the following information. Where the application is submitted simultaneously with an application for a Stage II Development Plan approval, the Master Signage Plan may refer to portions of the Stage II Development Plan application or approved Stage I Development Plan for related requirements:
a. If the site has not been improved, all information required by Section 9.19 for a Stage II Development Plan;
b. If the site has been improved, as-built conditions, showing all buildings and other improvements and all parking areas and vehicle entrances;
c. A proposed design plan showing signage design at a scale of ½” = 1 ft.
d. Computation of the maximum area for all signs, the height of signs and the number of detached signs allowed on the development site(s) included in the plan under this Article, including incentives authorized below;
e. For properties with multiple tenants or multiple occupants entitled to signs, an allocation of the allowed signage among the eligible tenants or users;
f. An accurate indication on the plot plan of the current or proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that signs not requiring permits need not be shown;
g. The color schemes and design features (excluding specific messages) for proposed signs; and
h. The signatures of all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the legislative body may require.
E. AMENDMENTS
1. A Master Signage Plan may be amended by filing a new Master Signage Plan that conforms to all requirements of this Section in effect at the time of submittal.
F. PROVISIONS FOR NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-32
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. A Master Signage Plan for a property already containing signs on the date of submission of the application shall include a schedule for bringing all signs on the development site into conformance with the Master Signage Plan by a specified date. The conformance schedule included in such Master Signage Plan shall be considered a condition of approval of the Master Signage Plan.
G. CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL
1. A Master Signage Plan shall be approved if and only if the planning commission’s duly authorized representative finds that the proposed plan meets all of the standards set out in this Article. If the planning commission’s duly authorized representative finds that the proposed plan substantially meets such standards, it may approve the proposed plan subject to conditions that will cause it to meet these standards. Otherwise, the planning commission’s duly authorized representative shall deny the application for plan approval:
a. Each proposed sign conforms with all applicable standards of this Article;
b. The total amount of signage proposed for any building, wall, site, or portion of a site, conforms with all applicable standards of this Article;
c. The proposed plan contains all of the information required by subsection D of this Section
d. The proposed allocation of allowed signage among eligible tenants, which shall be proportional to one of or a combination of the following criteria:
(1) The number of public entrances to space leased to or controlled by each tenant or occupant;
(2) The linear feet of frontage of the space leased to or controlled by each tenant or occupant along the wall(s) containing public entrances; and/or
(3) The façade area of the building elevation(s) containing the public entrances to the spaces leased to or controlled by each tenant or occupant.
e. All proposed signs shall be part of a common design scheme, meeting at least the following criteria:
(1) The materials and design of all wall signs shall follow one design scheme;
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-33
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(2) The materials and design of freestanding signs bearing commercial messages shall follow one design scheme, which may or may not be the same as the design scheme for wall signs;
(3) Each design scheme shall require consistency among signs for at least three of the following criteria: lighting design; color schemes; materials; shape; proportion; and/or type faces;
(4) If the design schemes for the wall signs and freestanding signs are different, they shall have in common at least two of the following criteria: lighting design; color schemes; materials; proportion; and
(5) The design scheme for freestanding signs shall use building materials, colors and, where applicable, architectural design features consistent with the materials, colors and architectural design features of the principal building on the site.
H. EFFECT
1. After approval of a Master Signage Plan, no permit shall be issued for a sign on the site(s) subject to the Master Signage Plan except in accordance with such plan, and no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in accordance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this Article. In case of any conflict between a provision of a Master Signage Plan and one or more provisions of this Article, this Article shall prevail.
I. SPECIAL SEVERABILITY PROVISIONS
1. The severability provisions of Section 14.18. A., 11., are limited by this subsection. If any procedural aspect of this Section is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, it is the intent of the City of Crestview Hills that this entire Section, but only this Section, should be stricken as unconstitutional, but that any plans previously approved under it should remain in effect, allowing the signs shown on such plans as lawful nonconforming signs, regardless of whether such signs have been erected on the date of such decision. If any substantive part of the standards and criteria for approval of this Section is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional it is the intent of the City of Crestview Hills that such part be stricken and that the rest of this Section remain in full force and effect, in accordance with the principles set out in more detail in Section 14.18, A., 11.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-34
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
SECTION 14.15 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
A. Unless a particular sign is exempt from the permit requirement under an explicit provision of this Article or other applicable law, then a permit for such sign is required.
1. WHEN REQUIRED
a. Replacements
(1) If any sign is removed and any new sign is erected in its place, a permit shall be obtained the same as if a new sign were erected at a new location, subject to all requirements enumerated herein.
b. Maintenance
(1) If any sign is removed for maintenance and replaced on the same supports, a new permit will not be deemed necessary if the size or type of sign is not changed.
c. Relocation of Signs
(1) If any sign is removed from one location and erected at a new location, a new permit shall be obtained.
d. Alteration
(1) Alteration or enlargement of any sign shall require a permit the same as for a new sign. Any change in technology for a sign shall be considered an alteration; this shall expressly apply but not be limited to the conversion of a sign to changeable copy technology of any type.
2. APPLICATION
a. No permit shall be granted until and after an application has been filed with the designated administrative official, showing the plans and specifications, including application fees, dimensions, materials, and details of construction of the proposed structure and meeting all provisions of this Article.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-35
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
3. APPLICATION FORM
a. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare and provide a form to be used as an application for a sign permit. The same form may constitute a permit, when duly approved. Multiple signs may be listed on a single permit only when they are all on the same lot or parcel, or are part of a single, comprehensive development.
4. INFORMATION ON APPLICATION
a. The sign application form shall include the following information:
(1) Name and contact information for the applicant, and if separate, the name, address and consent of the property owner;
(2) Street address and Property Identification Number (PIDN) of the site;
(3) Accurate site plan to scale describing the design, dimensions, proposed placement, structural and electrical characteristics and appearance of the sign(s), including the location of existing buildings, signs and other structures on the same site as the proposed sign(s);
(4) If the plans and drawings require an engineer’s or architect’s seal, signature or certificate, such shall show current Kentucky registration or licensure;
(5) Any signs or other structures to be removed or relocated;
(6) Dimensions and heights of all existing and proposed sign(s);
(7) Information regarding electrification, trenching, demolition, plumbing, temporary street closure, or encroachment into the public right of way;
(8) Any known uncorrected violations of zoning laws on the site;
(9) Name, address and any licensing/bonding information for any sign contractors;
(10) Technical drawings, specifications, structural safety calculations for the sign structure;
(11) If the sign is subject to any of the safety codes (building, electrical, etc.), then all information required to determine compliance with such codes or to satisfy the requirements of such codes;
(12) The length of each occupant’s/tenant/s lineal wall frontage;
(13) Workers’ compensation and liability documents and occupational licenses for all contractor’s.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-36
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
5. INITIAL REVIEW
a. Unless a given sign is exempt from the permit requirement, all sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, and approved or denied on the basis of whether the proposed sign satisfies all requirements of this Article, and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. If it does, then the permit shall be issued. If it does not, then the denial notice shall specify the point(s) of noncompliance. Decisions on sign permit applications shall be made in writing by the Zoning Administrator, and are subject to the appeal procedures provided herein. When applicable, permits under building and electrical codes then in effect are also required; sign permits may be approved subject to compliance with building and electrical code requirements.
6. COMPLETENESS
a. Initial review of an application will be for the purpose of determining if the application is complete. If the application is found incomplete, written notice of the finding of incompleteness will be given to the applicant within fifteen working days of submission, detailing the points of incompleteness. Notice is deemed effective when mailed or personally delivered. After notice of incompleteness, the applicant shall have thirty calendar days in which to resubmit the application, with all noted items of incompleteness cured. If the application is resubmitted within that time, no additional fee shall be required, and the application, if complete, shall then be processed in accordance with this Section. If no notice of incompleteness is timely provided, the application shall be deemed complete as of the last day on which the notice of incompleteness could have been given.
7. TIME FOR DECISION
a. The Zoning Administrator shall render a decision on each complete sign permit application within five working days of when the application was complete.
8. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT
a. All signs shall conform to the requirements of the permit, and all other applicable laws. Any sign not erected or constructed as represented on the application upon which the permit was issued shall not be construed as a hardship case, but shall be construed as a misrepresentation of facts on the application and a violation of
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-37
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
this Article. Any noncomplying sign which is not removed or corrected within the required time shall be a deemed public nuisances and a violation of the zoning ordinance, and may be abated in the same manner as any public nuisance or zoning ordinance violation.
9. ABANDONMENT, EXPIRATION, SIGN REMOVAL
a. Any sign not conforming with the standards of this ordinance shall be deemed abandoned if it is not maintained in accordance with the requirements of Section 14.6, c., or the premises on which it is located remain vacant for a period of twelve months or if the business activity to which it relates has been closed or otherwise removed from the premises for a period of twelve months. Any permit for such a sign shall expire on the date of such deemed abandonment and shall not be reissued.
b. A signed deemed abandoned under this section shall be removed by the owner of the signs or the owner of the premises. If such sign is not so removed, no permits shall be issued for other signs on the same premises until such sign is removed or modified to be brought into conformance with the new permit issued under this ordinance.
SECTION 14.16 APPEALS
A. Decisions on sign permit applications, as well as directives, orders, notices and all other sign-related decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
1. INITIATION OF APPEAL
a. An appeal under this Article may be initiated by following the procedures set forth in KRS §100.261, within the time allowed by that section.
2. HEARING ON APPEAL
a. Within 60 working days of timely receipt of a notice of appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall hear the appeal in an open, public, duly noticed hearing. The appellant and all other persons wishing to be heard shall be allowed to present evidence and argument. The Board will base its decision on the law and the evidence presented at the hearing. The Board will issue a written decision within 30
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-38
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
calendar days of the hearing, and the written decision shall state the decision and the facts and law supporting the decision.
3. WAIVER OF TIME
a. Any of the timeliness requirements of this Section may be waived by the appellant.
4. JUDICIAL REVIEW
a. The decision of the Board of Adjustment is final. Further review may be had in Kenton County Circuit Court, pursuant to the Kentucky law of civil procedure.
5. STATUS PENDING APPEAL
a. While any sign related matter is on appeal, the status quo of the subject sign(s) shall be maintained, except when, by virtue of physical condition, the sign poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, in which case the threat may be abated in the same manner as any other immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 14.17 DEFINITIONS AND MEASUREMENTS
A. MEASUREMENTS
1. Area of Signs Other than Wall Signs
a. The gross surface area of a sign, except wall signs, is the entire area contained within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign. For detached signs composed of more than one sign cabinet or module, the gross surface area shall include the sum of the area in each cabinet or module only. If a sign has more than one face, the gross surface area shall be equal to the maximum area of the sign face or faces visible from any ground position along any public right-of-way at any one time.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-39
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
b. The perimeter of a sign will not include lighting fixtures, pole covers, landscaping, framing, decorative roofing, moldings or aprons or other architectural or decorative embellishments, provided they contain no written copy, logos or symbols.
2. Area of Wall Signs
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-40
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. The gross surface area of a wall sign is the entire area contained within a single continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure(s) which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message(s). If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, color or embellishment, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each symbol or letter. The combined area of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area.
3. Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs
a. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-41
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
4. Measurement of Height of Sign
a. Sign height shall be measured from the elevation at the base of the sign to the highest point of the highest element of the sign, excluding any incidental structural element, such as an uplift cable for a projecting sign. Where the sign is located on a mound or berm, the average elevation of the land 20 feet to each side of the sign shall be used as a basis for measuring height.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-42
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
SECTION 14.18 POLICIES AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
A. This Article shall be administered, enforced and construed in accordance with the following policies.
1. DISCRETIONARY REVIEW
a. When one or more signs are part of a project or development, or a variance, conditional use permit, exception or special use permit is sought for sign(s), which requires discretionary review, then the sign shall be reviewed without regard to the graphic design or visual image on the display face of the sign, and discretion shall be restricted to structural, location and other non-communicative aspects of the sign. This provision does not override the billboard policy.
2. MESSAGE NEUTRALITY
a. It is the City of Crestview Hills policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner.
3. REGULATIONS ON OFF-SITE MESSAGES
a. This Article distinguishes in some cases between commercial messages that relate to products or services not offered at the location of the sign (“off-site commercial messages”). The purpose of that distinction is to acknowledge the need of businesses for identification and notice of their businesses at a business location while limiting the proliferation of commercial messages generally. There is no intent to limit noncommercial messages in any way with this distinction.
4. BILLBOARD POLICY
a. New billboards, as defined herein, are prohibited. The City of Crestview Hills completely prohibits the construction, erection or use of any billboards, other than those which legally exist within the regulatory zoning jurisdiction of the City of Crestview Hills, or for which a valid permit has been issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this provision is first adopted. No permit shall be issued for any billboard which violates this policy, and the City of Crestview Hills will take immediate enforcement or abatement action against any billboard constructed or maintained in violation of this policy. In adopting this provision, the City of Crestview Hills affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this billboard
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-43
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
policy even if it were the only provision in this Article. The City of Crestview Hills intends for this billboard policy to be severable and separately enforceable even if other provision(s) of this Article may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable.
5. MESSAGE SUBSTITUTION
a. Subject to the property owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted in whole or in part for the message displayed on any sign for which the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. In addition, any on-site commercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any other on-site commercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use; does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; and does not allow the substitution of an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message or a noncommercial message.
6. REGULATORY INTERPRETATIONS
a. All regulatory interpretations of this Article are to be exercised in light of the City of Crestview Hills message neutrality and message substitution policies. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this Article, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a “structure” as defined in the building code then in effect, then the Zoning Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this Article, in light of the policies stated in this Section.
7. NONCOMMUNICATIVE ASPECTS
a. All rules and regulations concerning the non-communicative aspects of signs, such as location, size, height, illumination,
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-44
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
spacing, orientation, etc., stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process.
8. MIXED USE ZONES AND OVERLAY ZONES
a. In any zone where both residential and non residential uses are allowed, the sign-related rights and responsibilities applicable to any particular parcel or land use shall be determined as follows: (1) if specific sign regulations are provided in the zoning district, those regulations shall be applied; or (2) if no sign regulations are provided in the zoning district, residential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where a use of that type would be allowed as a matter of right, and nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a conditional use permit or similar discretionary process.
9. PROPERTY OWNER’S CONSENT
a. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, “owner” means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property. The signature of the property owner or authorized agent will be required on all applications for sign permits.
10. LEGAL NATURE OF SIGN RIGHTS
a. As to all signs attached to real property, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this Article attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, sign-related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this Article or other law), or the ownership of sign structures. This provision does not apply to hand held signs or other images which are aspects of personal appearance.
11. SEVERABILITY
a. Generally
(1) If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this Article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-45
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article, except as limited by Section 14.18, A., 11., b.
b. Severability Where Less Speech Results
(1) Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection A of this Section or elsewhere in this Article or this Code, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article is declared unconstitutional, such declaration shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise additional standards.
c. Severability of Provisions Pertaining to Prohibited Signs
(1) Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection A of this Section, or elsewhere in this Article or in this Code, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article or any other laws declared unconstitutional by valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign types prohibited and not allowed under Section 14.5 of this Article. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article or of any part of the Zoning Ordinance is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article, except as expressly provided in Section 14.18, A., 11., b.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-46
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
d. Severability of Prohibition on Off-premise Signs
(1) If any part section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article and/or an other provisions of this Article or other provisions of Zoning Ordinance or this Code are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the limitations on off-premise signs as contained herein.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE XV
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL ZONES
SECTION 15.0 APPLICATION OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: After the effective date of this ordinance, any use established or changed to, and any building, structure, or tract of land, developed, constructed, or used for any permitted or permissible principal or accessory use in the IP Zone, shall comply with all of the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved. If any existing use, or building, or other structure is extended, enlarged, or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged, or reconstructed portion, or portions, of such use, or building, or other structure.
SECTION 15.1 TIME SCHEDULE FOR COMPLIANCE OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Except as otherwise specified herein, compliance with the provisions of this article of the ordinance shall be according to the following time schedule:
A. All new installations shall comply as of going into operation.
B. All existing installations not in compliance, as of the effective date of this ordinance, shall be in compliance within one (1) calendar year of the effective date of this ordinance, unless the owner or person responsible for the operation of the installation shall have submitted to the city, in a form and manner satisfactory to the city, a program and schedule for achieving compliance, such program and schedule to contain a date on or before which full compliance will be attained and such other information as the city may require. If approved by the city, such date will be the date on which the person shall comply.
The city may require persons submitting such program to submit subsequent periodic reports on progress in achieving compliance.
SECTION 15.2 EFFECTS OF CONCURRENT OPERATIONS: The sum total of the effects of concurrent operations on two (2) or more lots should not be greater or more offensive to the senses than the standards contained herein. Compliance with the provision of these performance standards by single or mutual changes in operational levels, scheduling of operations, and other adjustments is permitted.
A. BUILDING ENCLOSURES: Every use permitted in the IP industrial zone shall be operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed building. In the IP industrial zone, permitted uses shall be operated either within a completely enclosed building or within an area screened at the periphery of the area, according to Section 9.17 and Article XIV of this ordinance.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
B. LANDSCAPING: In all industrial districts, all required yards shall either be open landscaped and grassed areas or be left in a natural state, if acceptable to the city. If said area is to be landscaped, it shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, etc., according to the initially submitted plans which were first approved of for the development of such tract as a permitted use.
In areas to be used for off-street parking, the parking arrangement and surfacing must likewise have been approved of for the development of such tract as a permitted use. Any landscaped areas shall be properly maintained thereafter in a sightly and well kept condition. Parking areas shall likewise be maintained in good condition. Any areas left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in a well kept condition.
C. NOISE: For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequencies of a sound, a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer shall be employed that conform to specifications published by the American National Standards Institute (specifications for Sound Level Meters S1.4 - 1971, and Specifications for Octave, Half Octave, and Third Octave Band Filter Sets S1.11 - 1966, American National Standards Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, New York, 10018, or the latest edition of such standards, shall be used). In the enforcement of the regulation, noises produced by the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities shall not be included in determining the maximum permitted decibel level. In the IP Zone, the sound pressure of noise radiated continuously from any activity shall not exceed the value given in Tables 15-1 and 15-2 of this section, in any octave band frequency, at any point on or beyond any lot line. If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the corrections in Table 15-2 of this section shall be added or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table 15-1 of this ordinance.
In the I-1 Zone, the sound pressure of noise radiated from any activity shall not exceed the values given in Table 15-3 of this section in any octave band frequency at any point on or beyond any lot line. If the IP or I-1 Zones adjoins a residential zone, the maximum sound pressure level at any point on the district boundary shall be reduced by six (6) decibels from the maximum listed in Table 15-3.
In the I-2, I-3, I-4, and I-5 Zones, the sound pressure of noise radiated from any activity shall not exceed the value given in Table 15-3 of this section in any octave band frequency at any point on or beyond the nearest district boundary. If an I-2 Zone adjoins a residential district, the maximum sound pressure shall be reduced by six (6) decibels from the maximum listed in Table 15-3 of this section.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
In all districts, industrial noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness.
D. ODOROUS MATTER: No emission of odorous matter shall be allowed in excess of ambient air quality standards, as set forth by regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution, Cincinnati Air Quality Region.
E. HUMIDITY, HEAT OR GLARE: In the IP or I-1 districts, any activity producing humidity, in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not perceptible at any lot line. In the I-2, I-3, I-4, and I-5 districts, any activity producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not perceptible at or beyond any residential or commercial district boundary. Detailed plans for the elimination of humidity, heat, or glare may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
F. EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Any lights used for exterior illumination, except for overhead street lighting and warning, or traffic signals shall direct light away from the adjoining zones in the IP, I-1, and I-2 districts.
G. VIBRATION: Vibrations shall be measured at the lot line in the IP Zone. No vibrations are permitted which are discernible to the human sense of feeling without instruments at the property lines of the subject premises.
H. EMISSIONS AND OPEN BURNING: No emission of particulate matter, sulfur compound, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide, and open burning shall be allowed in excess of regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution, Cincinnati Air Quality Region.
I. RADIATION: In the IP Zone, all sources of ionizing radiation shall be registered or licensed by the Kentucky State Department of Health and operated in accordance with their regulations.
J. ELECTRICAL RADIATION: In the IP Zone, any electrical radiation shall not adversely affect, at any point on or beyond the lot line, any operation or equipment, other than those of the creation of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from electrical radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operations in permitted.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
K. STORAGE: In the IP Zone, no material, product, or supplies shall be stored or permitted to remain on any part of the property outside the buildings constructed thereon.
L. FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS: In the IP Zone, the storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids, or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be permitted, provided that storage, handling, and use shall be in accordance with Standards of American Insurance Association for Storage, Handling, and Use of Flammable Liquids, "American Insurance Association", Pamphlet No. 30, June 1959, or any subsequent revision or amendment thereto.
M. WASTE: Within the IP Zone, no waste material or refuse shall be dumped upon, or permitted to remain upon, any part of the part of the property outside of the buildings constructed thereon. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated and disposed of in such a manner so as to comply with the standards of the appropriate local authority and in accordance with the Solid Waste Regulations of the Kentucky Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection. All plans for waste disposal facilities shall be required before the issuance of any building permit.
N. MINING AND RECLAMATION: All methods of operation, construction of roads, backfilling, grading, blasting, water impoundments, treatment facilities, and reclamation must be in conformance with the regulations adopted by the Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Reclamation. Any excavation or processing operations shall be subject to the regulations of the Kentucky Water Pollution Control Commission.
O. BLASTING AND EXPLOSIVES: All blasting and the use of explosives must be conducted in accordance with the regulations set forth by the Department of Mines and Minerals, Division of Explosives and Blasting (pursuant to the authority of KRS 351.310 to 351.990) and in accordance with the Standards of Safety for Explosives, for the Commonwealth of Kentucky, prepared by the Department of Public Safety, Division of Fire Prevention (pursuant to the authority of KRS 227.300).
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
TABLE 15-1
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL AT SPECIFIED POINTS OF MEASUREMENT FOR NOISE RADIATED CONTINUOUSLY FROM A FACILITY
OCTAVE BAND
(CYCLES PER SECOND)
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL
(DECIBELS*)
20 -
75
69
75 -
150
54
150 -
300
47
300 -
600
41
600 -
1,200
37
1,200 -
2,400
34
2,400 -
4,800
31
4,800 -
10,000
28
10,000 -
20,000
26**
20,000 -
30,000
25**
30,000 -
40,000
24**
40,000 -
50,000
23**
* According to the following formula, Sound Pressure Level in Decibels equals 10 Log where P2 equals 0.0002 dynes/cm2 P1/P2
** To avoid possible interference with animal experiments
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
TABLE 15-2
CORRECTION IN MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL IN DECIBELS TO TABLE 15-3
TYPE OF OPERATION OF CHARACTER OF NOISE
CORRECTION IN DECIBELS
Noise source operates less than twenty (20) percent of any one hour period
plus 5*
Noise source operates less than five (5) percent of any one hour period
plus 10*
Noise source operates less than one (1) percent of any one hour period
plus 15*
Noise of impulse character (hammering, etc.)
minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.)
minus 5
* Apply one of these corrections only
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
TABLE 15-3
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND PRESSUTE LEVEL IN DECIBELS
OCTAVE BAND
(CYCLES PER SECOND)
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL
(DECIBELS*)
0 -
74
79
75 -
1149
74
150 -
299
66
300 -
599
59
600 -
1,199
53
1,200 -
2,399
47
2,400 -
4,799
41
4,800 and over
39
* According to the following formula, Sound Pressure Level in Decibels equals 10 Log where P2 equals 0.0002 dynes/cm2 P1/P2
Article XVI Administration 16-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE XVI
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 16.0 ENFORCING OFFICER: A zoning administrator (official or officials appointed by the city for carrying out the provisions and enforcement of this ordinance) shall administer and enforce this ordinance. He may be provided with assistance of such other persons as the city directs.
If the zoning administrator finds that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall take such action as is permitted by law.
In addition to the foregoing, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, structures, signs, fences, or additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto, discontinuance of any illegal work being done.
All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts, as provided by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
It shall be illegal for any person or entity to interfere with the zoning administrator's performance of his duties, as defined herein.
SECTION 16.1 ZONING PERMITS: Zoning permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions:
A. ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED: No public or private building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, structurally altered, or changed from one permitted use to another, nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel of ground without a permit, issued by the zoning administrator. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, except after written orders from the board of adjustment.
B. APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMITS: All applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by:
1. A completed application form, provided by the zoning administrator (in triplicate - See Appendix A).
2. The required fee for a zoning permit, as provided for in Section 19.0 of this
Article XVI Administration 16-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ordinance.
3. A site plan, if required by this ordinance, or
4. A plot plan, in triplicate, drawn at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to thirty (30) feet, showing the following information as required by this ordinance.
a. The location of every existing and proposed building with number of floors and gross floor area, the use or uses to be contained therein, the number of structures including dimensions and height, including dimensions and height, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.
b. All property lines, shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
c. Lot width at minimum building setback line.
d. Minimum front and rear yard depths and side yard widths.
e. Existing topography, with a maximum of two (2) foot contour intervals. Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2) percent, either one (1) foot contours or spot elevations not more than fifty (50) feet apart shall be required.
f. The proposed finished grade of the development area shown by contours with intervals not larger than two (2) feet supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
g. Total lot area, in square feet.
h. Location and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving aisles, off-street parking and loading and/or unloading spaces, including number of spaces, angle of stalls, and illumination facilities.
i. Layout, type of surfacing, cross sections, and drainage plans for all off-street parking facilities.
j. A drainage plan of the lot area including provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction.
k. All sidewalks, malls, and open spaces.
l. Location, type, and height of all walls, fences, and screen plantings.
m. Location, size, height, class, and orientation of all signs.
n. Location of all existing and proposed streets, including rights-ofway and pavement widths.
o. All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, indicating all pipe sizes, types, and grades.
p. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential areas, in order of priority, by type of dwelling
Article XVI Administration 16-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
unit.
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority.
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership with a preliminary statement indicating how maintenance of the latter will be handled.
(4) The construction of non-residential buildings, in order of priority.
q. And such other information as may be required by the zoning administrator to determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of this ordinance and the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
C. ISSUANCE OF ZONING PERMIT: The zoning administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application (when required by this ordinance -- e.g., Development Plan submitted required -- the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, approval or disapproval shall also be required). If disapproved, two (2) copies of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Disapproved" and shall indicate the reasons for such disapproval thereon. Such disapproval shall be attested by the zoning administrator's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the zoning administrator.
If approved, two (2) copies of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant, marked "Approved". Such approval shall be attested by the zoning administrator's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall also issue a zoning permit to the applicant at this time and shall retain a duplicate copy for his records.
D. FAILURE TO COMPLY: Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
E. EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT: If a building permit, as required herein, has not been obtained within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days from the date of issuance of zoning permit, said zoning permit shall expire and be canceled by the zoning administrator and a building permit shall not be obtainable until a new zoning permit has been obtained.
Article XVI Administration 16-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
SECTION 16.2 BUILDING PERMITS: Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions:
A. BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED: No public or private building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, except after written orders from the board of adjustment.
B. APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMITS: All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by:
1. A completed application form, provided by the building inspector.
2. An approved zoning permit.
3. The required fee for a building permit, as provided for in Section 19.0 of this ordinance.
4. A Development Plan, if required by this ordinance: or
5. Plans in duplicate approved by the zoning administrator and including any additional information required by the building code and/or building inspector, as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, the building code and the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
C. ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT: The building inspector shall either approve or disapprove the application. If disapproved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Disapproved" and shall indicate the reasons for such disapproval thereon. Such disapproval shall be attested by the building inspector's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building inspector.
If approved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Approved". Such approval shall be attested by the building inspector's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building inspector. The building inspector shall also issue a building permit to the applicant at this time and shall retain a duplicate copy for his records.
D. COMPLIANCE: It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit, or occupancy permit, to build, create, erect, change, alter, convert, or occupy any building or structure hereafter, unless a zoning permit has been issued in compliance with
Article XVI Administration 16-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
this ordinance.
E. BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THE ADOPTION OF THIS ORDINANCE: Building permits issued in conformance with the building code of the legislative body prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, whether consistent or inconsistent with this ordinance, shall be valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar days from time of issuance of the permit. If construction in connection with such a permit has not been started within such a one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar day period, the permit shall be void and a new permit, consistent with all provisions of this ordinance and the building code, shall be required. For purposes of this section, construction shall be deemed to have been started at the time of completion of the foundation.
F. EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT: If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building inspector and no construction shall be permitted until a new building permit has been obtained. There shall be no refund of the original fee for the building permit.
For purposes of this section, construction shall be deemed to have been started at the time of completion of the foundation. After the work described in the building permit has been started, the building permit shall expire after a period of twelve (12) months, providing that an extension may be permitted if sufficient proof can be demonstrated why the work described in the building permit was not completed.
G. CONSTRUCTION AND USE: To be as provided in applications, plans, permits, zoning permits and building permits, issued on the basis of plans and applications, approved by the zoning administrator and/or building inspector, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided in Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
SECTION 16.3 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any building or premises, or part thereof, hereafter created, changed, converted, or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a certificate of occupancy, which shall be a part of the building permit, shall have been issued by the building inspector. Such certificate shall show that such building or premises, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that he
Article XVI Administration 16-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
has checked and is satisfied that the building and the proposed use thereof, conform with all the requirements of this ordinance, the building code, and subdivision regulations.
SECTION 16.4 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR EXISTING BUILDING: Upon change of occupancy, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or premises existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance, certifying, after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or premises, and whether such use conforms with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 16.5 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR LAWFUL NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES: A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by this ordinance. A fee, as provided for in Section 19.0 of this ordinance, shall be charged for said certificate.
Applications for such certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or lessee of the land or building occupied by such nonconforming uses within six (6) consecutive calendar months of the effective date of this ordinance. Failure to apply for such certificate of occupancy will place upon the owner and lessee the entire burden of proof that such use of land or buildings lawfully existed on the effective date of this ordinance.
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for lawful nonconforming uses upon application and such certificate shall identify the extent to which the nonconforming use exists at the time of issuance of such certificate.
SECTION 16.6 DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Except as herein stated, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and to plans for which the building permit was issued.
SECTION 16.7 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY RECORDS: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the offices of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary building affected by such certificate of occupancy.
SECTION 16.8 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS: Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and bases thereof, shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon, as provided by this ordinance and the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
Article XVI Administration 16-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
SECTION 16.9 PENALTIES: Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall upon conviction be fined not less than ten (10) but no more than five hundred (500) dollars for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 16.10 INTENT CONCERNING DETERMINATIONS INVOLVED IN ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: It is the intent of this ordinance that:
A. Where investigation can be made by the zoning administrator, or other designated employee, using equipment normally available to the legislative body, such investigation shall be so made before notice of violation is issued.
B. Where technical complexity, nonavailability of equipment, or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, for the legislative body to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be established for:
1. Causing corrections in apparent violations of performance standards;
2. For protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations; and
3. For protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
C. If the zoning administrator finds, after investigations have been made by qualified experts, that there is a violation of the performance standards, he shall take, or cause to be taken, lawful action to cause correction to, within limits set by such performance standards.
SECTION 16.11 DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR REGARDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: If, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, there is probable violation of the performance standards as set forth, the following procedures shall be followed:
A. The zoning administrator shall give written notice, by registered mail or certified mail, to the person or persons responsible for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the zoning administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of such notification. The notice shall state that failure to reply or to correct the alleged
Article XVI Administration 16-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
violation, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice, constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this ordinance.
B. The notice shall further state that, upon request of those to whom said notice is directed, a technical investigation will be made by a qualified expert or experts and that, if violations as alleged are found, costs of such investigations shall be charged against those responsible for the violations, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the investigation will be paid by the city.
C. If there is no reply within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice, but the alleged violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, he shall note "violation corrected" on his copy of the notice, and shall retain it among his official records, taking such other action as may be warranted.
D. If there is no reply within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice and the alleged violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator within the established time limit, he shall proceed to take, or cause to be taken, such action as is warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
E. If a reply is received within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice indicating that the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, but requesting additional time, the zoning administrator may grant an extension if he deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
F. If a reply is received within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice requesting technical determination as provided in this ordinance, and if the alleged violations continue, the zoning administrator shall call in properly qualified experts to investigate and determine whether violations exist.
If expert findings indicate violations of the performance standards, the costs of the investigations shall be assessed against the properties or persons responsible for the violations, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
If no violation is found, the cost of the investigation shall be paid by the legislative body without assessment against the properties or persons involved.
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE XVII
AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
SECTION 17.0 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
A. FILING OF AMENDMENT APPLICATION: All applications for amendments to this ordinance shall be filed with Planning and Development Services of Kenton County. Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff shall immediately notify the city promptly forwarding the application to the local planning commission. A public hearing shall be scheduled to be held within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of the application by Planning and Development Services of Kenton County. The fee required for applying for such amendment shall be as provided for by the local planning commission and/or the legislative body.
B. PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW REQUIRED: A proposal for a zoning map amendment to this ordinance may originate with the planning commission, legislative body, or with an owner of the property in question. A proposal to amend the text of this ordinance may originate with the planning commission or legislative body. Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, it shall be referred to the planning commission for its action before adoption.
C. PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED, NOTICE GIVEN
1. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed amendment, at which hearing parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once, but may be published two or more times, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, provided that one publication occurs not less than seven (7) calendar days nor more than twenty-one (21) calendar days before the occurrence of such hearing.
2. In addition to the public notice requirements prescribed herein, when the planning commission, fiscal court, or legislative body originates a proposal to amend the zoning map, notice of the public hearing before the planning commission, fiscal court, or legislative body shall be given at least thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, to an owner of every parcel of property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed. Records by the property valuation administrator may be relied upon to determine the identity and address of said owner.
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
D. OTHER HEARING REQUIREMENTS, ZONING MAP AMENDMENT: In addition to the public hearing notice required in Section 17.0, C., above, the following notices shall also be given when a proposal is submitted by a property owner to amend the official zoning map
1. Notice of the hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed, for fourteen (14) consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Said posting shall consist of one or more signs, constructed of durable material, and clearly depicting the following information: the words "ZONING CHANGE" (three (3) inch high lettering); current zoning classification of property and proposed zoning classification (three (3) inch high lettering); date, place, and time of public hearing (one (1) inch high lettering); and address, including telephone number, of the planning commission where additional information regarding hearing may be obtained; and
2. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, with certification by the commission secretary, or other officer of the planning commission, that the notice was mailed to an owner of every parcel of property adjoining the property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed. Where said property adjoins a street or alley, property abutting the opposite side of such street or alley shall be considered adjoining property. It shall be the duty of the person(s) proposing the amendment to furnish to the planning commission the names and addresses of the owners of all adjoining property. Records maintained by the property valuation administrator may be relied upon conclusively to determine the identity and address of said owner. In the event such property is in condominium or cooperative forms of ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or chairperson of the owner group which administers property commonly owned by the condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be mailed to two or more coowners of an adjoining property who are listed in the property valuation administrator's records as having the same address.
3. If the property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed, adjoins property in a different planning unit, or property which is not part of any planning unit, notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, to certain officials, as follows:
a. If the adjoining property is part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to that unit's planning commission; or
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
b. If the adjoining property is not part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to the mayor of the city in which the property is located or, if the property is in an unincorporated area, notice shall be given to the judge/executive of the county in which the property is located.
4. All procedures for public notice and publication, as well as for adoption, shall be the same as for the original enactment of a zoning regulation, and the notice of publication shall include the street address of the property in question, or if one is not available, or if it is not practicable due to the number of addresses involved, a geographic description sufficient to locate and identify the property, and the names of the two (2) streets on either side of the property which intersect the street on which the property is located. If the property is located at the intersection of two (2) streets, the notice shall designate the intersection by name of both streets rather than name the two (2) streets on either side of the property.
E. FINDINGS NECESSARY FOR MAP AMENDMENT: Before any map amendment is granted, the planning commission, or legislative body, must find that the amendment is in agreement with the adopted comprehensive plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of the following apply, including the making of a written report, setting forth explicitly, the reasons and substantiation as to how each would apply, and such finding and report shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the planning commission or legislative body.
1. That the existing zoning classification given to the property is inappropriate and that the proposed zoning classification is appropriate; and
2. That there have been major changes of an economic, physical, or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the adopted comprehensive plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of such area.
F. MINIMUM SIZE OF NEW ZONES: No amendment to this ordinance shall be adopted whereby the zoning classification of an area is changed unless the total area being applied for meets the following requirements as to minimum size: the zoning map shall not be amended, changed, or modified in such manner as to create a free standing zone of less than five (5) acres, except where specific area restrictions are stipulated in this ordinance, or as outlined in the adopted comprehensive plan by the planning commission. For the purpose of computing the total size of an area to be rezoned for compliance herewith, there shall be added to such area: (1) the area of public rights-of-way interior to the area being changed; (2) one-half the area of public rights-of-way abutting the area being
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
changed; and (3) the area of any land which is contiguous to the area being changed (including land located outside the jurisdiction of the legislative body but contiguous thereto and which land already bears the zoning classification sought for the area being changed). For the purpose of this section, neither continuity nor abutment shall be destroyed by the existence of a street, alley, or city's corporation line.
G. PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION
1. MAP AMENDMENT: Following the public hearing held by the planning commission on a proposed map amendment, the commission shall, within sixty (60) calendar days from the date of its receipt, make findings of fact and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the proposed map amendment to the legislative body, including a statement setting forth explicitly the reasons and substantiation for such action and, in the case of a map amendment, the submission of a written report as required in Section 17.0, E., above. The findings of fact and recommendation shall include a summary of the evidence and testimony presented by the proponents and opponents of the proposed amendment. A tie vote shall be subject to further consideration by the planning commission for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, at the end of which, if the tie has not been broken, the application shall be forwarded to the fiscal court or legislative body without a recommendation of approval or disapproval.
2. TEXT AMENDMENT: Following the public hearing held by the planning commission on a proposed text amendment, the commission shall make a recommendation as to the text of the amendment and whether the amendment shall be approved or disapproved and shall state the reasons for its recommendation. In the case of a proposed text amendment originating with a legislative body or fiscal court, the planning commission shall make its recommendation within sixty (60) days of the date of its receipt of the proposed text amendment.
H. LEGISLATIVE BODY DISPOSITION
1. MAP AMENDMENT: The legislative body or fiscal court shall take final action upon a proposed map amendment within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the planning commission takes its final action upon such proposal. It shall take a majority of the entire legislative body or fiscal court to override the recommendation of the planning commission and it shall take a majority of the entire legislative body or fiscal court to adopt a zoning map amendment whenever the planning commission forwards the application to the legislative body or fiscal court without a recommendation
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
of approval or disapproval due to a tie vote. Unless a majority of the entire legislative body or fiscal court votes to override the planning commission's recommendation, such recommendation shall become final and effective and if a recommendation of approval was made by the planning commission, the ordinance of the legislative body or fiscal court adopting the zoning map amendment shall be deemed to have passed by operation of law.
2. TEXT AMENDMENT: It shall take an affirmative vote of a majority of the legislative body or fiscal court to adopt a proposed text amendment.
I. SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN AS CONDITION TO COMMERCIAL, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, OR INDUSTRIAL ZONING MAP AMENDMENT: Any request for a zoning map amendment, excluding those submitted by the legislative body (other than for a zone change for land under city ownership that the city intends to develop) and the planning commission, to any commercial (i.e., NC, SC, etc.) multi-family residential zone (i.e., R-2, R-3, etc.), or industrial zone (i.e., IP, I-1, I-4, etc.) shall be made in accordance with all applicable requirements of this ordinance, including the following:
1. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Application for a zoning map amendment shall be processed in two stages:
a. Application for a zoning amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator as required by Section 17.0, A., and shall include a Development Plan in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 10.7, D., of this ordinance. The zoning administrator may waive the submission of such data involving detailed engineering study until such time as the zoning amendment has been granted.
b. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application and review said application with regard to the required elements of the Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such a hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with condition(s), or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
c. The legislative body shall, within forty-five (45) consecutive days after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
disapprove the proposed Development Plan. Such approval may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and recommended by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendations, in accordance with the process required for the initial review.
Approval of the zoning map amendment shall require that development be in accordance with the approved Development Plan. Additionally, upon approval of the zoning map amendment, the official zoning map shall be amended for the area as shown on the approved development plan.
d. The legislative body shall forward a copy of the approved Development Plan to the zoning administrator, or the city's duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance.
e. If the detailed engineering data required under Section 9.19 had been waived by the zoning administrator in the initial submission of the Development Plan, then such data shall be submitted for review in accordance with the Site Plan requirement of Section 9.19 before a permit may be issued for construction.
The zoning administrator, in reviewing the Site Plan, may authorize minor adjustments from the approved development plan, provided that the adjustments do not affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
2. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the zoning administrator as noted above, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
3. EXPIRATION: The zoning map amendment shall be subject to the time constraints as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said zoning map amendment should revert to its original designation. A public hearing may be initiated if substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Development Plan by the legislative body, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Development Plan obsolete. The amount of construction that constitutes initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the Development Plan.
J. RESUBMISSION: As authorized by Kentucky Revised Statute (KRS) 100.213 (2), the reconsideration of a denied map amendment, or the consideration of a map amendment identical to a denied map amendment, shall not be permitted within a period of two (2) years from the date of the legislative body's final action.
SECTION 17.1 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OF KENTON COUNTY STAFF REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED PRIOR TO OR AT THE SCHEDULED PUBLIC HEARING: Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff, pursuant to KRS 147.673, shall review and make recommendations upon all applications to the local planning commission and the applicant, along with supporting information and comprehensive plan documentation, prior to or at the scheduled public hearing.
SECTION 17.2 ACTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL UNITS TO BE FURNISHED TO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OF KENTON COUNTY: Pursuant to KRS 147.705, the legislative body shall, after final adoption of any zoning ordinance or resolution, including amendments thereto, furnish, or cause to be furnished, within sixty (60) days after adoption, a copy of same to Planning and Development Services of Kenton County.
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE XVIII
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION 18.0 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES; OATHS; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL; OFFICERS
A. A board of adjustment is hereby established.
B. The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom must be citizen members and not more than two (2) of whom may be citizen members of the planning commission.
C. The mayor shall be the appointing authority of the board of adjustment, subject to the approval of the legislative body.
D. The term of office for the board of adjustment shall be four (4) years, but the term of office of members first appointed shall be staggered so that a proportionate number serve one (1), two (2), three (3), and four (4) years, respectively.
E. Vacancies on the board of adjustment shall be filled within sixty (60) calendar days by the appropriate appointing authority. If the authority fails to act within that time, the planning commission shall fill the vacancy. When a vacancy occurs, other than through expiration of the term of office, it shall be filled for the remainder of that term.
F. All members of the board of adjustment shall, before entering upon their duties, qualify by taking the oath of office, prescribed by Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, before any judge, notary public, clerk of court, or justice of the peace, within the district or county in which they reside.
G. Reimbursement for expenses or compensation or both may be authorized for members on the board of adjustment.
H. Any member of the board of adjustment may be removed by the mayor, subject to the approval by the legislative body, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or conflict of interest. The mayor exercising the power to remove a member from the board of adjustment, shall submit a written statement to the planning commission setting forth the reasons and the statement shall be read at the next meeting of the board of adjustment which shall be open to the general
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
public. The member so removed shall have the right of appeal from the removal to the circuit court of the county in which he resides.
I. The board of adjustment shall elect annually a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary, and any other officers it deems necessary, and any officer shall be eligible for re-election at the expiration of their term.
SECTION 18.1 MEETINGS OF BOARDS; QUORUM; MINUTES; BYLAWS; FINANCES; SUBPOENA POWER; ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS
A. The board of adjustment shall conduct meetings at the call of the chairman, who shall give written or oral notice to all members of the board at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting, which notice shall contain the date, time, and place for the meeting, and the subject or subjects which will be discussed.
B. A simple majority of the total membership of the board of adjustment, as established by regulation or agreement, shall constitute a quorum. Any member of the board of adjustment who has any direct or indirect financial interest in the outcome of any question before the body shall disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself from voting on the question.
C. The board of adjustment shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep minutes and records of all proceedings including regulations, transactions, findings, and determinations and the number of votes for and against each question, and if any member is absent or abstains from voting, indicating the fact, all of which shall, immediately after adoption, be filed in the office of the board of adjustment. A transcript of the minutes of the board of adjustment shall be provided if requested by a party, at the expense of the requesting party, and the transcript shall constitute the record.
D. The board of adjustment shall have the right to receive, hold, and spend funds which it may legally receive from any and every source in and out of the state of Kentucky, including the United States Government.
E. The board of adjustment shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel witnesses to attend its meetings and give evidence bearing upon the questions before it.
F. The chairman of the board of adjustment shall have the power to administer an oath to witnesses prior to their testifying before the board on any issue.
G. A board of adjustment may appoint one (1) or more of its members to act as
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-3
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
hearing examiner to preside over a public hearing or public meeting and make recommendations to the board based upon a transcript or record of the hearing.
SECTION 18.2 PROCEDURE FOR ALL APPEALS TO BOARD: Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an official action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days after the appellant or his agent receives notice of the action of the official to be appealed from, by filing with said zoning administrator and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and all parties of record. A fee, as required by Section 19.0 of this ordinance, shall also be given to the zoning administrator at this time. Said zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and shall be treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings. At the public hearing on the appeal held by the board, an interested person may appear and enter his appearance, and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice in accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as well as written notice to the appellant and the zoning administrator at least one (1) calendar week prior to the hearing, and shall decide on the appeal within sixty (60) consecutive calendar days. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or by attorney.
SECTION 18.3 APPEALS FROM PLANNING COMMISSION OR BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, OR LEGISLATIVE BODY: Any appeal from planning commission or board of adjustment or legislative body action may be taken in the following manner:
A. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the planning commission or board of adjustment shall appeal from the action to the circuit court of the county in which the property, which is the subject of the action of the board of adjustment, lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days after the final action of the planning commission or board of adjustment. All final actions which have not been appealed within thirty (30) days shall not be subject to judicial review. The board of adjustment shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court. Final action shall not include the planning commission's recommendations made to other governmental bodies.
B. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the planning commission shall appeal from the final action to the circuit court of the county in which the property, which is the subject of the commission's action, lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after such action. Such action
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-4
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
shall not include the commission's recommendations made to other governmental bodies. All final actions which have not been appealed within 30 days shall not be subject to judicial review. Provided, however, any appeal of a planning commission action granting or denying a variance or conditional use permit, as provided in Section 17.0, J. of this ordinance, shall be taken pursuant to this subsection. In such case, the thirty (30) day period for taking an appeal begins to run at the time the legislative body grants or denies the map amendment for the same development. The planning commission shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court. All appeals shall be taken in the appropriate circuit court within 30 consecutive calendar days after the action or decision of the planning commission or board of adjustments and all decisions, which have not been appealed within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days shall become final. After the appeal is taken, the procedure shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure. When an appeal has been filed, the clerk of the circuit court shall issue a summons to all parties, including the planning commission in all cases, and shall cause it to be delivered for service as in any other law action.
C. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the legislative body of any city, county, or urban-county government, relating to a map amendment, shall appeal from the action to the circuit court of the county in which the property, which is the subject of the map amendment, lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the final action of the legislative body. All final actions which have not been appealed within thirty (30) days shall not be subject to judicial review. The legislative body shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court.
D. The owner of the subject property and applicants who initiated the proceeding shall be made parties to the appeal. Other persons speaking at the public hearing are not required to be made parties to such appeal.
E. For purposes of this ordinance, final action shall be deemed to have occurred on the calendar date when the vote is taken to approve or disapprove the matter pending before the body.
SECTION 18.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator from whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and/or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a court of record on application, or on notice to the zoning administrator from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
SECTION 18.5 POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: Upon appeals, The board of
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-5
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
adjustment shall have the following powers:
A. To hear and decide on applications for variances.
B. To hear and decide appeals, where it is alleged, by the appellant, that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by a zoning administrator in the enforcement of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.
C. To hear and decide applications for conditional use permits to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which are specifically named herein, which may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain conditions are met, as specified in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
D. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, requests for interpretation of the official zoning map or for decisions upon other special questions upon which said board is authorized to act upon.
E. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the adopted comprehensive plan, requests for the change from one nonconforming use to another.
SECTION 18.6 VARIANCES; CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER; CONDITIONS GOVERNING APPLICATIONS; PROCEDURES
A. VARIANCES
1. A variance shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until:
a. A written application for a variance (including the required fee per Section 19.0 of this ordinance) and a Site Plan, subject to the applicable requirements of Section 9.19, are submitted.
b. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 18.1 of this ordinance.
c. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney.
d. Prior to granting a variance:
(1) The board of adjustment shall make findings that the
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-6
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
requirements of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance.
(2) The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
e. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
2. Before any variance is granted, the board of adjustment must find that the granting of the variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, will not alter the essential character of the general vicinity, will not cause a hazard or a nuisance to the public, and will not allow an unreasonable circumvention of the requirements of the zoning regulations. In making these findings, the board shall consider whether:
a. The requested variance arises from special circumstances which do not generally apply to land in the general vicinity, or in the same zone;
b. The strict application of the provisions of the regulation would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land or would create an unnecessary hardship on the applicant; and
c. The circumstances are the result of actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation from which relief is sought.
3. The board shall deny any request for a variance arising from circumstances that are the result of willful violations of this ordinance by the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance from which relief is sought.
B. VARIANCE CANNOT CONTRADICT ZONING REGULATION: The board of adjustment shall not possess the power to grant a variance to permit a use of any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by this ordinance in the zone in
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-7
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
question, or to alter the density of dwelling unit requirements in the zone in question.
C. VARIANCE RUNS WITH LAND: A variance applies to the property for which it is granted and not to the individual who applied for it. A variance runs with the land and is transferable to any future owner of land, but it cannot be transferred by the applicant to a different site.
D. CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without the specific approval of the board of adjustment, as provided herein.
1. The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide on applications to convert or change an existing nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, subject to the following:
a. A written application for a change from one nonconforming use to another (including the required fee as per Section 19.0 of this ordinance) and a Site Plan, if applicable, subject to the applicable requirements of Section 9.19, shall be submitted to the board.
b. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 18.2 of this ordinance
c. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney
d. Prior to granting a change from one nonconforming use to another, the board of adjustment shall find that the new nonconforming use is in the same or more restrictive classification of use as the prior nonconforming use. In the determination of the same or more restrictive classification of use, the applicant shall establish and the board of adjustment shall find:
(1) That the new nonconforming use shall generate less vehicular traffic (automobile and truck) than the prior nonconforming use;
(2) That the new nonconforming use is of a nature which will emit less noise and air pollution than the prior nonconforming use;
(3) That the new nonconforming use will be more in character
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-8
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
with the existing neighborhood than the prior nonconforming use, in that it is more in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan, and also, more in conformance with the uses permitted in the zone in which the use is located, than the prior nonconforming use.
e. Any change of nonconforming use granted by the board of adjustment shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, parking requirements, sign regulations and yard requirements, and all other pertinent ordinances of the legislative body.
f. The board of adjustment shall not allow the enlargement or extension of a nonconforming use beyond the scope and area of its operation at which time its use became nonconforming.
g. The board of adjustment, in granting a change of nonconforming uses, may attach such conditions thereto as it may deem necessary and proper; and the action, limitations, and conditions imposed, if any, shall be in writing, directed to the applicant, with a copy to be furnished to the zoning administrator.
h. The change of nonconforming use, as may be granted by the board of adjustment, applies to the property for which it is granted and not to the individual who applied and, therefore, cannot be transferred by the applicant to a different property.
i. In the case where the change of nonconforming use has not occurred within one (1) year after the date of granting thereof, the said use shall be governed according to the requirements of Section 9.12, B., 3., c.
SECTION 18.7 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS: Conditional use permits shall not be issued without the specific approval of the board of adjustment, as provided herein.
A. The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for conditional use permits, subject to the following:
1. A written application for a conditional use permit (including the required fee per Section 19.0 of this ordinance) and a Site Plan subject to the applicable requirements of Section 9.19, shall be submitted to the board.
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Sections 18.2
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-9
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
and 9.14, B., 6. of this ordinance.
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney.
4. Prior to granting a conditional use permit, the board of adjustment shall find that the application for a conditional use permit meets the requirements of this ordinance and Section 9.14.
SECTION 18.8 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. In exercising the aforementioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination as made by the zoning administrator, from whom the appeal is taken.
B. A simple majority of board members present and voting shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance.
C. The details of the decision of the board shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator.
SECTION 18.9 ACTIONS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO BE FURNISHED TO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OF KENTON COUNTY
Pursuant to KRS 147.705, the board of adjustment shall, after final approval of any variance, change from one nonconforming use to another, conditional use permit, and other appeal, furnish, or cause to be furnished, within sixty (60) days after approval, a copy of same to Planning and Development Services of Kenton County.
Article XIX Fees, Charges, And Expenses 19-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance January 1995 PDS
ARTICLE XIX
FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
SECTION 19.0 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES: The schedule of fees, charges, and expenses shall be as established by separate city ordinance.
APPENDIX A A-1
CRESTVIEW HILLS ZONING ORDINANCE JANUARY 1995 PDS
APPENDIX A A-2
CRESTVIEW HILLS ZONING ORDINANCE JANUARY 1995 PDS
Appendix B Zones As Regulated By Kenton County B-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance May 1996 PDS
APPENDIX B
ZONES AS REGULATED BY THE KENTON COUNTY FISCAL COURT
SECTION 10.0 CO (CONSERVATION) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Agricultural uses
2. Private recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated such as golf courses, country clubs, and camping areas
3. Publicly owned and/or operated parks and/or recreation areas
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses and their customary accessory buildings or uses subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Riding academies and stables;
2. The following uses are permitted providing that the development of all facilities in or adjacent to navigable waters shall be approved by the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, and the Division of Water, Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection. Such statements of approval or denial shall be submitted to the board of adjustment at the time of submittal for a conditional zoning certificate:
a. Boat harbors and marinas;
The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in connection with any boat harbor or marina provided they are primarily intended to serve only persons using the boat harbor or marina:
(1) Boat fueling, service, and repairs;
(2) Sale of boat supplies;
Appendix B Zones As Regulated By Kenton County B-2
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance May 1996 PDS
(3) Grocery store;
(4) Restaurant;
b. Boat landing, docking, and launching facilities;
c. Off-street parking facilities including facilities for temporary parking of boat trailers.
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum lot area - One (1) acre
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum building height - Twenty-five (25) feet
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be required for any permitted use or conditional use in this zone.
2. Any activity that may be located in the floodplain of any water course shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.25
3. Dwellings, including cabins, rooming houses, and mobile homes are not permitted in this zone.
4. Temporary camping units, tents, and recreational vehicles, as defined in KRS 219.320 (8) shall be permitted; however, no such units shall be used for year-round habitation.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided for any use within this zone, according to the provisions of Article XI.
6. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
7. No motor vehicle which is inoperable, or mobile home or trailer shall be stored or used for storage in this zone.
8. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
Appendix C Summary Of Amendments C-1
Crestview Hills Zoning Ordinance August 2019 PDS
APPENDIX C
SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS
ORDINANCE NUMBER PAGES AFFECTED DATE OF APPROVAL
Typed New Text - January 1995
1995-10-01 10-1 through 10-63 11/9/95
1995-9-1 B-1, B-2 4/22/96
1996-11-1 10-55 through 10-63 11/14/96
1998-9-2 7-1 through 7-23 10/8/98
1999-4-1 7-1 through 7-24, 10-1 through 10-63 5/13/99
2000-1-1 Table of Contents, Article VII, Article X 2/10/00
2000-8-1 Article X 9/14/00
2001-1-1 Article IX, Table Of Contents 2/8/01
2001-12-2, 2001-12-3
2001-12-4 Table of Contents, Article VII, Article IX,
Article X, Article XIII 1/10/02
2002-11-1 Article X 12/12/02
2003-12-1 Table of Contents, Article XIV 1/8/04
2004-2-1 Article XI 3/11/04
2004-2-2 Article X 3/11/04
2004-9-1 Article VIII, Article X, Article XIII, Article XIV 10/14/04
2006-6-1 Table of Contents, Article IX 7/13/06
2008-2-1 Table of Contents, Article IX 4/10/08
2008-10-1 Table of Contents, Article VII, Article XIV 11/13/08
2017-1-2 Article XI 2/9/17
2017-11-01 Article XIV 12/14/17
2017-11-02 Table Of Contents, Article XIV 12/14/17
2018-02-01 Table Of Contents, Article VII, Article IX 3/15/18
2018-10-01 Table Of Contents, Article VIII, Article IX
Article X, Article XI, Article XIII, Article XIV 11/8/18
2018-10-02 Table Of Contents, Article IX, Article XIV 11/8/18
2019-08-03 Article VII, Article X 8/29/19


Kenton County, Kentucky
Subdivision Regulations
October 1, 2015
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Table of Contents.........................................................................................................................................................i
Article 1: Application and Authority........................................................................................................................1
Section 1.1: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.2: Title .............................................................................................................................................................. 1
Section 1.3: Authorization................................................................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.4: Citations of Kentucky Revised Statutes ........................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.5: Citations of these Regulations...................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.6: Jurisdiction................................................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.7: Statement of Severability.............................................................................................................................. 1
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards ...................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.9: Compliance Required................................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules ........................................................................................................................................ 2
Section 1.11: Penalties....................................................................................................................................................... 4
Section 1.12: Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, and Cross-References................................................................... 4
Section 1.13: Burden of Proof............................................................................................................................................ 4
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation .................................................................................................5
Section 2.1: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................ 5
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation.................................................................................................................. 5
Section 2.3: Definitions.................................................................................................................................................... 8
Article 3: Administration and Procedures .............................................................................................................31
Section 3.1: Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 31
Section 3.2: Review and Decision-Making Bodies......................................................................................................... 31
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements........................................................................................................... 32
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements.................................................................................................................... 37
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions..................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions..................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats........................................................................................................ 60
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff .......................................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations......................................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions ............................................................................................................................... 64
Section 3.11: Appeals of Planning Commission Actions.................................................................................................. 64
Section 3.12: Enforcement ............................................................................................................................................... 65
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure..........................................................................................................66
Section 4.1: Streets......................................................................................................................................................... 66
Section 4.2: Lot Layout .................................................................................................................................................. 89
Section 4.3: Public Utilities ........................................................................................................................................... 94
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses .............................................................................. 100
Section 4.5: Use of Aggregates Within the Right-of-way ............................................................................................. 104
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure ............................................................................. 104
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications ........................................ 113
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design ......................................................................................................... 119
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options ......................................................................................................127
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page i
Table of Contents
Section 5.1: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 127
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies............................................................................................................................... 128
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management .................................................................................... 128
Section 5.4: Criteria for Integrated Stormwater Management .................................................................................... 137
Section 5.5: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management allowed By-Right........................................................ 137
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements ..........................................138
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations....................................................................................................................... 138
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public
Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements ............................................................................................ 140
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies...........................................................................................................................147
Section 7.1: Purpose of the Traffic Impact Study......................................................................................................... 147
Section 7.2: Need for a Traffic Impact Study ............................................................................................................... 147
Section 7.3: Study Area ................................................................................................................................................ 148
Section 7.4: Study Requirements.................................................................................................................................. 149
Section 7.5: Mitigation................................................................................................................................................. 151
Section 7.6: Administration.......................................................................................................................................... 152
Article 8: Access Control Regulations ..................................................................................................................154
Section 8.1: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 154
Section 8.2: Applicability ............................................................................................................................................. 154
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points ......................................................................................... 154
Section 8.4: Traffic Control ......................................................................................................................................... 158
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes ........................................................................................................... 159
Section 8.6: Provision of Access Easement and Access Drives for Nonresidential Uses............................................. 161
Section 8.7: Pedestrian Access Points ......................................................................................................................... 161
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings...........................................................................................162
Appendix B: Surety Templates .....................................................................................................................194
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report........................................................................................200
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page ii
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.1: Purpose
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.1: Purpose
These regulations create the mechanisms, further define the powers and duties, and set forth the standards and
requirements necessary to administer responsibilities granted to local Planning Commissions by Chapter 100 of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS). In so doing, they assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive,
and aesthetically-pleasing development while also promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the Kenton
County public.
Section 1.2: Title
These regulations shall be known as the “Kenton County, Kentucky, Subdivision Regulations,” and may be referred
to as “these Subdivision regulations” or “these Regulations.”
Section 1.3: Authorization
These regulations are adopted pursuant to authority granted to local Planning Commissions by Kentucky Revised
Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through 100.292.
Section 1.4: Citations of Kentucky Revised Statutes
Whenever a provision of these regulations cites a provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS), and that
provision is later amended or superseded, these regulations shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
provision, or the provision that most closely corresponds to the superseded provision.
Section 1.5: Citations of these Regulations
Citations to provisions within these regulations shall be by article, section, subsection, and clause.
Section 1.6: Jurisdiction
These regulations shall be effective throughout Kenton County.
Section 1.7: Statement of Severability
The articles, sections, subsections and clauses of these regulations are severable. If any article, section, subsection,
or clause of these regulations is declared unconstitutional, or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction
in a valid judgment or decree, that unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining articles, sections,
subsections, or clauses as they would have been enacted without the incorporation into these regulations of the
unconstitutional or invalid article, section, subsection, or clause.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 1
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be viewed as minimum standards or requirements,
adopted for promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever these regulations conflict with a
requirement of any other lawfully-adopted rule, regulation, ordinance, order, or resolution, then the most restrictive,
or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Section 1.9: Compliance Required
Except as hereinafter specified, no Subdivision of land shall hereafter occur except in conformity with these
regulations.
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules
1.10-1 Effective Date
These regulations shall become effective at 12:01 AM EST on March 11, 2015 and replace any current
Subdivision regulations adopted pursuant to Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through 100.292.
1.10-2 Violations Continued
Any violation of the previous Subdivision regulations shall continue to be a violation under these
regulations and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes. Violations of these regulations shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.11: Penalties, and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or
statutes.
1.10-3 Completed Application Submittals
(A) Any Applicant that has submitted a complete set of Application requirements that was accepted as
complete before the effective date of these regulations, but are still pending final action as of that
date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the regulations in effect when the complete
Application submittal was accepted.
(B) Complete Application submittals shall be processed in good faith and shall comply with any time
frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the regulations in effect at the time
the submission was accepted.
(C) If any completed Application submission fails to comply with the required time frames, it shall
expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
(D) An Applicant with a pending Application accepted before the effective date of these regulations
may opt to have the proposed development reviewed and decided under the standards of these
regulations by withdrawing the pending Application and submitting a new Application in
accordance with the standards of these regulations.
(1) If an Applicant chooses to withdraw an Application and submit a new Application under
these regulations, such Applicant shall be subject to these regulations in full and may not opt
to go back to the previous set of standards after the original Application has been withdrawn.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 2
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules
(2) If an Applicant has a Preliminary Plat approval prior to the effective date of these regulations
but only certain phases of the Preliminary Plat have been developed, such Applicant may
request that all of the remaining phases of the Subdivision be reviewed under these new
regulations. In this case, the Applicant shall be required to submit a new Application for a
Major Subdivision review (including a new Preliminary Plat approval) for all of the
remaining phases of the development that have not already been approved and recorded.
Plat 1.10-4 Approvals / Transition Rules
(A) A development for which a Preliminary Plat or Identification Plat approval was granted prior to the
effective date of these regulations may be completed in accordance with the approved plat and any
other approved conditions, even if the development does not comply with the requirements
established in these regulations, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) If during subsequent review, the development subject to the Preliminary Plat fails to comply
with any time frames for review or conditions of approval, the preliminary approval shall
expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
(2) Improvement Drawing applications submitted after 90 days from the effective date of these
regulations shall be required to comply with the street design and earthwork requirements as
set out in Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section
4.7:Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications and Section
6.2:Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork
Within the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally
Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements of these regulations.
(3) Developments containing Streets within Improvement Drawings approved prior to the
effective date of the regulations or within 90 days from the effective date of the regulations,
where Streets have not yet been constructed by December 31, 2016, shall be required to
construct the Streets to comply with the Street design and earthwork requirements as set out
in Section 4.4:Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section
4.7:Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications and Section
6.2:Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork
Within the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally
Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements of these regulations.
If a development is subject to this condition, revised Improvement Drawings including
review fees shall be submitted and approved by Staff prior to construction of the street(s).
(4) Staff shall have the discretion to approve individual transitional design elements as submitted
by the Applicant on a case by case basis that occur between new Improvement Drawings
designed under these regulations and Improvement Drawings designed under the preceding
regulations.
(B) Any development for which a Final Plat for a Subdivision was approved prior to the effective date
of these regulations shall be permitted to develop, even if such development does not conform to
the provisions of these regulations.
(C) If the development for which the Final Plat for a Subdivision fails to comply with the time frames
for recordation or conditions of approval, such approval shall expire and future development shall
be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 3
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.11: Penalties
Section 1.11: Penalties
Pursuant to KRS 100.991, any person or entity who violates any of these regulations shall upon conviction, be fined
not less than 10 dollars but not more than 500 dollars. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1.12: Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, and Cross-
References
1.12-1 Where a conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration, or figure, the text shall control.
1.12-2 In some instances, cross-references between articles, sections, and subsections are provided that include
the article, section, or subsection number along with the name of the referenced article, section, or
subsection. Where a conflict may occur between the given cross-reference number and name, the name
shall control.
Section 1.13: Burden of Proof
The burden of demonstrating that an Application subject to these regulations complies with applicable review and
approval standards is on the Applicant. The burden is not on the Staff, the KCPC, or other parties to show that the
standards have been met by the Applicant or person responsible for the development.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 4
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.1: Purpose
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for
Interpretation
Section 2.1: Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide an explanation, and where appropriate, illustrations of terms, expressions,
and concepts used throughout this ordinance. It is intended to aid the reader in understanding the intention of the
Planning Commission in using specific terms within these regulations. By providing this explanation, it assures a
necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development and promotes the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kenton County.
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
2.2-1 For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, words, and phrases shall be
used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. Whenever words and phrases are not defined
here but are defined in Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) Chapter 100 and in any amendments to it, the
KRS statutory definition shall apply.
2.2-2 Whenever reference is made to a resolution, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a
reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, statute, regulation, or document, unless
otherwise specifically stated.
2.2-3 Additionally, the following rules shall be observed in the application and interpretation of these
regulations, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.
(A) The words “must,” “shall,” or “will” are mandatory. The word “may” is permissive. The word
“should” is suggestive but not mandatory.
(B) Masculine terms shall include the feminine and vice versa.
(C) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following words shall be interpreted as
follows:
(1) “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions apply;
(2) “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singularly or in any
combination; and
(3) “Either...or” indicates that the connected words or provisions apply singularly but not in
combination.
(D) The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words,
letters, or figures whether by printing or other form or method of writing.
(E) Words used and defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and/or derivative forms.
(F) Singular words shall include the plural and vice versa.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 5
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
(G) The word “including,” “includes,” “such as,” “additional,” or “supplemental” is illustrative and not
intended as an exhaustive listing, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
(H) The words “used” or “occupied” shall include the words “intended or designed to be used or
occupied.”
(I) Any reference to a specific member of Staff may be interpreted to include their designee.
(J) Headings are for convenience only and do not govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning, or intention of any portion of these regulations.
(K) Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
If a term used in these regulations is not defined in this article or 2.2-4 in the KRS, Staff shall have the
authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted sources, including but not
limited to, A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms, and A
Survey of Zoning Definitions, published by the American Planning Association.
2.2-5 Table 2.2-1 identifies common abbreviations used within these regulations and their associated meanings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 6
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
TABLE 2.2-1:COMMON ABBREVIATIONS AND MEANINGS
ABBREVIATION MEANING
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
ACI American Concrete Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
CBR California Bearing Ratio
CLSM Controlled Low Strength Material
ESAL Equivalent 18,000 pound Single Axle Load
FTP File Transfer Protocol
GIS Geographic Information Systems
GPM Gallons Per Minute
HCM Highway CapacityManual
HCS Highway Capacity Software
ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers
KAR Kentucky Administrative Regulations
KCPC Kenton County Planning Commission
KRS Kentucky Revised Statutes
KYTC Kentucky Transportation Cabinet
LOS Level of Service
MUTCD Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
NAD North American Datum
NFPA National Fire Protection Association
NTS Not to Scale
OKI Ohio Kentucky Indiana Regional Council of Governments
PAIKY Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
PCA Portland Cement Association
PDS Planning and Development Services of Kenton County
PHF Peak Hour Factor
PLS Professional Land Surveyor
PSI Pounds Per Square Inch
PVI Point of Vertical Intersection
PVT Point of Vertical Tangency
Q Peak StormWater Discharge
RODEL Roundabout Design Software
ROW Right-of-way
RTOR Right Turn on Red
SD1 Sanitation District No. 1
SPCS State Plane Coordinate System
SSEC Street Standards Engineers Committee
SSRBC KY Department of Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
TIS Traffic Impact Study
TSM Transportation SystemManagement
USGS United States Geodetic Survey
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 7
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-1 1993 AASHTO Rigid Pavement Structural Design
A set of empirical equations used to relate observed or measurable phenomena (pavement characteristics)
with outcomes (pavement performance). Test equations were developed which related loss in
serviceability, traffic, and pavement thickness.
2.3-2 AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials)
A standards setting body which publishes specifications and test protocols and guidelines which are used
in highway design and construction throughout the United States.
2.3-3 Access
Access means any Access Drive, Driveway, Private Street, or other vehicular connection providing for
the movement of vehicles to or from the Public Street system. See Figure 2.3-A.
Figure 2.3-A: Illustration of an Access Drive
2.3-4 Access Drive
An Access Drive is a vehicular way that affords direct access to abutting property from the Street system,
typically from the back or side of the property.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 8
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-5 Access Point
An Access Point is the point at which the centerline of any Access Drive, Driveway, Street, or other
vehicular connection intersects another Street system. See Figure 2.3-B.
Figure 2.3-B: Illustration of an Access Point
2.3-6 Access Point, Full
A Full Access Point is an access point that accommodates all possible turning movements. See Figure
2.3-C.
Figure 2.3-C: Example of a Full Access Point
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 9
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-7 Access Point, Partial
A Partial Access Point is an Access Point that accommodates left and right turn movements into an
Access Point, and right turn movements out of an Access Point but does not allow for left turn
movements out of the Access Point. See Figure 2.3-D.
Figure 2.3-D: Example of a Partial Access Point
2.3-8 Access Point, Restricted
A Restricted Access Point is an Access Point that only accommodates right turning movements into and
out of the Access Point. See Figure 2.3-E.
Figure 2.3-E: Example of a Restricted Access Point
2.3-9 Access Point, Unsignalized
An Unsignalized Access Point is an Access Point where traffic movements are not regulated by a traffic
signal.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 10
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-10 Access Throat
An Access Throat is the Access Drive or Driveway entry onto a private Lot that does not provide further
access to parking spaces or parking drives. See Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access
Points.
2.3-11 ACI (American Concrete Institute)
An organization involved in the development and distribution of consensus-based standards, technical
resources and educational programs for individuals and organizations involved in concrete design,
construction, and materials.
2.3-12 Applicant
An Applicant is person or entity who is authorized by the provisions of these regulations to file for
approval under these regulations.
2.3-13 Application
An Application is the completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees
required of an Applicant by Staff, the Planning Commission, or the applicable Legislative Body as part of
a submission for review.
2.3-14 Asphalt Concrete
Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) is a composite material commonly used in construction paving projects that
consists of asphalt (used as a binder) mixed with mineral aggregate place in layers and compacted.
2.3-15 ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials)
An international standards organization that develops and publishes voluntary consensus technical
standards for a wide range of materials, products, systems, and services.
2.3-16 Authorized Agent
An Authorized Agent is a person with express written consent to act upon another person’s behalf.
2.3-17 Bearing Ratio (CBR)
A penetration test for evaluation of the mechanical strength of Roadway Subgrades and basecourses
developed by the California Department of Transportation.
2.3-18 Bicycle Facilities
Bicycle Facilities shall mean bike trails, bike lanes and/or multi-use paths designed for the use of
bicycles.
2.3-19 Bioretention Swale
A Bioretention Swale (or biofiltration trench) is a bioretention system that is located within the base of a
swale and incorporates special types of landscaping and vegetation to enhance water quality and improve
overall stormwater management. See Figure 2.3-F.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 11
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Figure 2.3-F: Illustration of a Bioretention Swale
2.3-20 Certificate of Occupancy
A Certificate of Occupancy is a certificate that shall be obtained prior to the occupancy of any premises.
2.3-21 Channelization, Traffic
Channelization is the separation or regulation of conflicting traffic movements into definite paths of
travel to facilitate safe and orderly movements of both vehicles and pedestrians. See Figure 2.3-G.
Figure 2.3-G: Illustration of channelizing elements
2.3-22 Commission
See “Planning Commission” (Subsection 2.3-84: Planning Commission).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 12
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-23 Comprehensive Plan
The Kenton County Comprehensive Plan is a guide for public and private actions and decisions to assure
the development of public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. It shall contain, as
a minimum, the following elements:
(A) A statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies, and standards;
(B) A land use plan element;
(C) A transportation plan element;
(D) A community facilities plan element; and
(E) May include any additional elements such as, without being limited to, community renewal,
housing, Flood control, pollution, conservation, natural resources, regional impact, historic
preservation, and others.
2.3-24 Condominium Property Regime Plat
See “Plat, Condominium Property Regime” (Subsection 2.3-87: Plat, Condominium Property Regime).
2.3-25 Construction Materials Testing Agency
A Construction Materials Testing Agency shall be under the full-time technical direction of a registered
Professional Engineer in the state of Kentucky. The Engineer shall have at least five years’ experience in
construction materials testing. The testing laboratory shall maintain an accreditation for the test methods
performed. Appropriate accreditations are provided by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Accreditations at an equivalent level by another nationally
recognized organization are also acceptable.
2.3-26 Contractor
A Contractor is a person or firm engaged in construction related to the installation of Improvements and
infrastructure. A Contractor may be an “Applicant” or may be employed by an Applicant to install
Improvements as approved as part of the Subdivision process.
2.3-27 Controlled Low Strength Material
A fluid mixture of Portland Cement, fly ash, sand and water designed to be low strength to allow for
possible removal of the material at a later date.
2.3-28 County
County shall mean Kenton County in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-29 County Clerk
The County Clerk is the duly-elected clerk of Kenton County in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-30 Cul-de-sac
A Cul-de-sac is a Street having an outlet at one end with a permanent circular turnaround at the other
end.
2.3-31 Curb
A Curb is the concrete boundary at the edge of the pavement of a Street that may also include gutters.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 13
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-32 Curb Extension
A Curb Extension is an extension of the Sidewalk or Curb line into the parking lane to reduce the
effective Street width.
2.3-33 Curb, Integral
An Integral Curb is a Curb system that is constructed as an integrated part of the Street pavement.
2.3-34 Design Speed
Design Speed is the speed to which a Street is being or has been designed.
2.3-35 Developer
A Developer is a person who develops real estate by preparing a site for residential or commercial use.
2.3-36 Drainage
Drainage is the natural or artificial flow of surface and sub-surface water from an area.
2.3-37 Driveway
A Driveway is a privately owned vehicular way.
2.3-38 Easement
An Easement is an interest in real property, distinct from the fee ownership of the land, granting the legal
right to cross property with facilities such as, but not limited to, sewer lines, water lines, and transmission
lines, or the right, distinct from the fee ownership of the land, to reserve and hold an area for
conservation, Drainage or access purposes.
2.3-39 Engineer
An Engineer is a qualified registered Professional Engineer in good standing with the Kentucky State
Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
2.3-40 Final Plat
See “Plat, Final” (Subsection 2.3-88: Plat, Final).
2.3-41 Flag Stem
A Flag Stem is the narrow portion of a Flag Lot that provides the Lot with Frontage along a public or
Private Street.
2.3-42 Flood, Flooding, or Flood Water
The terms “Flood,” “Flooding,” or “Flood Water” reflect a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 14
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Flood 2.3-43 Plain or Flood Prone Area
Flood Plains and Flood Prone Areas are land areas susceptible to being inundated by Flood Waters from
any source. See Figure 2.3-H.
Figure 2.3-H: Illustration of a Flood Plain
2.3-44 Floodway, 100-year
A Floodway is the channel of a river or other Watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the 100-year Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot at any point. See Figure 2.3-I.
Figure 2.3-I: Illustration of a Floodway
2.3-45 Freeway
A Freeway or interstate is a controlled-access highway that has grade-separated interchange connections
with intersecting highways and Streets.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 15
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-46 Frontage
Frontage is all the property abutting on one side of the Right-of-way of a Street, measured along the
Right-of-way line of the Street between the intersecting Lot Lines. In no case shall the line along an
Access Drive be considered as acceptable for Frontage. See Figure 2.3-J.
Figure 2.3-J: Illustration of Frontage
2.3-47 Functional Classification
Functional Classification shall mean the categorization of Streets and roads based on their provided
mobility and access to adjacent land.
2.3-48 Guarantee
A Guarantee is a contract guaranteeing the Developer or Applicant’s obligation to the Planning
Commission to complete approved Subdivision Improvements.
2.3-49 Geotechnical Technician
A Geotechnical Technician shall be trained by, and under the full-time technical direction of, a registered
Professional Engineer in the state of Kentucky. The Engineer shall have at least five years’ experience in
construction materials testing.
2.3-50 Identification Plat
See “Plat, Identification” (Subsection 2.3-88:).
2.3-51 Improvement Drawings
See “Improvement Plans” (Subsection 2.3-52: Improvement Plans).
2.3-52 Improvement Plans
Improvement Plans are the engineering plans showing design layout, types of materials, and construction
details for the physical structures and facilities to be installed in, or in conjunction with a Subdivision.
The terms “Improvement Plans” and “Improvement Drawings” can be used interchangeably.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 16
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-53 Improvements
Improvements are physical changes made to raw land, and the structures placed on or under the land’s
surface, in order to make the land more usable for activities. Typical Improvements in these regulations
would be grading, Street pavement, Curbs, gutters, Drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, and
utility lines of all types.
2.3-54 Inlet Grates
An Inlet Grate is an opening in the pavement covered by a type of protective grate that allows for the
passage of stormwater.
2.3-55 Inspector
An Inspector shall be the person(s) responsible for inspecting Improvements pursuant to these
regulations. See also “Staff” (Subsection 2.3-108: Staff).
2.3-56 Joint, Construction
A stopping place in the process of concrete construction usually set to coincide with a Contraction Joint.
2.3-57 Joint, Contraction
A joint, tooled or cut into freshly placed concrete to induce cracking caused by drying and thermal
shrinkage at preselected locations.
2.3-58 Joint, Expansion
A concrete joint designed to allow for the horizontal movement of concrete due to the effects of thermal
expansion and contraction.
2.3-59 Joint, Longitudinal
A joint in concrete pavement running parallel to the centerline of the Street either tooled, sawn or formed.
2.3-60 Kenton County Planning Commission (KCPC)
The 20-member body appointed by the county judge/executive and mayors and their legislative bodies
that pursues and administers provisions of KRS Chapter 100.
2.3-61 Kentucky Transportation Cabinet (KYTC)
An executive branch agency responsible for overseeing the development and maintenance of a safe,
efficient multi-modal transportation system throughout the state of Kentucky.
2.3-62 KYTC Highway Design Manual
A manual that presents detailed or descriptive design information for Kentucky Road Projects based on
common practice and other resources.
2.3-63 Legislative Body
Legislative Body shall mean the elected board or body responsible for adopting law in the applicable
jurisdiction.
2.3-64 Lot
A Lot is a Parcel of land or any combination of several Lots of record occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or group of buildings, as permitted herein, together with their accessory
buildings or uses and such access, Yards, and open spaces required under these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 17
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-65 Lot Area
Lot Area is the total area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and Rear Lot Lines, but not
including any area occupied by rights-of-way. See Figure 2.3-K.
Figure 2.3-K: Illustration of Lot Area (hatched area)
2.3-66 Lot, Corner
A Corner Lot is a Lot situated at the intersection of two Streets or on a curved Street in which the interior
angle of such intersection or curved Streets does not exceed 135 degrees. See Figure 2.3-L.
Figure 2.3-L: Illustration of a Corner Lot
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 18
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-67 Lot, Double Frontage
A Double Frontage Lot is a Lot, other than a Corner Lot, that has Frontage on two Streets. See Figure
2.3-M.
Figure 2.3-M: Illustration of a Double Frontage Lot
2.3-68 Lot, Flag
A Flag Lot is a Lot that does not contain the minimum required Lot Width at the minimum required front
yard setback. See Figure 2.3-N.
Figure 2.3-N: Illustration of a Flag Lot
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 19
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-69 Lot, Triple Frontage
A Triple Frontage Lot is a Lot that has Frontage on three Streets. See Figure 2.3-O.
Figure 2.3-O: Illustration of a Triple Frontage Lot
2.3-70 Lot Line
A Lot Line is a line of record surrounding a Lot that separates one Lot from another Lot, a public Rightof-
way, or any other public or private space. For the purposes of these regulations, a “Lot Line” may also
be called a “property line.”
2.3-71 Lot Line, Front
A Front Lot Line is the common boundary line of a Lot and a Street Right-of-way line. In the case of a
Corner Lot or a Double Frontage Lot, the Front Lot Line is the common boundary line with that Street
Right-of-way line toward which the principal or usual entrance to the principal building faces. In the
case of a Flag Lot, the interior line most parallel to and nearest the Street Right-of-way line. See Figure
2.3-P.
2.3-72 Lot Line, Rear
A Rear Lot Line is the boundary line of a Lot which is most nearly opposite the Front Lot Line of such
Lot. In the case of a triangular or wedge shaped Lot, for measurement purposes only, a line 10 feet in
length within the Lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the Front Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-P.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 20
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-73 Lot Line, Side
A Side Lot Line is any boundary line of a Lot, other than a Front Lot Line or Rear Lot Line. See Figure
2.3-P.
Figure 2.3-P: Illustration of front, side, and Rear Lot Lines
2.3-74 Lot Width
The Lot Width is the horizontal distance of a Lot measured between the Side Lot Lines along the
building Front Setback line. See Figure 2.3-Q.
Figure 2.3-Q: Illustration of Lot Width
2.3-75 Median
A Median is a form of Channelization that physically separates traffic movements.
2.3-76 Mixed Use
Mixed Use is a single development containing both residential and nonresidential uses.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 21
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Multi-Family 2.3-77 Residential Dwelling
A building that contains three or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one
or more units. The land underneath the structure may or may not be divided into separate Lots. Multi-unit
buildings include structures commonly referred to as “apartments” and “condominiums.”
2.3-78 Parcel
See “Lot” (Subsection 2.3-64: Lot).
2.3-79 Parcel, Residual
A Residual Parcel is a piece of land that is leftover after Lots are laid out in a Subdivision that does not
meet the minimum requirements of the applicable zoning and is therefore inadequate for development.
2.3-80 Parking Area
A Parking Area is an open paved area which primarily affords for vehicular parking and corresponding
drive aisles.
2.3-81 PCA Design and Control of Concrete Mixtures
A reference manual developed by the Portland Cement Association that contains design and placement
specifications for concrete pavements.
2.3-82 Pedestrian Walkway
A Pedestrian Walkway is an improved path intended for pedestrian travel.
2.3-83 Permeable Pavement
Permeable Pavement is a pavement material that allows the infiltration of water through it to be
recharged into the ground below.
2.3-84 Planning Commission
The term “Planning Commission” shall mean the Kenton County Planning Commission in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-85 Planning Jurisdiction
The Planning Jurisdiction includes those areas of Kenton County, Kentucky, which fall under the
jurisdictional authority of the Kenton County Planning Commission, as provided by KRS 100.131.
2.3-86 Plat
A Plat is the map or drawing representing a Parcel of land, showing the location and boundaries of
individual Lots and Streets, created and approved through these regulations.
2.3-87 Plat, Condominium Property Regime
A Condominium Property Regime Plat is a drawing representing a proposed Subdivision of a building
into individual units and common areas as defined under Kentucky Condominium Law whereby the
ownership of each unit may be transferred independently of another unit.
2.3-88 Plat, Final
A Final Plat is the final drawing and documents pertaining to a proposed Subdivision of land which is
submitted formally by an Applicant following approval of the Preliminary Plat. Once approved and
recorded, the Final Plat becomes a lawful Subdivision.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 22
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-89 Plat, Identification
An Identification Plat is a drawing representing a proposed Minor Subdivision of land that does not
contain public Improvements as further defined in Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions.
2.3-90 Plat, Minor
See “Plat, Identification” (Subsection 2.3-89: Plat, Identification).
2.3-91 Plat, Preliminary
A Preliminary Plat is the preliminary drawings and documents pertaining to a proposed Subdivision of
land which is submitted formally by an Applicant for review under these regulations.
2.3-92 Plat, Record
A Record Plat is the Final Plat that is submitted to the Kenton County Clerk for recordation.
2.3-93 Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete)
Portland Cement Concrete is a composite material commonly used in construction paving projects that
consists of coarse aggregate (crushed stone and gravel), fine aggregate (such as sand), Portland cement
and water.
2.3-94 Preliminary Plat
See “Plat, Preliminary” (Subsection 2.3-91: Plat, Preliminary).
2.3-95 Pumping (or deflection)
Pumping is defined as movement or deflection of the Subgrade soil that extends beyond the limits of the
direct wheel load. Unless accompanied by Rutting (which is common), the pumping Subgrade soil may
rebound back to its original position after the wheel load passes. Pumping failures are typically caused
by Subgrade soils with higher than optimum moisture content located within a zone up to several feet
below the Subgrade surface.
2.3-96 Qualified Geotechnical Engineer
A Geotechnical Engineer who individually, or whose firm, has been accepted onto the City of
Cincinnati’s list of Qualified/Recognized Geotechnical Engineers.
2.3-97 Record Drawing
Redrawn Improvement Drawings after construction is complete that verifies the as-built condition of the
site Improvements.
2.3-98 Record Plat
See “Plat, Record” (Subsection 2.3-92: Plat, Record).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 23
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-99 ReSubdivision
A ReSubdivision is any change to an approved or recorded Plat that affects a Street layout or Lot Line, or
that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of regulations controlling
Subdivisions. See Figure 2.3-R.
Figure 2.3-R: Illustration of a ReSubdivision
2.3-100 Right-of-way
A Right-of-way is a strip of land used, occupied, or intended to be used or occupied by transportation and
public use facilities such as Streets, railroads, and utility lines. See Figure 2.3-S. The term Right-of-way
may be abbreviated as ROW or R/W.
Figure 2.3-S: Illustration of a Right-of-way
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 24
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-101 Roadway
See “Street” (Subsection 2.3-109: Street) and any variation of Street as the terms “Roadway” and
“Street” can be used interchangeably.
2.3-102 Rutting
Rutting is defined as imprints or depressions in the Subgrade caused by direct wheel loads. Rutting
failures are typically caused by inadequate compaction of near surface soils.
2.3-103 Setback
A Setback is the required distance between a side, rear or front property line and the exterior face of the
foundation of a building or structure as regulated by the applicable Legislative Body’s Zoning Ordinance.
2.3-104 Sidewalk
A Sidewalk is a Pedestrian Walkway within a Right-of-way of a Public Street or Access easement of a
Private Street but not on the Street surface.
2.3-105 Sight Distance
Sight Distance is the length of the Street or Roadway ahead that is visible to the driver.
2.3-106 Single-Family Residential Dwelling (Attached)
A single dwelling unit located on its own Lot that shares one or more common or adjacent walls with one
or more dwelling units. An attached house does not share common floor/ceilings with other dwelling
units. An attached house is also called a “townhouse” or a “rowhouse.”
2.3-107 Single-Family Residential Dwelling (Detached)
A detached house is a building containing a single dwelling unit (other than a mobile home or
manufactured housing unit) that is located on its own Lot and that is not attached to any other dwelling
unit. Detached houses are surrounded on all sides by open Yards and Setback areas.
2.3-108 Staff
Staff shall mean the Duly Authorized Staff of the Kenton County Planning Commission.
2.3-109 Street
A Street is a vehicular way that affords a means of transport and access to abutting property. Streets are
further classified by Functional Classification and Street type as defined in these regulations. A Driveway
or Access Drive shall not be classified as a Street.
2.3-110 Street, Arterial
An Arterial Street is a public Street which primarily serves through traffic and most of the trips
entering/leaving large urban areas and major traffic generators.
2.3-111 Street, Collector
A collector street which primarily serves to collect traffic from Local Streets and also connect smaller
urbanized areas and traffic generators. A collector street typically serves greater than 500 Lots.
2.3-112 Street, Local
A Local Street is a paved vehicular way which primarily serves to provide direct access to abutting
properties. Local Streets typically serve no more than 199 Lots.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 25
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-113 Street, Private
A Private Street is a paved vehicular way constructed or intended to be constructed within the boundaries
of a privately owned Parcel of land.
2.3-114 Street, Public
A Public Street is a paved vehicular way constructed or intended to be constructed within the boundaries
of a dedicated and accepted public Right-of-way.
2.3-115 Street, Subcollector
A Subcollector Street is a street which primarily serves to connect Local Streets with Collector Streets. A
Subcollector Street typically serves more than 200 Lots, but less than 500 Lots.
2.3-116 Street Name Sign
A Street Name Sign is a sign that identifies only the applicable Street name, including all prefixes and
suffixes, and which may include a logo of the community.
2.3-117 Subdivider
A Subdivider is the individual(s) or entity subdividing land.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 26
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-118 Subdivision
A Subdivision is the division of a Parcel of land into two or more Lots or Parcels for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, or if a new Street is involved, any
division of a Parcel of land; providing that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new
Street shall not be deemed a Subdivision. The term includes ReSubdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of Subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of
land into Parcels of less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division of the same land
shall be deemed a Subdivision within the meaning of these regulations. See Figure 2.3-T.
Figure 2.3-T: Illustration of the development spectrum of Subdivisions
2.3-119 Subdivision, Major
A Major Subdivision is a proposed Subdivision of land that contains public infrastructure Improvements
or the construction of a public or Private Street. See Figure 2.3-U.
Figure 2.3-U: Illustrative example of a Major Subdivision
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 27
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-120 Subdivision, Minor
A Minor Subdivision is a proposed Subdivision of land that does not contain public infrastructure
Improvements. See Figure 2.3-V.
Figure 2.3-V: Illustrative example of a Minor Subdivision
2.3-121 Subgrade
The Subgrade is the layer of soil or soil base that pavement or an improvement is constructed upon.
2.3-122 Surety
See “Guarantee” (Subsection 2.3-48: Guarantee).
2.3-123 Surveyor
A Surveyor is a registered professional Surveyor in good standing with the Kentucky State Board of
Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
2.3-124 Tract
A tract is a Parcel of land identified by letter or number, the boundaries of which are shown on a recorded
Plat. See also “Lot” (Subsection 2.3-64: Lot).
2.3-125 Traffic Control
Traffic Control shall mean signs or devices that regulate traffic movement.
2.3-126 Traffic Impact Study (TIS)
A traffic impact study is a study analyzing existing and anticipated Street conditions to determine traffic
impacts associated with potential development. See Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
2.3-127 Treelawn
A planting strip typically between the Sidewalk and the edge of the Street.
2.3-128 Watercourse
A permanent channel designed to carry concentrated stormwater flows without causing erosion.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 28
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-129 Yard
A Yard is a space on the same Lot or Parcel with the main building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed
by structures, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. See Figure 2.3-W, Figure 2.3-X, Figure
2.3-Z, and Figure 2.3-Y.
Figure 2.3-W: Illustration of yard areas (hatched area) on a typical Lot
2.3-130 Yard, Front
A Front Yard is an area between the front building line and the Front Lot Line, as defined herein,
extending from Side Lot Line to Side Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-X.
Figure 2.3-X: Illustration of a front yard (hatched area)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 29
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-131 Yard, Rear
A Rear Yard is an area between the rear building line and the Front Lot Line, as defined herein,
extending from Side Lot Line to Side Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-Y.
Figure 2.3-Y: Illustration of a rear yard (hatched area)
2.3-132 Yard, Side
A Side Yard is an area between any building and the Side Lot Line, as defined herein, extending from the
front to the Rear Yard or on through Lots or building sites from one Front Lot Line to the other Front Lot
Line. See Figure 2.3-Z.
Figure 2.3-Z: Illustration of side yards (hatched areas)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 30
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.1: Purpose
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.1: Purpose
3.1-1 This article fulfills the administration requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. It shall be the responsibility of Staff to administer these regulations, including performance of
all inspections on behalf of the Kenton County Planning Commission as provided for in these
regulations.
3.1-2 This article also fulfills the procedural requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273
through 100.292. By establishing these procedures, it assures a necessary component of harmonious,
progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development. Furthermore, these procedures promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this
article:
(A) Assures that land is divided according to policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan;
(B) Promotes the coordination of existing and proposed Streets, utilities, and community facilities;
(C) Assures each Plat conforms to the principles, design standards, and construction standards set forth
in these regulations; and
(D) Provides methods for making changes to recorded Plats and assures the changes conform to the
purposes and requirements of these regulations.
Section 3.2: Review and Decision-Making Bodies
3.2-1 Authority of the Planning Commission
Unless otherwise modified herein, the authority and duties of the Kenton County Planning Commission
as it relates to these Subdivision regulations shall be as established in KRS 100.133 through 100.182 and
KRS 100.273 through KRS 100.292.
3.2-2 Delegation of Responsibilities to Staff
Unless otherwise specified, the Planning Commission authorizes staff to administer these regulations
pursuant to KRS 100.281(1). This authorization shall include, but not be limited to, the following
responsibilities:
(A) To interpret these regulations, including the ability to determine appropriate review processes, and
the applicability and substance of design standards;
(B) To review, process, and make decisions on all Plats and Improvement Plans;
(C) To inspect all work required by these regulations;
(D) To be in receipt of and to distribute fees collected as a result of these regulations;
(E) To distribute Plats and plans to various governmental bodies for review; and
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 31
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(F) To assure compliance with these regulations that shall include the authority to:
(1) Notify any person(s) responsible for violating these regulations;
(2) Seek injunctions; and
(3) Institute any remedies permitted under KRS 100.
Authority 3.2-3 and Duty of Inspectors
Inspectors shall be members of Staff who are authorized to inspect all work performed and all materials
furnished in the following manner:
(A) Inspectors shall not revoke, alter, or waive any requirements of the approved plans, but call to the
attention of the Contractor and/or Project Engineer any failure of the work or materials to conform
to the approved plans and/or these Subdivision regulations.
(B) Any work determined by the Inspectors not to conform to the requirements of the approved plans
and/or these Subdivision regulations shall be suspended and such construction brought into
conformance with the approved plans and/or these Subdivision regulations.
(C) The Inspector’s authority includes the right to order items removed and replaced and/or additional
testing performed when work does not comply with the approved plans and/or these Subdivision
regulations, or when work was performed without the required notification or inspection.
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
The requirements of this section shall apply to all Subdivisions and Applications subject to review under these
regulations, unless otherwise stated.
3.3-1 Authority to File Applications
The person having legal authority to take action in accordance with the approval sought shall file an
Application for any review in accordance with these regulations. The person having legal authority shall
be the record owner or the duly Authorized Agent of the record owner and may be required to provide
proof of such authority at the time of application.
3.3-2 Application Contents
(A) Submittal Requirements
(1) Applications required under these regulations shall be submitted in a form and in such
numbers as established by these regulations. A list of the requirements shall be made
available to the public.
(2) The Applicant shall attest to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented
with the Application.
(B) Submission of Fees
(1) Applications shall be accompanied by a processing fee as established in the Planning
Commission’s by-laws.
(2) The Subdivider shall pay all fees due at the time of submittal.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 32
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(3) Processing fees are not refundable except where the Applicant withdraws the Application
prior to a complete review by Staff. If the Applicant requests the withdrawal of an
Application (in writing), Staff shall determine the amount of the submittal fee used for
review based on an hourly fee and shall refund any amount not already used for Staff review.
(C) Complete Application Submittal Determination
(1) Staff shall only initiate the review and processing of Applications submitted under this article
if such Application submittal is determined to be complete.
(2) Staff shall make a determination of Application submittal completeness within five business
days of the Application filing.
(3) If the Application submittal is determined to be complete, the Application shall then be
processed according to the procedures set forth in these regulations.
(4) If an Application submittal is determined to be incomplete, Staff shall provide notice to the
Applicant along with an explanation of the Application submittal’s deficiencies. No further
processing of an incomplete Application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
(5) If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied by an Applicant on an
Application, that Application shall be deemed incomplete.
3.3-3 Digital Submission Policy
(A) Purpose of the Digital Submission Policy
The purpose of this policy is to describe the content, format, and standards required for the digital
submission of Subdivision Plats and development plans.
(B) Applicability
All Preliminary Plats, Improvement Drawings, Final Plats, and Record Drawings that were
produced digitally shall be submitted digitally in accordance with this subsection.
(C) Minimum Required Content
All information submitted shall be at an accurate scale. The minimum information that shall be
submitted for each Plat or drawing shall include:
(1) Preliminary Plats
a) Exterior boundary lines of the property;
b) Proposed Lot Lines;
c) Proposed Street centerlines and rights-of-way;
d) A north arrow; and
e) All required annotations.
(2) Improvement Drawings
a) Exterior boundary lines of the property;
b) Proposed Lot Lines;
c) Proposed Street centerlines and rights-of-way;
d) Proposed edges of pavement;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 33
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
e) Proposed Sidewalks;
f) Proposed storm and sanitary sewers;
g) The proposed water system (e.g., water lines, hydrants, valves);
h) Existing utilities & Sidewalks; and
i) All required annotations.
(3) Final Plats
Digital files for a Final Plat shall provide a complete submission of all information outlined
in Subsection 3.6-6(E): Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats.
(4) Record Drawings
a) Platted property lines;
b) Lot numbers;
c) Right-of-way lines;
d) Easement lines;
e) As-built information of storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water system components
(e.g., hydrants and valves).
(D) Accepted File Formats for Digital Submissions
Files will be accepted and implemented into the Planning and Development Services (PDS)
Geographic Information System (GIS) using the following formats:
(1) Microstation drawings as stored in a design format with a .DGN extension generated by
Microstation up to release V8 2004.
(2) AutoCad drawings as stored in a proprietary drawing file format with the .DWG extension.
Files will be accepted generated by AutoCad release 12 and higher.
(3) ArcGIS Software that produces a shape file (.shp) or geodatabase (.mdb).
(E) Accepted Standards and Data Integrity Requirements
(1) A layer system should be utilized. Each unique feature should have its own unique layer as
illustrated in Figure 3.3-A.
(2) Data accuracy standards shall conform to the requirements of the official hard copy and 201
KAR 18.150 of the Standards of Practice for Professional Land Surveyors.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 34
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
Figure 3.3-A: Example illustration of layers properties for digital submissions
(F) Tie to Horizontal Control
The following standards apply to all digitally submitted Plats and drawings:
(1) The boundary of the submitted plan shall be tied into the NAD 1983 Kentucky SPCS North
FIPS 1601;
(2) A reference shall be made as to which monuments were used for control; and
(3) Upon review with the Applicant’s Surveyor/Engineer, Staff may grant a modification or
waiver to the above requirements providing the Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed development does not lie within one mile of a horizontal control monument
established in the Northern Kentucky Control Network. The one mile shall be measured
along existing Street centerlines to the nearest available monument.
(G) Media Requirements
(1) Digital submissions will be accepted using the following media and methods:
a) A readable compact disc (CD-R);
b) Email of file provided that file size does not exceed eight megabytes;
c) Iomega or WinZip files; or
d) Publication to a FTP site provided by PDS.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 35
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(2) All media submitted will provide labels or an attached transcript with the information as
illustrated the example provided in Table 3.3-1.
TABLE 3.3-1:LABEL INFORMATION FOR DIGITAL SUBMISSIONS
REQUIRED INFORMATION EXAMPLE
Project or Subdivision Name Sunny Acres
File Name sunnyacres.dwg
Date June 26, 2002
Company Name Bailey & Associates, Inc.
PLS/PE Joe Smith
Registration No. PLS 53405
Format DWG
(H) Availability of Information
Digitally submitted information shall not be available to the general public in the same digital
format in which it was delivered. The governing documentation will be in a hard copy format.
(I) Adjustments to Requirements
PDS reserves the right to waive or adjust requirements specified herein based on the continued
maintenance of the Kenton County GIS.
Examination and Copying of 3.3-4 Application and Other Document
Documents and/or records may be inspected and/or copied as provided for by state law.
3.3-5 Computation of Time
(A) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these regulations, the date of the
Application, act, decision, or event, from which the designated period of time begins shall not be
included. The last date of the period of time to be computed shall be included, unless it is a
Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which case the period runs until the end of the next day
which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday as observed by the Staff’s offices where the
offices are closed for the entire day.
(B) When the offices are closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day of the
period of time, then such Application, act, decision, or event may be performed on the next
succeeding days which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday observed by Staff in which
the Staff’s offices are closed for the entire day.
3.3-6 Subdivider and/or Contractor Construction Responsibilities
(A) The Subdivider and/or Contractor shall have a superintendent acting as the agent for the project
that shall have available at all times, a copy of all approved plans and specifications.
(B) The Subdivider’s and/or Contractor's superintendent shall be capable of reading and thoroughly
understanding the plans and specifications and shall always be available regardless of the amount
of work sublet.
(C) The name and contact information of the Subdivider’s and/or Contractor’s superintendent shall be
submitted to Staff prior to the beginning of any site work.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 36
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements
(D) The Contractor shall notify Staff and/or the Inspectors at least 24 hours prior to the time when the
work is to begin on each phase of construction including earthwork, utilities, Street paving,
Sidewalk, and all applicable testing.
3.3-7 Final Clean Up of Site
The Subdivider and/or Contractor shall remove all debris or excess materials in connection with the
completed work within the proposed street Right-of-way, prior to Final Plat approval.
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements
3.4-1 General Provisions
(A) A Subdivider may execute and file a written Guarantee with the Planning Commission in lieu of
actual installation or completion of the required public Improvements or Private Street construction
when requesting approval of a Final Plat.
(B) The amount of the Guarantee shall be based on a cost estimate provided by the Project Engineer or
Developer, approved by Staff, for the cost to complete the public Improvements contained on the
section(s) of Final Plat plus a 10 percent contingency fee.
(1) Where applicable, engineering, plan review, and construction review fees, etc., shall be
required to be a part of the cost estimate.
(2) After a period of two years from the date of submittal, Staff shall require that a revised
estimate and bond be submitted by the Developer or guarantor that reflects updated unit
prices if the unit prices have increased.
(C) Unit prices used in the cost estimate shall be based on R.S. Means Construction Cost Data, latest
edition.
(D) Guarantees shall be made payable to the Planning Commission and be acceptable to Staff and the
Planning Commission's legal counsel.
(E) Incomplete Improvements that Staff determines constitutes a safety hazard, is a maintenance issue,
or is necessary for the effective functioning of the infrastructure or Improvements, shall be required
to be completed prior to the approval of a Final Plat.
(F) The Guarantee shall have no expiration date and contain the condition that should the Subdivider
fail to complete all Guaranteed Improvements within 24 calendar months from the date of Final
Plat approval, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to claim the proceeds from the
Guarantee and use them to pay for the completion of all the Guaranteed Improvements.
(G) Should the Subdivider fail to complete the Guaranteed Improvements prior to 24 calendar months
from the date of Final Plat approval, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to claim the
proceeds from the Guarantee and use them to pay for the completion all of the Guaranteed
Improvements.
(H) Written verification shall be provided to the Subdivider by Staff when Guaranteed Improvements
have been completed in accord with the Subdivision regulations. Such written verification shall
constitute a release of any remaining Guarantee.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 37
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
3.4-2 Types of Guarantees
(A) A Guarantee shall be an assurance of faithful performance executed by the Subdivider for all
required uncompleted public Improvements and shall be in one of the following forms:
(1) Cash, check, cashier’s check, or money order;
(2) A Subdivision bond secured from an insurance company;
(3) An irrevocable standby letter of credit from a financial institution; or
(4) A certificate of deposit from a financial institution.
(B) Final Plats will not be released until checks, excluding cashier’s checks, have cleared the financial
institution.
(C) All Guarantees shall comply with the form and content contained in Section 3.4: Guarantees for
Improvements of these regulations.
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
3.5-1 Minor Subdivision Applicability
(A) In order to be subject to the Minor Subdivision review process, the proposed Subdivision of land
shall:
(1) Be located along an existing Public Street or Roadway accepted for maintenance by the
applicable Legislative Body if the proposed Lots will be used for building purposes;
(2) Not involve the creation of a new Street or the widening or extension of a public or Private
Street; and
(3) Contain no proposed public utility Improvements.
(B) The Minor Subdivision process may also be used for the attachment of
land to an adjacent Parcel or consolidation of two Lots.
3.5-2 Review Process for Minor Subdivisions
Minor Subdivisions shall require the approval of an Identification Plat or a
Final Plat. The review process for an Identification Plat is outlined in this
subsection. The review process for a Final Plat is found in Subsection 3.6-6:
Final Plat Review and Recordation.
(A) Step 1 – Application
The Identification Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements
of this section shall be submitted for review at the Planning Commission
offices.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Identification Plat and Application and
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Identification
Plats within 10 business days from the date the Plat and
Application is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-
2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this
Review Process for
Minor Subdivisions
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 38
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be made in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) An Applicant may appeal Staff’s decision in accordance with Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff
Actions.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved Identification Plats shall be forwarded by Staff to the Kenton County Clerk for
recordation. Such forwarding of the approved Identification Plat shall not result in the
recordation of the Plat.
(2) Recordation shall not occur until the Applicant, or the Applicant’s representative, formally
requests such recordation at the offices of the Kenton County Clerk. Approved Identification
Plats remain valid and available for recordation for two years from the date of Staff’s
approval.
(3) Approved Identification Plats not recorded within two years from the date of Staff’s approval
must be resubmitted for review and approval. Resubmitted Identification Plats shall require
the submittal of all new information and fees as required by these regulations
(4) Approved Identification Plats must be recorded before the property can be transferred.
Technical Requirements f 3.5-3 or Identification Plats
An Identification Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201 Kentucky
Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and:
(A) Drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 200 feet or greater;
(B) Contain a prepared date and signature from the Surveyor dated to within 90 days from the date of
submittal; and
(C) Submitted on two sets of paper that is no larger than 8.5 by 14 inches in size.
3.5-4 Additional Content Requirements for Identification Plats
An Identification Plat submitted for approval shall conform to the applicable zoning ordinance and shall
contain the following information, as applicable.
(A) A Right-of-way parcel measured from the centerline of the abutting Street indicating intent to
dedicate one half of the Right-of-way required for a new Street of the same classification. This
shall be accompanied by the following signed and notarized certificate of the owner(s) indicating
dedication of the required Right-of-way (See Figure 3.5-A and Figure 3.5-B.):
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 39
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat, dedicate the Right-ofway
as shown on the plat herein to public use and further certify that
the title to the property shown herein is part or all of the same
property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and recorded in Deed
Book______, Page _______ of the ____________ County records at
_____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature _____________ Date _____________
Figure 3.5-A: Dedication Certificate
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
County of ____________________
State of _____________________
I,__________________, a notary public in and for said county and
state, do certify that the foregoing instrument was acknowledged
before me this ____ Day of ___________, 200___By (Name of
Signer) , (Title) , (Company Name) .
Signed: __________________________
Notary Public State of ______________
My Commission Expires: ____________
Figure 3.5-B: Notary Acknowledgment
(B) Subdivisions of land that do not meet the minimum requirements for a buildable Lot shall contain
the following statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-C):
Subject parcel is a non-buildable parcel by itself and is approved for
attachment to adjacent land. This approval does not constitute a
guarantee that the resulting parcel complies with any other regulatory
agency’s requirements.
Figure 3.5-C: Non-Buildable Lot Statement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 40
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(C) Subdivisions of land within previously approved Preliminary Plats or Stage I Development Plans
shall contain the following statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-D):
Any development within or further Subdivision of the subject tract
shall comply with the previously approved preliminary plat (and/or
stage I development plan) on file at the Planning Commission
offices.
Figure 3.5-D: Previously Approved Preliminary or Stage I Plan Statement
(D) Sufficient information shall be included to locate the Parcel being subdivided in relation to
previously subdivided Parcels, as well as to their location within the original tract of land.
(E) The approval certificate illustrated in Figure 3.5-E.
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
Approved for attachment to deed and conveyance purposes by the
Kenton County Planning Commission. This approval does not
constitute a guarantee that the resulting parcel(s) complies with
any other regulatory agency’s requirements.
this ________day of _____________________, 20___.
By: _____________________________
_____________________________
Chair, Kenton County Planning Commission
Figure 3.5-E: Approval certificate for Identification Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 41
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(F) A Surveyor’s Certificate that indicates the following (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-F):
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the survey depicted by this plat was done by
persons under my direct supervision by the method of random
traverse with sideshots. The unadjusted precision ratio of the
traverse was 1:_______ and the directions and distances shown on
the plat are based on a traverse that (was/was not) adjusted. The
reference meridian basis shown hereon is
from_________________________. This survey is a
(Rural/Urban) Survey and the accuracy and precision of said
survey meets all the specifications of this class and complies with
201 KAR 18:150. )
Signature____________________PLS
#________Date___________
Figure 3.5-F: Surveyor’s Certificate
(G) An Owners Certificate that indicates the following (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-G):
OWNERS CERTIFICATE
We the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat and consent and
accept all easements and matters shown heron and further certify
that the title to the property shown hereon is part or all of the same
property conveyed to us by deed dated__________and recorded in
Deed Book________, Page_________of the ___________County
records at ______________KY.
Owners
Signature__________________________Date___________
Figure 3.5-G: Owners Certificate
(H) Subdivisions which will utilize on-site sewage disposal systems shall contain the following
statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-H):
Plat approval for building development and/or alteration of existing on-site systems on
each lot is contingent upon the issuance of a sewage construction permit and inspection
by the local and/or state health board or district.
Figure 3.5-H: On-Site Sewage Disposal Statement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 42
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(I) Plats in which no Subdivision of land is taking place and a plat is being requested for attachment to
a deed to clear up title confusion or otherwise shall contain the following statement (as illustrated
in Figure 3.5-I):
Survey plat represents all of the property conveyed
to_________________as recorded in O.R. C-xx, pg. xx. No new
subdivision of the property is shown. Plat approval indicates the
survey meets the requirements of 201 KAR 18:150 only.
Figure 3.5-I: Attachment or Title Confusion Statement
(J) All Easements that are to be established on the plat shall indicate the grantor of the Easement, the
recipient of the Easement and the purpose of the Easement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 43
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
3.6-1 Major Subdivision Applicability
Any Subdivision that does not qualify as a Minor Subdivision
(See Subsection 3.5-1: Minor Subdivision Applicability.) or a
Condominium Property Regime Plat (See Subsection 3.7-1:
Condominium Property Regime Plat Applicability.) shall be
subject to the Major Subdivision review process outlined in
this section.
3.6-2 Summary of Overall Major Subdivision Process
Major Subdivisions are reviewed in a four-step process that
includes the following steps that are further defined in the next
subsections:
(A) Preliminary Plat Review
(B) Grading Plan Review
(C) Improvement Drawings/Plan Review
(D) Final Plat Review and Recordation
3.6-3 Preliminary Plat Review
(A) Step 1 - Pre-application Meeting
(1) Attendance at a pre-application meeting(s)
between Staff and the Applicant is required prior
to submission of an Application for Major
Subdivision review. The purpose of this meeting
is to:
a) Acquaint the Applicant with the standards
and requirements of these regulations;
b) Review with the Applicant the required
procedures and Application requirements;
and
c) Allow Staff and other regulatory authorities
to identify problematic components of the
project and to suggest improvements that
will speed the approval process and avoid
future costly plan revisions.
i) The Applicant and/or their
representatives and their invitees,
Staff, regulatory agencies and public
utility agencies shall be permitted to
attend pre-application meetings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 44
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(2) The following provisions apply to required pre-application meetings:
a) Pre-application meetings are held weekly and do not require a formal Application or
payment of any fee.
b) Pre-application meetings may be scheduled with Staff at least 24 hours in advance of
the next regularly scheduled meeting.
c) Conceptual layouts of the proposed Subdivision (which are not required to be prepared
by design professionals) are encouraged. These layouts should include:
i) The proposed site;
ii) The proposed use;
iii) The proposed access; and
iv) The proposed density.
d) Discussion during pre-application meetings should focus on:
i) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
ii) Improvements needed for new and/or existing infrastructure (water, sewer,
traffic, Watercourse disturbance, etc.);
iii) Storm water management and tree canopy preservation;
iv) Spatial elements such as Street and Lot layout;
v) Connectivity to adjacent properties;
vi) Open space and recreation areas including maintenance and dedication options;
and
vii) Other issues that will facilitate design and development of a better Subdivision
such as issues of hillside disturbance and grading.
(3) Pre-applications are non-binding on Staff or the applicable Legislative Body and should not
be construed to be an approval of any type.
(B) Step 2 – Application
(1) The Preliminary Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements of this section shall
be submitted for review.
(2) Preliminary Plats may be submitted at any time following the required pre-application
meeting.
(3) Preliminary Plat submissions shall be forwarded to applicable regulatory authorities with a
request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(C) Step 3 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Preliminary Plat and Application and approve, conditionally approve,
or disapprove the Plat within 15 business days from the date the Plat and Application is
determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal
Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be made in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) Following Preliminary Plat approval, Applicants may proceed to grading plan and
Improvement Drawings review or may submit a Final Plat, as applicable.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 45
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(5) Approved Preliminary Plats remain valid for two years from the date of Staff’s approval.
(6) If public Street or utility Improvements are involved, the approval of each phase of
Improvement Drawings extends the Preliminary Plat approval an additional two years from
the date of the approval of Improvement Drawings.
(7) Approved Preliminary Plats shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(8) If public Street or utility Improvements are not involved, the approval of each section of a
Final Plat extends the Preliminary Plat approval an additional two years from the date of
Final Plat approval.
(9) An Applicant may extend Preliminary Plat approval for two years upon written request if
Staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the approved Preliminary Plat
have not occurred. This two year extension may be granted by Staff on no more than one
occasion.
(D) Technical Requirements for Preliminary Plats
A Preliminary Plat submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater and submitted in two formats:
(1) On paper no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches in size; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the Preliminary Plat was digitally generated.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Preliminary Plats
A Preliminary Plat submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The name and address of the Owner / Developer, date, north arrow, and an accurate graphic
and written scale;
(3) The name and address of the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the design of the
Preliminary Plat along with that professional’s stamp and signature. Where a Subdivision
proposal involves public infrastructure Improvements, the Preliminary Plat shall be prepared
by an Engineer;
(4) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area;
(5) The original parent tract deed book and page, group number, and remaining acreage;
(6) All proposed uses including the type of housing (e.g., single-family attached or detached,
townhouses, duplexes, etc.) and any public dedication or reservation of land;
(7) The outline of any existing buildings, Access Drives, or other Improvements and an
indication as to whether these are to be retained;
(8) The acreage of land to be subdivided, the total number of Lots, the numbering of each Lot,
and if applicable the approximate number of acres in open space or other public uses;
(9) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet to reflect the current topography of
the proposed Subdivision with elevations based on mean sea level (USGS data);
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 46
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(10) All landscaped areas within public rights-of-way along with provisions for their
maintenance. Drainage facilities shall be provided for landscape islands that contain
irrigation systems.
(11) The following regarding land within 100 feet of the Subdivision boundary:
a) Existing buildings;
b) Visible cemeteries;
c) Known historical landmarks or features;
d) Railroads;
e) Bridges;
f) All private/public utility facilities and Easements;
g) Water courses;
h) The names and deed book and page numbers for all adjoining property owners;
i) The numbering of all adjoining sections and Lots where the land has been subdivided;
and
j) The applicable zoning.
(12) A statement indicating the area of the smallest Lot in the Subdivision;
(13) A statement indicating the minimum Lot Width at the building Setback line;
(14) The layout of the following existing and proposed public/private utilities as well as a notation
as to whether they will be installed underground or overhead:
a) Storm and sanitary sewer lines;
b) Stormwater runoff control facilities;
c) Water lines;
d) Gas lines;
e) Telephone lines;
f) Electric lines; and
g) Cable service.
(15) Locations and widths of proposed Streets as well as a notation as to whether they are to be
public or private;
(16) The approximate boundaries of the 100-year Flood Plain based on National Flood Insurance
Program maps and the approximate boundaries of the 500-year Flood Plain if available;
(17) Known subsurface conditions that are not typical or which may cause problems (e.g. problem
soils, geological formations, wells, known mineral deposits, etc.); and
(18) The need for and scope of a Traffic Impact Study shall be determined by the traffic impact
study regulations contained in Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
(F) Revisions to Approved Preliminary Plats
An Applicant may find it necessary to make changes to the arrangement, size, number, or location
of individual Lots, Streets, or utilities after a Preliminary Plat has been approved. These changes
can be determined to be major or minor in nature by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 47
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(1) Changes that are minor in nature include those that:
a) Do not increase overall density more than 10 percent;
b) Do not significantly alter vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns;
c) Do not decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas more
than 10 percent;
d) Require submission of a revised Preliminary Plat and/or Improvement Drawings;
and/or
e) Can be processed administratively by Staff.
(2) Changes that are major in nature include those that:
a) Increase the overall density more than 10 percent;
b) Will significantly alter vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns;
c) Decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas more than 10
percent;
d) Will require a pre-application meeting and submission of a revised Preliminary Plat
and/or Improvement Drawings including Application and fees; and/or
e) Must be processed in accordance with Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions.
3.6-4 Grading Plan Review
(A) Step 1 - Application
(1) Grading plans may only be submitted after approval of a Preliminary Plat.
(2) Grading plan submissions shall be forwarded to the applicable Legislative Body with a
request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(3) Grading plan submissions may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g.,
public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order
to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the grading plan submission and approve, disapprove, or require revision
to the grading plan in writing within 15 business days from the date the plan submittal is
determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal
Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) Grading plans shall be generally consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat.
(5) Grading plans shall be approved by Staff prior to the commencement of any earthwork
operations and/or storm sewer installation. Failure to comply shall be considered a violation
of these regulations.
(6) Approved grading plans remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 48
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(7) The approval of each phase of an improvement drawing extends the grading plan approval an
additional year from the date of the improvement plan approval.
(8) Approved grading plans shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(9) An Applicant may extend the approval of the grading plan for two years upon written request
if staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the approved Preliminary Plat
have not occurred. This two year extension may be granted by staff on no more than one
occasion.
(C) Technical Requirements for Grading Plans
A grading plan submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or
greater and submitted in three sets on paper no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size unless another
scale is approved by Staff.
(D) Additional Content Requirements for Grading Plans
A grading plan submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The names and addresses of owner and Developer of the Subdivision and the Kentucky
Registered Professional Engineer responsible for the design of all Improvements. The plan
shall be certified with the seal and signature of the Engineer;
(3) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area, and the boundaries of the phase or phases under review relative to the entire
Subdivision;
(4) An accurate graphic and written scale shall be on each applicable sheet of the plan;
(5) The date shall be on the cover or first sheet of the plan, and a north arrow shall be on all
applicable sheets of the plan;
(6) The boundary of the Subdivision or section of Subdivision under review shall be indicated by
a heavy, solid line on one sheet of the plan at a standard scale to show the location of section
under review with other sections of the Subdivision. All Subdivision boundary lines shall be
labeled with the bearing and distance.
(7) The location and width of the following existing features:
a) Streets and/or Street Right-of-ways including Street names and classification of the
Street;
b) Railroads;
c) Public and private utility rights-of-way or Easements (including Drainage Easements);
d) Water courses (e.g., creeks, rivers, swales, Drainage ditches, etc.);
e) Public parks and open spaces;
f) Buildings (labeled "to remain" or "to be removed");
g) Legislative boundaries, County and state lines; and
h) Cemeteries and other historical landmarks or features.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 49
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(8) The location and sizes of all existing utility facilities (public and private) within or adjacent
to the Subdivision or development area;
(9) The location and identification of all existing zoning districts within or adjoining the
Subdivision or project area;
(10) A general location of any proposed Streets and detailed plans of any storm sewer to be
installed at the time of grading;
(11) Profiles of all proposed storm sewer including percent grade, pipe diameters, material of
pipe, pipe lengths, and invert elevations;
(12) Design calculations for all Drainage facilities including stormwater runoff control facilities,
sediment basins, storm water pipelines, and Drainage channels. These calculations shall be
provided by a Kentucky Registered Professional Engineer;
(13) Sight Distance plan views and profiles for both exiting and approaching vehicles;
(14) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet. Such contours shall be clearly
marked with elevation based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S. Data) and location and description
of the benchmark used;
(15) Proposed finished contours with intervals of not more than two feet;
(16) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities shall be shown on the plan, with
detail drawings of each type of facility being used;
(17) The approximate boundary of all areas that are to be left undisturbed;
(18) For Subdivisions planned with individual on-site sewage disposal systems, it is
recommended that the Applicant contact local and state health officials regarding the permit
process and preliminary soil testing.
Improvement 3.6-5 Drawing Review
(A) Step 1 - Application
(1) Improvement Drawings may only be submitted after approval of a Preliminary Plat (Grading
Plan can be part of an Improvement Plan).
(2) Improvement drawing submissions shall be forwarded to the applicable Legislative Body
with a request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(3) Improvement drawing submissions may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g.,
public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order
to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Improvement Drawings and approve, disapprove, or require revisions
to the Improvement Drawings in writing within 15 business days from the date the
Improvement Drawings submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C):
Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement
between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 50
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(4) Improvement Drawings shall be generally consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat.
(5) Improvement Drawings shall be approved by Staff prior to the construction and installation
of any utilities or Streets, or grading of any Parcel. Failure to comply shall be considered a
violation of these regulations.
(C) Effect of Staff’s Decision on Improvement Drawings
(1) Approved Improvement Drawings remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
(2) The approval of each section of a Final Plat extends the improvement drawing approval an
additional two years from the date of the Final Plat approval.
(3) Approved Improvement Drawings shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(4) An Applicant may extend the approval of the improvement drawing for two years upon
written request if Staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the overall
approved Preliminary Plat have not occurred.
a) This two year extension may be granted by staff on no more than one occasion.
(5) Site grading and utility and Street construction may begin, subject to the approval of other
applicable review authorities, following the approval of Improvement Drawings.
(D) Technical Requirements for Improvement Drawings
Improvement Drawings submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
or greater and submitted in two formats:
(1) Three sets on paper no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size unless another scale is approved
prior by staff; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the improvement drawing was digitally generated.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Improvement Drawings
Improvement Drawings submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and
information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The names and addresses of owner and Developer of the Subdivision and the Kentucky
Registered Professional Engineer responsible for the design of all Improvements. The plan
shall be certified with the seal and signature of the Engineer and the Surveyor;
(3) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area, and the boundaries of the phase or phases under review relative to the entire
Subdivision;
(4) An accurate graphic and written scale shall be on each applicable sheet of the plan;
(5) The date shall be on the cover or first sheet of the plan, and a north arrow shall be on all
applicable sheets of the plan;
(6) The boundary of the Subdivision or section of Subdivision under review shall be indicated by
a heavy, solid line on one sheet of the plan at a standard scale to show the location of section
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 51
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
under review with other sections of the Subdivision. All Subdivision boundary lines shall be
labeled with the bearing and distance.
(7) The location and width of the following existing features:
a) Streets and/or Street Right-of-ways including Street names and classification of the
Street;
b) Railroads;
c) Public and private utility rights-of-way or Easements (including Drainage Easements);
d) Water courses (e.g., creeks, rivers, swales, Drainage ditches, etc.);
e) Public parks and open spaces;
f) Buildings (labeled "to remain" or "to be removed");
g) Legislative boundaries, County and state lines; and
h) Cemeteries and other historical landmarks or features.
(8) The location and sizes of all existing utility facilities (public and private) within the
Subdivision or outside the Subdivision that will either impact or be impacted by the
Subdivision;
(9) The location and width of all public or private Sidewalks and Pedestrian Walkways including
ownership and maintenance of private Sidewalks and pathway systems.
(10) The location and identification of all existing zoning districts within or adjoining the
Subdivision or project area;
(11) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet. Such contours shall be clearly
marked with elevation based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S. Data) and location and description
of the benchmark used;
(12) Proposed finished contours with intervals of not more than five feet;
(13) The location, Right-of-way, and pavement width, and name of all proposed Streets and other
public utility Right-of-ways or Easements including the horizontal and vertical alignment of
Streets and typical cross-section details;
a) All landscaped areas within a proposed Public Street Right-of-way shall be shown.
Irrigated landscaped islands require permanent Drainage facilities that shall be shown
including details. Irrigation systems within the Right-of-way shall only be permitted if
written verification of approval from the authority designated by the applicable
legislative body is provided to staff.
b) The striping of Street lanes on Streets with more than two lanes shall be shown.
c) Street stations and points of vertical intersections (PVI's) shall be labeled on the
centerline of proposed Streets and correspond to profiles of said Street.
(14) The location and identification number of all Lots;
(15) The profile of each proposed Street with finish grades including all existing and proposed
underground public utility crossings with catch basins, junction boxes, and manholes and
existing private utility crossings including gas, electricity, and telephone.
a) The horizontal scale shall be the same as the plan scale, and the vertical scale not less
than one inch equal to 10 feet unless approved by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 52
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
b) Stationing shall be labeled and correspond to the plan view.
(16) Sight Distance plan views and profiles for both exiting and approaching vehicles; Sight
Distance plan views and profiles are not required if previously provided with a grading plan;
(17) The location of proposed sanitary, storm water, and water resource systems, including all
relating facilities such as manholes, pump stations, sewerage plants, catch basins, junction
boxes, headwalls, water valves, fire hydrants, stormwater runoff control facilities, etc.
Detailed drawings of all overflow facilities shall be shown and labeled including any
proposed connection to an existing facility;
(18) The location and identification of any Drainage facility (i.e., manmade dams) or natural
feature (i.e., lake or pond) on the site or within 100 feet of the Subdivision or development
boundary which has, or could have a significant impact on Drainage or siltation control;
(19) Profiles of all proposed stormwater and sanitary sewer pipelines, and facilities including
percent grade, pipe diameters, material of pipe, pipe lengths, and invert elevations.
a) Profiles shall show all existing and proposed public utility (e.g., water, storm and
sanitary sewer) crossings, and all existing private utility (e.g., gas, electric, telephone)
crossings.
b) Connections to existing pipelines or facilities shall be shown and labeled.
(20) The names of adjacent Street rights-of-way within 100 feet of the Subdivision boundary and
the names of the property owners of all adjoining properties. If the proposed Subdivision is
an additional section of an existing platted Subdivision, the plan shall show the numbering of
all adjoining sections and Lots;
(21) Lots in the proposed Subdivision that are intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the
Subdivision;
(22) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities with detail drawings of each type
of facility being used;
(23) For Subdivisions planned with individual on-site sewage disposal systems, it is
recommended that the Applicant contact local and state health officials regarding the permit
process and preliminary soil testing.
Final 3.6-6 Plat Review and Recordation
(A) Step 1 – Application
(1) A Final Plat may be filed under one of the following two conditions:
a) Immediately, without prior approvals, if the Subdivision qualifies as a Minor
Subdivision (See Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions.) and the Applicant opts to file a
Final Plat instead of an Identification Plat; or
b) Following the approval of the Improvement Drawings where there will be
infrastructure or other Improvements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 53
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(2) The Final Plat may contain only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the
Applicant proposes to record at the time.
(3) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private utilities,
County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input and
coordinate reviews.
(4) Where there will be infrastructure or other Improvements, the submitted Final Plats shall be
forwarded to Sanitation District No. 1 in order to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review, Field Inspections, and Decision by Staff
(1) Final Plats without Infrastructure Improvements
a) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private
utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input
and coordinate reviews.
b) For all Final Plats that do not include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall review
the Final Plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to the Final Plat within 10
business days from the date the Final Plat submittal is determined to be complete (See
Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time
is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
c) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar Final Plats may be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the Final Plat on a fixed line mylar
along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar Final Plat.
d) Approved mylar Final Plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis and distributed
to the Applicant.
e) Written documentation of the approved Final Plat shall be forwarded to the Applicant,
the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities (e.g., public/private
utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.).
f) Disapproved Final Plats shall be accompanied by written documentation of the reasons
for denial.
(2) Final Plats with Infrastructure Improvements
a) Final Plats with infrastructure Improvements may be submitted after approval of
applicable Improvement Drawings. The Final Plat may contain only that portion of the
approved Preliminary Plat which the Applicant proposed to record at that time.
b) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private
utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input
and coordinate reviews.
c) Staff shall perform a field inspection of Street or other infrastructure Improvements
within five business days (weather permitting) from the date the Plat and Application
is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application
Submittal Determination.), and prior to approval of the Final Plat, unless this time is
extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
i) Incomplete public Improvements shall be completed, or in the case of bondable
public Improvements, guaranteed in lieu of completion in accordance with
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 54
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements. Such Guarantee shall be submitted
prior to Final Plat approval.
ii) Results of the field inspection shall be forwarded to the Applicant's Design
Engineer and Applicant in writing.
d) For all Final Plats that include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall review the
Final Plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to the Final Plat within 12
business days from the date the Final Plat submittal is determined to be complete (See
Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time
is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
e) The Final Plat shall generally conform to the approved Preliminary Plat.
f) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar Final Plats may be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the Final Plat on a fixed line mylar
along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar Final Plat.
g) Approved mylar Final Plats shall be signed by the Chair or other KCPC officer and
distributed to the Applicant.
h) Written documentation of the approved Final Plat shall be forwarded to the Applicant,
the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities (e.g., public/private
utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.).
i) Disapproved Final Plats shall be accompanied by written documentation of the reasons
for denial.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved Final Plats shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s designated
representative for recordation.
(2) Approved Final Plats shall be recorded in the office of the Kenton County Clerk by the
Applicant or the Applicant’s representative before the property can be transferred.
(D) Technical Requirements for Final Plats
A Final Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201 Kentucky
Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and submitted in two formats:
(1) Three sets on paper no larger than 18 by 24 inches in size; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the Final Plat was digitally generated.
(3) Final Plats containing Lots having a minimum Lot Area of 80,000 square feet or greater shall
be drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 200 feet or greater. All other Final
Plats shall be drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 50 feet or greater.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats
A Final Plat submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision, as established by the improvement drawing;
(2) The date, north arrow, and a graphic and written scale;
(3) The area of the Subdivision or section of the Subdivision to the nearest 100th of a foot or
square feet to the nearest one foot;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 55
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(4) The area of each Lot in acres to the nearest 100th of a foot or square feet to the nearest one
foot;
(5) The location and Right-of-way width of all Streets and Easements that are to be dedicated or
reserved for public or private use;
(6) The names of Streets within or adjacent to the Subdivision;
(7) Centerline curve data for the Right-of-way of the Streets and Easements with the data to
include: central angle and radius, arc, length, long chord and tangent distances;
(8) Numbered Lots (corresponding to the approved Improvement Drawings) whose boundaries
are described by bearing and distance for each tangent course, and proper curve data (as
given above) for curve courses;
a) Side Lot Lines that are not radial with curved Street centerlines shall have a reference
tie to the tangent line of that centerline curve.
b) Lots that were subject to an Identification Plat shall be noted with dashed lines and
referenced by deed book and page number.
(9) The location of areas to be dedicated for public or common use, and conservation Easements,
riparian buffers and other areas to be set aside for environmental stewardship;
(10) A statement that describes the ownership and maintenance responsibilities for any public or
common use areas; and
(11) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-A for Plats without public Improvements.
OWNERS CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat and further certify that the title to the property
shown hereon is part or all of the same property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and
recorded in Deed Book______, Page _______ of the ____________ County records at
_____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature ___________________ Date _____________
Figure 3.6-A: Owners Certificate
(F) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-B for Plats with public Improvements.
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat, dedicate the Right-of-way as shown on the plat
herein to public use and further certify that the title to the property shown herein is part or all of
the same property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and recorded in Deed Book______, Page
_______ of the ____________ County records at _____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature ___________________ Date _____________
Figure 3.6-B: Dedication certificate.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 56
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(G) Both the owners certificate (Figure 3.6-A) and the dedication certificate (Figure 3.6-B) shall be
notarized with the acknowledgment illustrated in Figure 3.6-C.
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
County of ____________________
State of ______________________
I,__________________, a notary public in and for said county and state, do
certify that the foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this ____
Day of ___________, 200___By (Name of Signer) , (Title) ,
(Company Name) .
Signed: __________________________
Notary Public State of ______________
My Commission Expires: ____________
Figure 3.6-C: Notary acknowledgement
(H) The approval certificate illustrated in Figure 3.6-D.
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
Approved by the Kenton County Planning Commission. This approval
does not constitute a guarantee that the resulting parcel(s) complies
with any other regulatory agency’s requirements.
this ________day of _____________________, 20___.
By: _____________________________
_________________________________
Chair, Kenton County Planning Commission
Figure 3.6-D: Approval certificate for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 57
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(I) The County Clerk acknowledgment illustrated in Figure 3.6-E.
COUNTY CLERK ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I, ___________________, Clerk of Kenton County Court, do certify
that this plat of (Subdivision Name), (Section) was this day presented
to me at my office and was this day left for record. Whereupon same
has been duly recorded this ______________day of
________________, 20___.
Signed_____________________________
Figure 3.6-E: County clerk acknowledgement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
(J) The Surveyor certificate illustrated in Figure 3.6-F.
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the survey depicted by this plat was done by persons under
my direct supervision by the method of random traverse with sideshots. The
unadjusted precision ration of the traverse was 1:_______ and the directions
and distances shown on the plat are based on a traverse that (was/was not)
adjusted. The reference meridian basis shown hereon is
from_________________________. This survey is a (Rural/Urban) Survey and
the accuracy and precision of said survey meets all the specifications of this
class and complies with 201 KAR 18:150. )
Signature_______________________PLS #_________Date________________
Figure 3.6-F: Surveyor certificate for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
(K) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-G related to sanitary sewer Easements.
SANITARY SEWER EASEMENTS
The utility easements shown and described on this plat are dedicated to the use
and benefit of the named utility. The respective rights, duties and obligations of
the individual lot owner and the respective utility are set forth in separate
recorded document in the Kenton County Clerk’s Office. Terms and conditions
of the document listed below are incorporated by reference:
Sanitary Sewers Sanitation District No. 1 Misc. Book 431, Pg. 110
Figure 3.6-G: Sanitary sewer Easement statement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 58
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(L) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-H for Condominium Property Regime Plats that involve onsite
sewage disposal systems.
"Plat approval for building development and/or alteration of existing systems on
each Lot is contingent upon the issuance of a sewage construction permit and
inspection by the local and/or state health board or district."
Figure 3.6-H: Statement for Plats that involve on-site sewage disposal
(M) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-I for Condominium Property Regime Plats that involve
private, on-site sanitary sewage treatment plants.
"The sanitary sewer lines and the sewage treated at the plant
shall be owned and operated by . The sanitary sewer lines shall
be maintained by and the sewage treatment plant shall be
maintained by ."
Figure 3.6-I: Statement for Plates that involve private, on-site sanitary sewage treatment plants
(N) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-J for Condominium Property Regime Plats that contain
water mains installed on private property that are going to be maintained by the water district.
WATER MAIN EASEMENTS
The Water Main Easement(s) as shown on this plat are subject to the
DECLARATION OF MASTER WATER FACILITY EASEMENT AGREEMENT
as set forth in __________________________of the Kenton County Clerk’s
records
(Document Location) at Kenton County Courthouse, Ky.”
Figure 3.6-J: Water main Easement statement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 59
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
3.7-1 Condominium Property Regime Plat Applicability
(A) This section and review process shall apply to condominium property
regimes that do not include the Subdivision of land into individual Lots.
Condominium property regimes allow a unit within a building to be
individually conveyed and be the subject of ownership and other acts as
if it were solely and entirely independent of the other units in the
building(s) of which they form a part.
(B) In accord with the Horizontal Property Law (KRS 381), whenever an
owner or the co-owners of a building expressly declare through the
recordation of a master deed or lease, a condominium property regime
may be established.
3.7-2 Condominium Property Regime Plat Review and Recordation
(A) Step 1 – Application
(1) Condominium Property Regime Plats without infrastructure
Improvements do not require submittal of a Preliminary Plat.
(2) Condominium Property Regime Plats that include infrastructure
Improvements shall only be submitted after approval of an
improvement drawing.
(3) The Condominium Property Regime Plats may contain only that
portion of the approved plat that the Applicant proposes to record at the time of approval.
(4) The Condominium Property Regime Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements
of this section shall be submitted for review.
(5) Condominium Property Regime Plats and Applications may be forwarded to other regulatory
authorities (e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation
cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input and coordinate reviews. The Condominium Property
Regime Plat shall be forwarded to Sanitation District No. 1 in order to seek input and
coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review, Field Inspections, and Decision by Staff
(1) Condominium Regime Plats without Infrastructure Improvements
a) Submitted condominium regime plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities
(e.g., private utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to
seek input and coordinate reviews.
b) For all condominium regime plats that do not include infrastructure Improvements,
Staff shall review the condominium regime plat and approve, disapprove, or require
revisions to the condominium regime plat within 15 business days from the date the
condominium regime plat submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-
2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
c) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar condominium regime plats may
be produced.
Review Process for
Condominium
Property Regime
Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 60
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the condominium regime plat on a
fixed line mylar along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar condominium regime plat.
d) Approved mylar condominium regime plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis
and distributed to the Applicant.
e) Written documentation of the approved condominium regime plat shall be forwarded
to the Applicant, the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities
(e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet,
etc.).
f) Disapproved condominium regime plats shall be accompanied by written
documentation of the reasons for denial.
(2) Condominium Regime Plats with Infrastructure Improvements
a) Condominium regime plats with infrastructure Improvements may be submitted after
approval of applicable Improvement Drawings. The condominium regime plat may
contain only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the Applicant
proposed to record at that time.
b) Submitted condominium regime plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities
(e.g., private utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to
seek input and coordinate reviews.
c) Staff shall perform a field inspection of Street or other infrastructure Improvements
within 10 business days from the date the Plat and Application is determined to be
complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.),
and prior to approval of the condominium regime plat, unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
i) Incomplete public Improvements shall be completed, or in the case of bondable
public Improvements, guaranteed in lieu of completion in accordance with
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements. Such Guarantee shall be submitted
prior to condominium regime plat approval.
ii) Results of the field inspection shall be forwarded to the Applicant's Design
Engineer in writing.
d) For all condominium regime plats that include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall
review the condominium regime plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to
the condominium regime plat within 12 business days from the date the condominium
regime plat submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C):
Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
e) The condominium regime plat shall generally conform to the approved Preliminary
Plat.
f) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar condominium regime plats may
be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the condominium regime plat on a
fixed line mylar along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar condominium regime plat.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 61
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
g) Approved mylar condominium regime plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis
and distributed to the Applicant.
h) Written documentation of the approved condominium regime plat shall be forwarded
to the Applicant, the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities
(e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet,
etc.).
i) Disapproved condominium regime plats shall be accompanied by written
documentation of the reasons for denial.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved condominium regime plats shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s
designated representative for recordation.
(2) Approved condominium regime plats shall be recorded in the office of the Kenton County
Clerk by the Applicant or the Applicant’s representative before the property can be
transferred.
Technical Requirements for Condominium 3.7-3 Property Regime Plats
A Condominium Property Regime Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201
Kentucky Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and submitted in two formats:
(A) Three sets on paper no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches in size; and
(B) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection 3.3-3:
Digital Submission Policy if the Condominium Property Regime Plat was digitally generated.
3.7-4 Additional Content Requirements for Condominium Property Regime Plats
A Condominium Property Regime Plat submitted for approval shall conform to the applicable zoning
ordinance and shall contain the following information, as applicable.
(A) The proposed name of the Subdivision, as established by the improvement drawing;
(B) The date, north arrow, and an accurate graphic and written scale;
(C) The area of the Subdivision or section of the Subdivision to the nearest 100th of a foot or square
feet to the nearest one foot;
(D) The area of each Lot and/or unit in acres to the nearest 100th of a foot or square feet to the nearest
one foot;
(E) Floor plans of the building or buildings bearing the certification of a registered architect or
Professional Engineer;
(F) The location and Right-of-way width of all Streets and Easements that are to be dedicated or
reserved for public or private use;
(G) The names of Streets within or adjacent to the Subdivision;
(H) The centerline curve data for the Right-of-way of the Streets and Easements with the data to
include central angle and radius, arc, length, long chord, and tangent distances.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 62
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff
(I) Numbered Lots (corresponding to the approved Improvement Drawings) whose boundaries are
described by bearing and distance for each tangent course and proper curve data (as given above)
for curve courses.
(1) Side Lot Lines that are not radial with curved Street centerlines shall have a reference tie to
the tangent line of that centerline curve.
(2) Lots that were subject to an Identification Plat shall be noted with dashed lines and
referenced by deed book and page number.
(J) The location of areas to be dedicated for public or common use, and conservation Easements,
riparian buffers and other areas to be set aside for environmental stewardship.
(K) A statement shall appear on the Final Plat that describes the ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for any public or common use areas.
(L) All of the statements and certificates, as applicable, required for Final Plats and defined in
Subsection 3.6-6(E): Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats.
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff
3.8-1 Staff has been delegated certain discretionary judgment when minor deviations from the approved plans
and/or Subdivision regulations are observed in the field. No minor deviation shall be authorized by Staff
or an Inspector if it is:
(A) In conflict with the intent and purpose of these regulations;
(B) In dispute with generally accepted construction practices or industry standards; or
(C) Detrimental to the public interest.
3.8-2 Where minor deviations from the approved plans and/or Subdivision regulations have been identified,
Staff may require a warranty of up to 12 months for the work in question.
Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations
This section sets forth a procedure by which the Planning Commission may allow for waivers of these regulations.
The purpose is to allow some flexibility in dealing with unique issues that are outlined in Subsection 3.9-2(C)
below.
3.9-1 Step 1 – Application
(A) An Application requesting a waiver, the applicable fee, and any additional requirements of this
section shall be submitted for review.
(B) Waivers to lot size requirement or other regulations controlled by the zoning ordinance shall be
heard through the applicable waiver or variance procedure in the zoning ordinance.
3.9-2 Step 2 – Planning Commission Review and Decision
(A) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purposes of reviewing the requested
waiver.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 63
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions
(B) After the public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove a waiver to these regulations.
(C) The Planning Commission may grant a waiver to these regulations balanced against the public
interest, providing the Planning Commission finds that the waiver will not be detrimental to the
public interest and at least one of the following criteria applies:
(1) That unusual topographical or exceptional physical conditions exist; or
(2) That strict compliance with these regulations would create an extraordinary hardship in the
face of exceptional conditions; or
(3) That compliance with the regulations could cause an unsafe situation; or
(4) That the requested waiver would create a materially safer situation than complying with the
regulations; or
(5) That the requested waiver is not objectionable to the surrounding property or community and
does not materially change the intent of the regulations. If using these criteria as a basis for
waiver, the Applicant shall provide evidence from all adjoining property owners that they
have no objection to the requested waiver. Note that approval from adjoining property
owners is not intended to serve as approval by surrounding property owners or the
community as a whole.
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions
3.10-1 Any Subdivider or Applicant claiming to be aggrieved by any action of Staff may appeal such actions to
the Planning Commission.
3.10-2 Such appeal shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
3.10-3 Staff shall forward any applicable material of record to the Planning Commission.
3.10-4 The Planning Commission shall consider the appealed decision and make a decision to reaffirm or
overturn Staff’s decision.
Section 3.11: Appeals of Planning Commission Actions
3.11-1 Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the Planning Commission
may appeal from the action to the Kenton County Circuit Court. Such appeal shall be taken within 30
consecutive calendar days after the final action of the Planning Commission.
3.11-2 Final action shall not include the Planning Commission's recommendation made to other governmental
bodies.
3.11-3 All final actions which have not been appealed within 30 consecutive calendar days shall not be subject
to judicial review.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 64
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.12: Enforcement
Section 3.12: Enforcement
The following regulations comply with the authority granted to local Planning Commissions by Chapters 100.273
through 100.317 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS).
3.12-1 All Subdivisions of land shall receive final approval from Staff. No person or his agent shall subdivide
any land, before securing the approval from Staff of a Plat designating the areas to be subdivided, and no
Plat of a Subdivision of land within Kenton County shall be recorded by the County Clerk until the Plat
has been approved by Staff, and the approval entered thereon in writing by the Planning Commission
chairman.
3.12-2 No person owning land composing a Subdivision, or his agent, shall transfer or sell or agree to sell any
Lot or Parcel of land located within a Subdivision by reference to, or by exhibition, or by any other use of
a Plat of such Subdivision, before such Plat has received final approval from Staff, been signed by the
Planning Commission chairman, and has been recorded. Any such instrument of transfer, sale, or contract
shall be void and shall not be subject to be recorded, but all rights of such purchaser to damages are
hereby preserved. The description of such Lot or Parcel by metes and bounds in any contract or
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not
exempt the person attempting to transfer from penalties provided or deprive the purchaser of any rights or
remedies he may otherwise have.
3.12-3 No revisions shall be made to any Subdivision Plat after final approval has been given by Staff unless the
Plat is first resubmitted and the revisions are approved by Staff in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
3.12-4 After the applicable Legislative Body or fiscal court has adopted an official map, no board, public officer,
or authority shall accept, layout, improve, or authorize any Improvements to be constructed in any Street,
including rights-of-way, Watercourses, park and playgrounds, public school, or other public building
sites shown on the official map, except as provided for in KRS 100.293 through 100.317.
3.12-5 The Planning Commission shall have the power to apply for an injunction against any type of
Subdivision construction by the Subdivider or the landowner where the Subdivision regulations have
been violated or other remedies permitted under KRS 100.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 65
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. By establishing these Street standards as a factor in the development review process, it assures
a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development. It
contributes to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods where residents can live, work, shop, and play.
Furthermore, it promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the public in Kenton County. To
further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Establishes the adequacy of existing and proposed transportation elements as a factor to be
considered when reviewing proposed Subdivisions;
(B) Sets forth minimum standards for new Streets and the extent to which they shall be provided;
(C) Provides a Street system of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate satisfactory
access to police, firefighting, emergency medical services, snow removal, and maintenance
equipment; and
(D) Ensures an effective traffic circulation system by requiring that new Streets extend into adjoining
areas and that existing Streets interconnect from adjoining areas.
4.1-2 Street Names
The following shall apply to the naming of proposed Streets:
(A) The name of a new Street shall not duplicate existing or platted Street names within the County, or
approximate such names in spelling, sound, or pronunciation.
(B) The use of existing Street names differentiated by alternate prefixes (i.e., "North," "South," etc.), or
suffixes (i.e., "Lane," "Way," etc.) is prohibited.
(C) Street names shall not be objectionable or offensive.
(D) Street names shall be limited to no more than three words including any prefix or suffix, and shall
not contain more than 20 characters including spaces.
(E) Punctuation, such as apostrophes or hyphens, etc., or numerals including fractions, are prohibited.
(F) Streets in direct alignment that cross an intersecting Street should bear the same name.
(G) Street names shall be approved and/or reserved by Staff prior to approval of Improvement
Drawings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 66
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-3 Street Name Signs
The following shall apply to the installation of Street Name Signs:
(A) The Developer shall be responsible for the installation of Street Name Signs in conformance with
standards established by the applicable Legislative Body.
(B) Street Name Signs shall be installed prior to approval of a Final Plat. Temporary Street Name Signs
are permitted during construction until the permanent signs are erected.
4.1-4 Traffic Control Signs and Devices
Traffic Control signs and devices shall be the responsibility of the applicable Legislative Body.
4.1-5 Pavement Signing and Marking
(A) Pavement marking and signing shall be provided on all arterial and collector streets in accordance
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition.
(B) Marking and signing shall include centerline, edgeline, and lane use markings and all necessary
regulatory signing.
4.1-6 Addressing
(A) Addresses shall conform to a uniform County system and be assigned by Staff prior to approval of
an identification or Final Plat.
(B) Addresses shall be shown for each Lot or unit on the Plats prior to recording.
4.1-7 Street Lights
Street lights shall be the responsibility of the applicable Legislative Body.
4.1-8 Public Rights-of-Way
The following shall apply to public rights-of-way:
(A) The minimum public Right-of-way width for Streets shall comply with Table 4.1-1 of these
regulations.
(B) The required Right-of-way widths are based on development type and Functional Classification.
(C) Subdivisions platted along existing Streets shall dedicate additional Right-of-way, if necessary, to
meet the minimum Right-of-way requirements identified in Table 4.1-1. Such dedication shall be
in accord with the following:
(1) The minimum total Right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the proposed Subdivision is
on both sides of an existing Street.
(2) When the Subdivision is located on only one side of an existing Street, one-half (1/2) of the
required Right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the Right-of-way, shall be
dedicated.
(D) Proposed Streets shall be constructed dimensionally within the Right-of-way widths identified in
Table 4.1-1. The pavement shall be located centrally within the Right-of Way width.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 67
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(E) For developments containing only Multi-Family Residential Dwellings, the Right-of-way width
may be less than the minimum required width in Table 4.1-1 provided:
(1) The Right-of-way width is coupled with an ingress/egress and street maintenance easement
that when totaled, equals or exceeds the minimum Right-of-way width indicated in Table
4.1-1; and
(2) That the use of the narrowed Right-of-way width coupled with the ingress/egress and street
maintenance easement is approved by the authority designated by the applicable Legislative
Body in writing.
4.1-9 Pavement Widths
The following shall apply to the pavement width of Streets.
(A) The minimum pavement widths shall comply with Table 4.1-1.
(B) The required pavement widths are based on development type and Functional Classification.
(C) Pavement widths shall be measured from back of Curb to back of Curb. If no Curbs are required,
then pavement width shall include the entire paved surface of the wearing course. See Figure
4.1-A.
(D) Subdivisions located along existing Streets that contain pavement widths less than identified in
Table 4.1-1, may be required by Staff to construct additional pavement to comply with the
minimum widths contained in Table 4.1-1.
Figure 4.1-A: Illustration of pavement width measurements
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 68
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
TABLE 4.1-1: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
PAVEMENT
WIDTH [1]
(FEET)
CURB PARKING SIDEWALK/MULTIUSE
FACILITIES TREELAWN TYPE OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES
MEDIAN
WIDTH
ROW
WIDTH
(FEET)
CROSSSECTION
FIGURE #
RURAL
RESIDENTIAL[3]
Local (Serving under
50 lots) 17 No None No Side Ditches
Only None None 40 Figure 4.1-J
Local (Serving 50 to
199 lots) 20 No None 4 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 50
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots) 20 No None 4 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 60
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots) 22 No None 8 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 60
Arterial 24 No None 10 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-B
SUBURBAN
RESIDENTIAL
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes None 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
25 Yes One Side 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 50
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
35 Yes Both 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 60 Figure 4.1-G
22 Yes None 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes One Side 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 50
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
22 Yes None 10 feet wide [2] 4 feet wide Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-C
30 Yes One Side 10 feet wide [2] 4 feet wide Multi-use path None 60
Arterial 28 Yes None 12 feet wide [2] 10 feet wide Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-D
URBAN
RESIDENTIAL
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 46
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
25 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 43 Figure 4.1-H
30 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 48 Figure 4.1-I
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
30 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 50
44 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 64
Arterial
32 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 52 Figure 4.1-E
46 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 66
TRADITIONAL
NEIGHBORHOOD
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 46
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 69
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
TABLE 4.1-1: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
PAVEMENT
WIDTH [1]
(FEET)
CURB PARKING SIDEWALK/MULTIUSE
FACILITIES TREELAWN TYPE OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES
MEDIAN
WIDTH
ROW
WIDTH
(FEET)
CROSSSECTION
FIGURE #
RESIDENTIAL Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
25 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 43
30 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 48
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
40 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 10 feet wide 60
54 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 10 feet wide 74
Arterial
44 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 12 feet wide 64
58 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 12 feet wide 78 Figure 4.1-F
COMMERCIAL /
INDUSTRIAL
All Classifications 28
6”
Barrier
Curb
Only
None 5 feet wide Optional None None 60
ALL
DEVELOPMENT
TYPES
Access Drives 12 (20) No None None None None None N/A
NOTES:
[1] Total pavement width including amenities such as Medians, Bicycle Facilities and parking
[2] Sidewalk is required along only one side of the Street
[3] Development type determined by lot sizes and widths as indicated in Table 4.1-2; not by geographic area.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 70
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Allowable 4.1-10 Pavement Design
The allowable pavement design shall be permitted in conjunction with the appropriate development type
as identified in Table 4.1-2.
TABLE 4.1-2:ALLOWABLE PAVEMENT DESIGN
DEVELOPMENT TYPE
PAVEMENT DESIGN
TRADITIONAL
NEIGHBORHOOD
DEVELOPMENT
(TND)
URBAN SUBURBAN RURAL
Single-Family
and Two-Family
Residential [1]
Lot Widths equal to or greater
than 200 feet and Lot Sizes
equal to or greater than 2 acres
--- --- P P
Lot Widths 60 feet to 199 feet --- --- P ---
Lot Widths less than 60 feet P P P ---
Multi-Family Residential P [2] --- P ---
Special
Development
Zones
Agricultural Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 200 feet and lot
Sizes are equal to or
greater than 2 acres) [1]
Rural Commercial Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 200 feet and lot
Sizes are equal to or
greater than 2 acres) [1]
Institutional Zone --- --- P ---
Eco-Commerce Park Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 300 feet) [1]
Mixed Use Zone P [2] P [2] P ---
Specific Use
Regulations
Residential Cluster
Development or Planned Unit
Development Zone
P [2] --- P ---
Conservation Subdivisions --- --- --- P
Retirement Communities P P P P
Manufactured Home Parks P P P P
NOTES:
“---” Pavement design not permitted for specified development type.
“P” Stands for “Permitted”
[1] Minimum Lot Width along a Street excluding Flag Lots and Cul-de-sac Lots.
[2] Collector or Arterial Streets only
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 71
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-B: Typical cross-section of a rural development arterial street without parking
Figure 4.1-C: Typical cross-section of a suburban development collector street without parking
Figure 4.1-D: Typical cross-section of a suburban development arterial street without parking
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 72
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-E: Typical cross-section of an urban development arterial street without parking
Figure 4.1-F: Typical cross-section of a traditional neighborhood development arterial street with parking on both
sides of the street
Figure 4.1-G: Typical cross-section of a suburban development subcollector street with parking on both sides of
the street
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 73
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-H: Typical cross-section of an urban development subcollector street with parking on one side of the
street
Figure 4.1-I: Typical cross-section of an urban development subcollector street with parking on both sides of the
street
Figure 4.1-J: Typical cross-section of a rural development local street without parking
4.1-11 Sidewalks
The following shall apply to the installation of Sidewalks.
(A) Sidewalks shall be provided as indicated in Table 4.1-1, except as provided in this subsection.
(B) With the exception of a Rural Type Development where sidewalks may not be required at all,
sidewalks may be provided along one side of new Streets under the following circumstances:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 74
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(1) When residences are proposed only along one side of the entirety of the Street;
(2) When the development contains alternative Pedestrian Walkways (Subject to Subsection 4.1-
12: Alternative Pedestrian Walkways.) that constitute a pedestrian circulation system equal to
or exceeding Sidewalk on both sides of the Street; or
(3) When the Street serves as an entrance to a development and contains no residences or
contains residences along one side of the Street.
(C) Sidewalks shall be provided along existing Streets that abut the limits of a Subdivision shown on a
Preliminary Plat.
(D) Where Sidewalks are present, Curb ramps shall be installed at all Street intersections containing
Curb and gutter in accord with Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings.
(1) Curb ramps shall be required at the intersection of the sidewalk and curb when sidewalk
dead-ends into a t-type or hammerhead type turnaround.
(E) Sidewalks constructed closer than two feet from the edge of Street pavement, or back of Curb,
shall require the use of a barrier Curb along the Street.
(1) Sidewalks shall be permitted closer than two feet from the back of sloped Curb within multifamily
developments only.
(F) Concrete Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. See Figure 4.1-K.
(1) The thickness of concrete Sidewalks shall be increased to five inches when part of a
Driveway. See Figure 4.1-K.
Figure 4.1-K: Illustration of Sidewalk thickness for Sidewalks
(2) In commercial and industrial areas, Sidewalks within the Driveway apron shall have a
minimum thickness equal to the thickness required for the commercial or industrial
Driveway apron.
(G) In the case where Sidewalk Improvements have not been completed, a conditional Certificate of
Occupancy may be given provided it does not exceed six months.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 75
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(H) In the case where Sidewalks have not been installed fronting platted, but vacant Lots, such
Sidewalks shall be installed by the owner of the Lot(s) in question within six months from the date
when 75 percent of the Lots have been issued certificates of occupancy.
Alternative 4.1-12 Pedestrian Walkways
Alternative Pedestrian Walkways may be permitted in developments by choice of the Applicant and/or as
an alternative to Sidewalks identified in Subsection 4.1-11: Sidewalks.
(A) Pedestrian Walkways within the public Right-of-way shall be constructed of Portland cement
concrete.
(1) Multi-use paths (hiker-biker paths) referenced in Table 4.1-1 may be constructed of asphalt.
(B) Pedestrian Walkways located outside of the public Right-of-way that are intended to meet, in an
alternate way, the requirement of Table 4.1-1 may be constructed of asphalt.
(1) Asphalt walkways shall have a minimum width of five feet and a minimum thickness of five
inches consisting of a modified base mixture.
(2) The Subgrade for asphalt walkways shall be proofrolled prior to placement of the Sidewalk.
(3) Walkways constructed outside the public Right-of-way (See Figure 4.1-L.) shall only be
permitted within developments that contain a homeowners’ association with specific
maintenance and Easement agreements for the walk recorded at the County Clerk’s office.
Figure 4.1-L: Illustration of an alternative Pedestrian Walkway
(4) The recording of the maintenance and Easement agreements for the walkways shall occur
concurrently with the first Final Plat containing the walk.
(C) If the requirement for sidewalks in Table 4.1-1 have been met, either through the provision of: a)
Concrete sidewalks within the Right-of-way; b) a combination of Concrete sidewalks within the
Right-of-way and Asphalt sidewalks outside the Right-of-way; or c) Asphalt sidewalks outside the
Right-of-way, then any other sidewalk construction is not regulated in terms of materials used.
(1) Sidewalk construction where materials are not regulated by these regulations is still required
to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 76
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-13 Roadside Swales
The following shall apply to the installation of roadside swales.
(A) Curbs shall be provided along both sides of new Streets except within a Rural Type Development
and as herein provided.
(B) Roadside swales may be provided in the following circumstances:
(1) In developments that allow on-street parking and contain minimum Lot Widths that equal or
exceed 100 feet when used in conjunction with curb and gutter containing cut-outs and
flumes;
(2) Along streets that serve as an entrance to the development and contain no residences and no
parking.
4.1-14 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Curb Ramps
Where Sidewalks along Streets are required, Curb ramps shall comply with the U.S. Department of
Justice’s regulations for the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(A) Curb ramp installation shall prohibit stormwater from flowing onto the ramps.
(B) Curb ramps shall be installed at all new Street intersections in conjunction with construction of the
concrete Curbs and gutters.
(C) Curb ramps shall be required at the intersection of the Sidewalk and curb when Sidewalk dead-ends
into a t-type or hammerhead type turnaround.
4.1-15 Bicycle Facilities
If a Parcel or area is designated as an “Urban/Suburban Focus Area” in the Comprehensive Plan, Bicycle
Facilities shall be required in accordance with Table 4.1-1 of these regulations. See also Figure 4.1-M.
(A) Alternative Bicycle Facilities may be permitted provided they constitute a bicycle circulation
system equal to or exceeding the requirements of Table 4.1-1.
(B) Developments interfering with a bikeway planned by a Legislative Body shall reserve available
land and develop the bikeways as planned. These Improvements may serve as an alternative
bicycle facility to meet the requirements of this subsection.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 77
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-M: Illustration of a bicycle facility network
(C) All Bicycle Facilities shall be developed in accordance with the American Association of State
Highway Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities.
4.1-16 On-Street Parking
The following shall apply to on-Street parking:
(A) On Street parking may be provided as identified in Table 4.1-1 of these regulations.
(B) Lots that abut Streets which prohibit on-Street parking in residential developments shall contain
twice the off-Street parking that is required by the applicable zoning ordinance.
(C) Unless the water main changes to the opposite side of the street mid-street, on-Street parking lanes
shall not be shifted from one side of the Street to the other mid-Street, but can be shifted from
block to block as a traffic calming measure.
(D) Except for Streets that allow parking on both sides of the Street, the on-Street parking lane shall be
located on the opposite side of the Street from fire hydrants. See Figure 4.1-N.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 78
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-N: Illustration of on-Street parking
4.1-17 Off-Street Parking Areas
Off-street Parking Areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
zoning ordinance.
4.1-18 Geometric Design of Streets
The horizontal and vertical alignment of Streets shall be designed in compliance with the guidelines
established by the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHTO) manual “A Policy of the
Geometric Design of Highway and Streets, “(The Green Book) as summarized in Table 4.1-3. The
following issues shall also apply:
(A) When there is a change in the horizontal alignment of a Street along the centerline, a curve with a
minimum radius appropriate to the Design Speed of the Street as defined in Table 4.1-3 shall be
constructed.
(B) A tangent of at least 200 feet for Collector Streets shall be provided between reverse horizontal
curves.
(C) At intersections, the algebraic difference in cross slopes at the crown line of the intersected Street,
shall not exceed six percent. This standard shall apply to the centerline of all through travel lanes
at the intersection. See Figure 4.1-O.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 79
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-O: Illustration of cross slopes at an intersection
(D) The maximum grade of the centerline of the side Streets intersecting with the gutter line of the
through Street shall not exceed four percent for a distance of not less than 75 feet for Local Streets
and 150 feet for collector and arterial streets. See Figure 4.1-P.
Figure 4.1-P: Illustration of the maximum grades permissible along a Street
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 80
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(E) Descending centerline grades approaching the terminus of a Cul-de-sac shall be reduced within a
vertical curve to a maximum of four percent unless determination is made by Staff that a steeper
grade will provide adequate clearance for vehicles entering ascending Driveways. See Figure 4.1-P
and Figure 4.1-Q.
Figure 4.1-Q: Illustration of a descending centerline approaching the terminus of a Cul-de-sac
TABLE 4.1-3:GEOMETRIC DESIGN STANDARDS
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION DESIGN SPEED
HORIZONTAL
VERTICAL
GRADES (%)
CREST SAG
MINIMUM RADIUS
(FEET)
KFACTOR
MINIMUM
KFACTOR
MINIMUM
MAX MIN
Local and
Subcollector 25 100 15 15 12 (8) 1
Collector 35 400 30 35 10 1
Arterial 45 900[1] 61 79 7[1] 1
NOTES:
Numbers in parenthesis indicate values required for commercial/nonresidential uses.
[1] Under proposed standards, the Design Speed on arterial streets is 45 miles per hour.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 81
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Street Connectivity 4.1-19 to Adjoining Areas
The arrangement of Streets in new Subdivisions shall provide for reasonable access to adjoining tracts,
through connections between Streets, logical distribution of traffic patterns, and convenient and efficient
access for emergency vehicles, Street maintenance, school buses, postal delivery, and other essential
services.
(A) The public Right-of-way for a Street connection to adjoining property shall be platted when the
contributing Street in the Subdivision is within 150 feet of the connection to the adjoining property.
(B) No further Final Plat approvals will be granted until the condition in Clause 4.1-19(A) above is
satisfied.
(C) A Guarantee may be filed with the Planning Commission in lieu of the completion of the required
Street connection (See Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements.).
(D) Public Street rights-of-way not intended to dead-end permanently through the use of a Cul-de-sac
are required to extend to the abutting property line. Spite strips of land, defined as a piece of land
that limits or denies access to another Right-of-way for no legitimate reason, are prohibited by
these regulations.
(1) When the abutting property differs in elevation from the proposed Right-of-way the street
shall be constructed as close as practical, as determined by Staff, to the abutting property
line.
a) The distance between the end of the street and the elevation of the abutting property
line shall not result in a slope that exceeds 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
b) In those areas where the street was not able to be constructed to the abutting property
line, the section of unconstructed street shall not be required to be bonded.
c) The Engineer shall be required to provide on the Final Plat any grading easements
outside the Right-of-way necessary to accomplish constructing the unconstructed
section of street referenced above to the abutting property line when the adjacent
property develops.
4.1-20 Street Connectivity within a Subdivision
(A) The Street system shall be in compliance with the maximum intersection spacing identified in
Table 4.1-4. See Figure 4.1-R and Figure 4.1-S.
(B) Permanent Cul-de-sacs and dead end Streets may be provided in accordance with Table 4.1-4 of
these regulations unless topographic or other physical conditions render these provisions
impracticable as determined by Staff. See Figure 4.1-T.
TABLE 4.1-4: INTERNAL CONNECTIVITY STANDARDS BY DEVELOPMENT TYPE
DEVELOPMENT TYPE CUL-DE-SAC
PERMITTED
MAXIMUMCULDE-
SACLENGTH
MAXIMUM INTERSECTION
SPACING
Traditional Neighborhood NO N/A 600 Feet
Urban NO N/A 600 Feet
Suburban YES 1,200 Feet 1,200 Feet
Rural YES 1,200 Feet 1,200 Feet
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 82
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-R: Illustration of connectivity within a traditional neighborhood or urban development type Subdivision
Figure 4.1-S: Illustration of connectivity within a suburban or rural development Subdivision
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 83
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-T: Illustration of where Cul-de-sacs may be appropriate due to topographic conditions
Intersection 4.1-21 Design and Access Points
The design and spacing of intersections and Access Points shall comply with the access control
regulations contained in Article 8: Access Control Regulations.
(A) Centerlines of all intersecting Streets shall intersect at a 90 degree angle where possible and in no
case shall the angle of intersection be less than 75 degrees or greater than 105 degrees.
(B) Where ‘T’ type intersections are used, a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet for Access Points
along opposite sides of the Street shall be maintained on Local Streets. On collector and arterial
streets, a minimum centerline offset capable of accommodating required left and right turn lanes
shall be maintained. When no auxiliary turn lanes are required, a minimum centerline offset of 200
feet for Access Points along opposite sides of the Street on collector and arterial streets shall be
maintained.
(C) A Curb radius shall be constructed at intersections as shown in Table 4.1-5. The minimum radius
to be used shall comply with the standards for the Street with highest functional class at the
intersection and the adjacent land use. See Figure 4.1-U.
TABLE 4.1-5:CURB RADIUS (FEET)
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
LAND USE
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Local 25 30 40
Collector 30 40 50
Arterial 40 40 50
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 84
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-U: Illustration of applicable Curb radii based on land use and the Functional Classification of Streets
4.1-22 Sight Distance Requirements
(A) Minimum Sight Distances for vehicles entering and exiting an intersection shall be designed in
compliance with the guidelines established by the American Association of State Highway
Officials (AASHTO) manual “A Policy of the Geometric Design of Highway and Streets,” as
summarized in Table 4.1-6 and Table 4.1-7. See Figure 4.1-V and Figure 4.1-W.
(B) Sight Distance calculations and profiles shall utilize a driver’s eye height of 3.5 feet and an object
height of 2.0 feet.
TABLE 4.1-6: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXITING VEHICLES (FEET)
NO. OF LANES
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MILES PER HOUR)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2-Lane 230 285 340 400 455 510 570 625
4-Lane 245 305 365 425 485 545 605 665
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 85
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-V: Illustration of Sight Distance requirements for exiting vehicles
TABLE 4.1-7: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROACHING VEHICLES
(FEET)
NO. OF LANES
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MILES PER HOUR)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2-Lane 165 205 245 285 325 365 405 445
4-Lane 180 220 265 310 355 400 440 485
6-Lane 195 240 290 335 385 430 480 525
Figure 4.1-W: Illustration of Sight Distance requirements for approaching vehicles
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 86
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-23 Private Streets
Private Streets shall be designed, constructed, and inspected by Staff to ensure conformity with the same
standards as Public Streets.
4.1-24 Access Drives
(A) Access drives may be used to provide direct vehicular access to buildings and Parking Areas from
the side or rear of the property. See Figure 4.1-X.
(B) Access Drives may serve as the primary means of access for a maximum of four residential units or
four commercial Lots.
(C) Access drives may serve as the secondary means of access for an unlimited number of residential
units or commercial Lots when the primary means of access is provided by a Public Street system
accepted for maintenance by the appropriate governing body.
Figure 4.1-X: Illustration of an Access Drive
4.1-25 Temporary Turnarounds for Dead-End Streets
Temporary turnarounds shall be constructed at the terminus of all Streets.
(A) Temporary turnarounds constructed between phases within the same Preliminary Plat may be
constructed of Dense Graded Aggregate a minimum of eight inches in thickness.
(1) The missing asphalt or concrete turnaround is required to be bonded.
(B) Temporary turnarounds constructed at an abutting property line shall be constructed of either
asphalt of concrete in accord with the standards contained herein for street construction.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 87
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-26 DrivewayWidths
Driveways for residential areas shall be provided with a minimum width as identified in Table 4.1-8. See
Figure 4.1-Y.
TABLE 4.1-8:MINIMUM REQUIRED DRIVEWAY
WIDTHS
NO. OF RESIDENCES DRIVEWAYWIDTH
1 9 [1]
2 12
3 - 6 16
NOTE:
[1] Driveways longer than 150 feet shall have a minimum width
of 12 feet.
Figure 4.1-Y: Illustration of required Driveway widths based on number of residences served
4.1-27 Driveway Aprons
The following shall apply to Driveway aprons:
(A) Driveway aprons in residential areas shall have a minimum thickness of five inches.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 88
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
(B) Driveway aprons in commercial and industrial areas shall have a minimum thickness equal to the
thickness required for the commercial or industrial entrance.
(C) Driveway aprons shall be constructed in accordance with Figure A.1-U: Detail #19 and Figure A.1-
V: Detail #20.
Additional 4.1-28 Street Improvements
Improvements to the existing transportation network may be required to ensure adequate safety and
mobility of users on the Street system. The improvements shall be limited to the study area established
in a required traffic impact study and shall be consistent with the recommendations of the traffic impact
study that were identified to be necessary to maintain the pre-build level of service within the defined
study area.
4.1-29 Construction Details and Specifications
All infrastructure contained in this chapter shall conform to the standard construction drawings contained
in Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings.
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. These Lot layout standards assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and
aesthetically-pleasing development. They contribute to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods where
residents can live, work, shop, and play, and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public
in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Creates standards that result in the logical arrangement of Lots that are accessible and capable of
being built upon;
(B) Ensures that proper protection from Flood is provided to Lots, built structures and public
infrastructure;
(C) Sets forth minimum standards for utility and Watercourse Easements that will accommodate their
future maintenance needs; and
(D) Provides for the reservation of desirable recreational areas, school sites or other public grounds for
the potential purchase of such areas by the appropriate public body.
4.2-2 Easements
(A) The minimum width of Public utility Easements shall be as required by the applicable public utility
agency. The utilities shall be centrally located within the width of the Easement.
(B) Additional Easement width shall be required by Staff if Staff determines that such additional width
is necessary due to the depth the utilities must be buried or due to the proposed size and use of the
utilities.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 89
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-3 Watercourses
(A) The Subdivider shall provide Easements for storm Drainage purposes that conform to the lines of
any existing or proposed Watercourses which traverse the Subdivision.
(B) The Easement width shall be sufficient to provide for the maintenance of the Watercourse as
determined by Staff.
4.2-4 Natural Land Use
Subdivisions shall be encouraged to be designed to take advantage of the natural topography of the land,
to economize the construction of Drainage facilities, to minimize destruction of trees and topsoil, and to
preserve such natural features as Watercourses, unusual rock formations, large trees, sites for historical
significance, and other natural assets. See Figure 4.2-A.
Figure 4.2-A: Illustration of Subdivision design taking advantage of the natural topography
4.2-5 Flood Protection
The following shall apply to Flood protection:
(A) All Subdivision development shall comply with the Flood protection development controls
contained in the applicable zoning ordinance.
(B) All Streets and utilities constructed to serve a Subdivision shall be either Flood protected, or
constructed to a level of not less than two feet above the elevation of the 100-year Flood.
4.2-6 Lot Size
All proposed Lots shall conform to the minimum size requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
4.2-7 Lot Frontage
(A) All proposed Lots for building purposes shall front onto a Public Street system accepted for
maintenance by the applicable Legislative Body.
(B) The minimum Frontage for a single proposed building Lot along a Public Street system shall be 20
feet.
(C) The minimum frontage for contiguous Flag Lots along a Public Street system is 10 feet per flag.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 90
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
Double 4.2-8 and Triple Frontage Lots
(A) Lots shall not have Frontage onto more than one Street except:
(1) When a Lot is a Corner Lot;
(2) When the rear of a Double Frontage Lot abuts an arterial, Freeway, Access Drive, or
collector street; or
(3) When the rear of a Triple Frontage Lot abuts a Freeway, or Access Drive.
(B) Double frontage and Triple Frontage Lots shall be restricted to one Driveway on the Street with the
lowest Functional Classification.
(1) More than one Driveway may be provided for double and triple frontage lots that abut local
streets if permitted by the applicable zoning ordinance.
4.2-9 Flag Lots
The following shall apply to Flag Lots:
(A) Flag Lots shall only be used in those locations where due to geometric, topographic, or other
physical features, or the lack of economic feasibility in proportion to the size of the development, it
would be impractical to extend a publicly dedicated Street.
(B) Single Flag Lots shall have a minimum Frontage of 20 feet along a publicly dedicated and accepted
Street.
(C) Two or more contiguous Flag Lots shall each have a minimum Frontage of 10 feet onto a publicly
dedicated and accepted Street. Contiguous Flag Lots require the provision of a minimum 20-foot
wide ingress/egress Easement that provides for the permanent maintenance of the access way to be
located over the 10-foot Flag Stems. See Figure 4.2-B.
(D) Except in the unincorporated portion of Kenton County, access to the Lot(s) shall only be provided
from within the limits of the contiguous Flag Stem portion of the Lot(s) or from an existing, shared
driveway.
(E) In the case of new developments containing new Street only, no more than four Flag Lots are
permitted to be contiguous to each other at the street. Otherwise no more than two Flag Lots are
permitted to be contiguous to each other at the Street. See Figure 4.2-B.
(F) No more than 15 percent of Lots contained on a Preliminary Plat shall be Flag Lots.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 91
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
Figure 4.2-B: Illustration of Flag Lot requirements
4.2-10 Maximum Lot Depth
(A) The maximum depth of a Lot shall not be greater than four times the width of the Lot, except for
Flag Lots and Lots which contain over five acres of Lot Area. See Figure 4.2-C.
Figure 4.2-C: Illustration of maximum lot depth
(B) Individual site conditions and/or the proposed Lot layout and arrangement may require variation
from these requirements, as determined by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 92
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-11 Driveway Access
(A) The minimum width of a Driveway serving a single Lot shall conform to the applicable Zoning
Ordinance.
(B) The minimum width of a Driveway serving two Lots shall be 12 feet.
(C) The minimum width of a Driveway serving three to six Lots shall be 16 feet.
(D) Driveways shall serve no more than six Lots and/or residential dwellings.
4.2-12 Residual Parcels
No Residual Parcels shall be created which:
(A) Do not conform to the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which the Parcel is
located;
(B) Are not required for a private or public utility purpose; or
(C) Are not accepted by the applicable Legislative Body or any other appropriate public body.
4.2-13 Side Lot Lines
(A) Side Lot Lines shall be as close to right angles with the Street centerline as possible, or radial to
curve Street centerlines. See Figure 4.2-D.
(B) Lot Lines not at right angles with the Street centerline, and Lot Lines intersecting with curved
Right-of-ways shall have a reference tie to the tangent line of that centerline curve. See Figure
4.2-D.
Figure 4.2-D: Illustration of Side Lot Lines
4.2-14 Property Lines at Street Intersections
Property lines at Street intersections shall be provided from the same radius point necessary to establish
the pavement radius. See Figure 4.2-E.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 93
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Figure 4.2-E: Illustration of property line location at Street intersections
4.2-15 Public Sites
Where a proposed park, recreational area, open space, school site, or other public uses identified in the
Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part within a proposed Subdivision, Staff may require a
reservation for the purchase of such ground by an applicable public body not to exceed two years as a
condition precedent to Preliminary Plat approval.
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-1 Purpose
This chapter fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. These public utility standards assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and
aesthetically-pleasing development is addressed. They contribute to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods
where residents can live, work, shop, and play. Furthermore, they promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Establishes the adequacy of existing and proposed stormwater, wastewater and water supply
facilities as a factor to be considered when reviewing proposed Subdivisions;
(B) Sets forth minimum standards for stormwater Drainage systems, sanitary sewer and water systems,
and the extent to which they shall be provided;
(C) Ensures that new Lots are provided access to essential public utilities when they are available; and
(D) Promotes the ability of fire departments to fight fires by requiring minimum fire flows and
adequate provision of fire hydrants.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 94
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-2 Storm Water Drainage Systems
All storm water Drainage systems shall comply with the Northern Kentucky Regional Storm Water
Management Program Rules and Regulations of Sanitation District No. 1 (SD 1’s Storm Water
Regulations).
(A) Sanitation District No. 1 shall perform the plan review of the storm water Drainage system(s) and
issue the appropriate permit(s) for any development that disturbs one acre of land or greater, or for
disturbances of less than one acre when that disturbance is part of a larger overall development.
(B) Development that does not disturb one acre of land or greater will be subject to the requirement of
plan reviews and/or permits through these regulations and/or the applicable zoning ordinance.
(C) Any proposed Subdivision that requires submission of a grading plan or improvement drawing to
Staff shall receive grading plan or improvement drawing approval prior to the commencement of
any earth moving operations.
4.3-3 Inlet Grates
Except for inlets serving temporary silt basins, detention and/or retention basins, Inlet Grates shall not
allow a sphere with a diameter of six inches to pass through.
4.3-4 On-Street Inlet Location
Inlet spacing along Streets shall be based upon gutter and inlet capacity, Street slope, and contributing
Drainage area. In addition, inlet spacing shall not exceed the following spacing requirements unless
hydraulic calculations are submitted that indicate acceptable capacity:
(A) Along continuous grades less than two percent - 400 feet maximum;
(B) Along continuous grades two percent and over - 600 feet maximum;
(C) At sag locations less than two percent - 400 feet maximum between inlets or from a high point;
(D) At sag locations two percent and over - 600 feet maximum between inlets or from a high point;
(E) Inlets shall be placed immediately upstream of Pedestrian Walkways and designed to intercept 100
percent of the flow at the gutter line;
(F) Inlets placed at locations other than in Clause 4.3-4(E) above shall be designed to conform to
SD1’s Storm Water Regulations; and
(G) Roll type grate inlets shall be used in any location where a Driveway will intersect the Street.
4.3-5 Cul-de-sac Inlet Location
Special consideration should be given to storm Drainage entering Cul-de-sacs. In addition to an inlet
provided at the low point within the Cul-de-sac, two additional inlets shall be required along each Curb
prior to the entrance of the Cul-de-sac:
(A) For Street slopes eight percent and less draining more than 400 feet of pavement; and
(B) For all Street slopes more than eight percent and draining more than 300 feet of pavement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 95
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-6 Culverts and Pipe Types
Culverts and pipe types shall be designed in accord with SD 1’s Storm Water Regulations
(A) All pipe installations greater than 30 inches in diameter require full-time on-site inspections under
the direction of a Qualified Geotechnical Engineer of Firm.
4.3-7 Lot Grading and Drainage
The following shall apply to Lot grading and Drainage:
(A) Surface Drainage swales to accommodate individual Lot Drainage shall be constructed as part of
the final Lot grading and seeded and mulched.
(B) Surface Drainage swales shall have a minimum grade of two percent and shall be constructed so
that the surface water will drain onto a Street, storm inlet, natural Drainage area, or other Drainage
feature. See Figure 4.3-A.
Figure 4.3-A: Illustrations of Lot Drainage and Swales
(C) Roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, and sump pumps that are discharged above ground
shall be discharged onto the same Parcel of land from which the water is generated, as far from the
property line as practical and at least five feet from the residence.
(D) Roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, and sump pumps discharging toward the Street shall
be discharged onto a pervious area no closer than 20 feet from the edge of pavement or back of
Curb. See Figure 4.3-B.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 96
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
(1) The discharge of roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains and sumps directly onto an
impervious area that drains to the street is prohibited.
Figure 4.3-B: Illustration of Drainage on Lot
(E) The connection of roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, or sump pumps to the public storm
sewer system shall be prohibited unless approved by Sanitation District No. 1 in writing.
Waivers for Storm Water 4.3-8 Runoff Control Facilities
A waiver (See Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations.) of stormwater management control facilities
may be granted by Staff when the following criteria are present:
(A) Less than one acre of land is disturbed and the area is not part of a larger overall development;
(B) Less than ½ acre will be impervious area; and
(C) Drainage calculations indicate that the downstream Drainage facilities are adequately sized to
accommodate the additional stormwater runoff and that no pre-existing stormwater Drainage
problems in this watershed exist immediately downstream.
4.3-9 Sanitary Sewer System
The following shall apply to a sanitary sewage system:
(A) The sanitary sewage system shall comply with the Rules and Regulations of Sanitation District No.
1.
(B) In those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan within the "Urban/Suburban Focus Area", a
sanitary sewage system shall be provided to adequately serve all Lots in the Subdivision.
(C) The sanitary sewer system easements shall be required to be provided to adjacent property not
presently served by a sanitary sewer system.
(D) Where package sewage treatment plants are proposed, the sewage collection system shall be
designed for ultimate connection to the public system.
(E) Sanitary sewage treatment plants for any Subdivision shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from
any existing residence.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 97
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Individual On-4.3-10 Site Sewage Disposal Systems
Individual on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted in those areas identified in the Comprehensive
Plan within the "Rural Focus Area" and are required to be constructed in accordance with the current
standards and specifications of the state and local health department.
4.3-11 Water System
The following shall apply to a domestic water system:
(A) The water system shall comply with the applicable water district’s rules and regulations.
(B) In those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan as "Urban Service Area," a water system shall
be provided to adequately serve all Lots in the Subdivision.
(C) The water system easements shall be required to be provided to adjacent property not presently
served by a water system.
(D) The water system shall be required to interconnect with an existing water system where practical.
4.3-12 Fire Flow Requirements for Residential Development
The following shall apply to minimum fire hydrant flows within residential developments:
(A) The minimum fire hydrant flows shall be provided in accord with Table 4.3-1.
(B) The minimum fire hydrant flow is the quantity of flow in gpm (gallons per minute) at 20 psi
(pounds per square inch) residual pressure.
(C) In areas served by the Northern Kentucky Water District, minimum fire hydrant flows shall be
determined by the Design Engineer using Fire Flow Testing conforming to the standard procedures
contained in the National Fire Protection Association, (NFPA) Handbook and/or by hydraulic
modeling data provided by the Northern Kentucky Water District.
(D) In areas outside the jurisdiction of the Northern Kentucky Water District, minimum fire hydrant
flows shall be determined by a Fire Flow Test performed by the applicable water service district or
fire department and shall conform to the standard procedures contained in the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Handbook.
TABLE 4.3-1:MINIMUM FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPOSURE DISTANCES [1] MINIMUM FIRE FLOW
Over 100 feet None
100 feet or less 500 gpm
NOTE:
[1] Exposure distances are measured using the minimum allowable side yards
identified in the applicable zoning ordinance.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 98
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Fire Hydrant Locations for 4.3-13 Residential Development
The following shall apply to the location and spacing of fire hydrants for residential development:
(A) Water mains and fire hydrants shall be extended along any proposed Street where the existing
water system can support the extension and meet all of the Northern Kentucky Water District
Regulations.
(B) The maximum spacing of fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with Table 4.3-2. See also
Figure 4.3-C.
(C) Fire hydrant spacing shall be measured along the centerline of the Street and placed at proposed
Lot Lines where practical.
(D) A fire hydrant shall be located a maximum of 500 feet from the face of any building within
developments where a new Street is involved.
(1) Other Northern Kentucky Water District Regulations
TABLE 4.3-2:MAXIMUM SPACING OF FIRE
HYDRANTS
DEVELOPMENT TYPE SPACING
Single-Family 500 feet
Multi-Family 300 feet
Figure 4.3-C: Illustrations of fire hydrant locations for single-family and multi-family developments
4.3-14 Fire Hydrant Locations and Fire Flow Requirements for Nonresidential Development
Minimum fire hydrant locations and fire flows for nonresidential developments shall be as approved by
the applicable fire department in writing.
4.3-15 Telephone, Cable and Electric Utility Lines
All new telephone, cable and electrical utility lines shall be installed underground and be in conformance
with the appropriate utility company's policy and requirements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 99
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
Pavement Section 4.4: Design Method and Required Thicknesses
4.4-1 Pavement Design Method
AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1986 and 1993), published by The American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials is the design method used herein and is
specified as the design method to be used for any alternate pavement designs that are allowed or required
in this regulation. Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method sets
out the design parameters used herein for Kenton County Subdivision pavements. For definition and
explanation of the parameters shown here, see the above mentioned AASHTO guides, Section 4.8:
Pavement Performance and Design herein, and Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report. Project
specific pavement designs are required for residential streets serving over 1,000 residences or
commercial/industrial streets serving more than 3,500,000 ESALs or alternative pavement designs
proposed under Section 4.4-2: Required Thicknesses. Any project specific pavement designs are required
to use the design parameters identified in Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using
AASHTO Method.
TABLE 4.4-1: SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT DESIGN PARAMETERS USING AASHTOMETHOD
PARAMETER
DESIGN VALUES
CONCRETE ASPHALT
Design Life 20 years 20 years
Life Cycle Analysis 50 years 50 years
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 --
Reliability 80% 80%
Deviation 0.35 0.45
Initial Serviceability 4.2 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.5
Modulus of Rupture 600 psi --
Modulus of Elasticity 3,600,000 psi --
CBR, Minimum 2 (K=50 pci) 3 (MR=2700 psi)
Load Transfer 4.4 (no dowels) --
Load Transfer 3.2 (dowels) --
20 Year ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 81,000 81,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 203,000 203,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 406,000[2] 406,000[2]
20 Year ESAL, Commercial/Industrial Street 3,500,000[1] 3,500,000[1]
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 53,000 53,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 133,000 133,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 265,000[2] 265,000[2]
ESAL, Arterial Per KYTC Specification
Asphalt Surface Layer Coefficient 0.44
Asphalt Base Layer Coefficient 0.40
Crushed Stone Base Layer Coefficient 0.14
Crushed Stone Base with Tensar TX5 Geogrid Layer Coefficient 0.25 for CBR ≥ 3
0.21 for 2≤ CBR < 3
Thickness conversion factor, 17 year old asphalt 0.7
Thickness conversation factor, 34 year old asphalt 0.6
NOTES:
[1] Engineer shall submit a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) documenting project-specific design ESALs for each
commercial/industrial Subdivision generating more than 100 vehicle trips per hour during the AM or PM peak period. If projectspecific
ESAL loading is greater than 3,500,000, a project-specific pavement design is required.
[2] Project specific pavement design required for residential streets serving more than 1,000 lots
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 100
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
4.4-2 Required Thicknesses
(A) Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses shows the required pavement thicknesses for
various Street classifications for Asphalt and Concrete Streets where in situ Subgrade soils can
meet the minimum required Subgrade CBR equal to 2 or greater for Concrete pavements or CBR
of 3 or greater for Asphalt pavements. These thicknesses were determined using the AASHTO
Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1986 and 1993) and the design parameters identified in
Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method. These values
meet requirements for a 50 year life cycle without replacement, assuming resurfacing at 17 and 34
years as shown in the example calculation in Figure C.1-A: Exhibit A.
(B) Wherever the minimum CBR values for Asphalt or Concrete pavements as defined in Table 4.4-1:
Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method cannot be provided by the in
situ Subgrade soils, the Engineer shall: 1) submit an engineered Subgrade improvement design
that increases the CBR value of the in situ Subgrade soils to the required minimum CBR values
for Asphalt and Concrete pavement in Subsection 4.4-1: Pavement Design Method; or 2) submit an
engineered alternate pavement design that takes into account the substandard CBR values.
TABLE 4.4-2:REQUIRED SUBDIVISION STREET THICKNESSES
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
WITH NUMBER OF
LOTS SERVED[5]
CONCRETE
CONCRETE
OVER 4”
CRUSHED
STONE
BASE
FULL-DEPTH
ASPHALT
ASPHALT OVER CRUSHED
STONE BASE (CSB)
ASPHALT OVER CRUSHED
STONE BASE (CSB)+
GEOGRID[6]
SURFACE BASE[1] SURFACE BASE CSB[1] SURFACE BASE CSB[1]
Residential Local
≤199 Lots
7”[2] NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”[4] 1.5” 3” 7”[4]
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”[2] NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”[4] 1.5” 4” 7”[4]
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”[2] NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”[4] 1.5” 5.75” 7”[4]
Commercial/
Industrial Not Permitted 10”[3] Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7”[4] 1.5” 12” 7”[4]
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
[1]Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
[2] Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Figure A.1-N: Detail #12 and Figure A.1-O: Detail
#13).
[3] Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints (see Figure A.1-M: Detail #11).
[4] 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can be
replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses are
maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector, and 7.5
inches commercial/industrial
[5] Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where a
number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a Local
Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
[6] Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 101
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
(1) Engineered subgrade improvements may include:
a) Undercutting the substandard Subgrade soils and replacing them with documented
soils that provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
b) Providing a chemically stabilized Subgrade (usually lime stabilization) to effectively
provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
c) Utilizing crushed stone base with geotextile and/or Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid to
effectively provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
(2) Alternative pavement designs may be proposed for Asphalt pavement on subgrades with a
CBR value of 2, provided the pavement structure is shown to meet the structural number
requirements identified in Table 4.4-3: Structural Numbers For Alternative Asphalt
Pavement Designs (CBR =2). Alternative pavement designs are not permitted for Subgrade
soils with a CBR less than 2; rather, the subgrade soils shall be improved to CBR equal to 2
or greater, per Subsection 4.4-2(B)(1).
TABLE 4.4-3: STRUCTURAL NUMBERS FOR
ALTERNATIVE ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESIGNS
(CBR=2)
STREET CLASSIFICATION STRUCTURAL NUMBER
Local (<200 Lots) 4.09
Subcollector 4.92 (200-500 Lots)
Collector 5.60 (501-1,000 Lots)
Commercial/ 8.40 Industrial
(3) When chemically stabilized Subgrade demonstrates a documented CBR value greater than 3,
an alternative asphalt pavement design may be proposed to reduce pavement thickness,
provided the pavement structure is shown to meet the structural number requirements
identified in Table 4.4-4: Structural Numbers For Alternative Asphalt Pavement Designs.
TABLE 4.4-4: STRUCTURAL NUMBERS FOR
ALTERNATIVE ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESIGNS
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
STRUCTURAL NUMBER
CBR4 CBR5 CBR6 CBR7
Local
2.85 2.50 2.24 2.04
(<199 Lots)
Subcollector
3.52 3.14 2.84 2.60
(200-500 Lots)
Collector
(501-1,000 4.09 3.65 3.34 3.07
Lots)
Commercial/
6.47 5.92 5.47 5.12
Industrial
a) For full depth asphalt pavements, the maximum allowable reduction in asphalt
thickness over that identified in Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses
shall be 2 inches. Asphalt base shall be a minimum of 4” thick under the curb; if the
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 102
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
CBR of the subgrade is improved to 5 or higher, a 3” minimum thickness may be used
under the curb.
b) For Asphalt over Crushed Stone Base pavements, the crushed stone base may not be
reduced below the thicknesses shown in Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street
Thicknesses, and minimum total Asphalt thicknesses of 4.5 inches (local streets), 5.5
inches (subcollector streets), 6.5 inches (residential collector streets), and 7.5 inches
(commercial/industrial streets) shall be maintained.
c) There shall be no reduction in thickness for Concrete pavements below those shown in
Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses
d) Alternative pavement designs shall not be permitted for:
i) in situ soils with CBR values greater than 3;
ii) undercut and replaced subgrade soils; or
iii) crushed stone base and geotextile/geogrid subgrade improvements.
Pavement and Pavement Drainage 4.4-3 Construction Details
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings contains important construction details that are a part of
these specifications for the pavement, pavement Drainage system, and other utility construction within
the Right of Way that can impact pavement performance. Proper construction execution of the details in
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings is important to good pavement performance. For
discussion of the background of the reasoning behind these details, see Appendix C: Engineers
Committee Final Report.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 103
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.5: Use of Aggregates Within the Right-of-way
Use of Section 4.5: Aggregates Within the Right-of-way
4.5-1 Aggregate Specifications
Table 4.5-1 indicates the specifications for the various aggregate types and their uses in improvement
construction within the Street Right-of-way. All aggregates must pass all KYTC aggregate requirements
for their intended use as set out in Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
TABLE 4.5-1:AGGREGATE SPECIFICATION TABLE
KYTCSPECIFICATION USE WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY
Pipe Bedding Sand Bed and cover for deep sanitary sewer and storm sewer
Concrete Sand Concrete mix and bed and cover for waterline and power and
communication utilities
DGA Backfill for waterline and power and communication utilities under
the Street
No. 57 Crushed Limestone Concrete pavement aggregate and catch basins crossover
construction
No. 57 Gravel Allowable aggregate for all Concrete not used in Concrete pavement
and Concrete Curb and gutter
No. 8 Gravel Allowable aggregate for all Concrete
No. 467 Crushed Limestone Required aggregate for Concrete pavements
Crushed Stone Base Base material for Asphalt pavements with stone base
Asphalt Aggregates
See Table 4.7-1
Asphalt pavement aggregate must meet requirements in Section 400
of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition, except where
noted otherwise in this specification.
All aggregates must pass all KYTC aggregate requirements for their intended use as set out in Section
800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
4.6-1 General Requirement
(A) Materials
Portland cement, water, aggregates, air entraining agents, and admixtures to reduce water, retard
set, etc. shall satisfy the material specifications of, and be proportioned, batched, delivered, and
cured in accordance with, the Portland Cement Association (PCA), Design and Control of Concrete
Mixtures, latest edition, except as noted otherwise in these regulations.
(B) Mix Design
Concrete mix design will vary depending on the intended use, as spelled out in Subsections 4.6-
2(A), 4.6-3(A), and 4.6-4(A).
(C) Fly Ash
No fly ash is allowed in the Concrete mix.
(D) Strength
Finished Concrete shall attain a minimum compressive strength at 28 days of 4,000 pounds per
square inch.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 104
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(E) Ready Mix Suppliers
All Concrete Ready Mix must be provided by Ready Mix plants listed on the KYTC List of
Approved Materials (LAM) as a qualified producer. In the alternative, the Ready Mix supplier
must supply to the staff an executed original of KTC Form TC-64-764/09 2011 “Certification of
Compliance for Freeze Thaw Resistant Concrete Aggregate” for the aggregate used in Concrete
mixes prior to commencement of construction. All Ready Mix Concrete suppliers shall submit to
the Staff in January of each year mix design verifications for all Concrete mixes that will be
supplied during that year for use in Subdivision improvements.
(F) Delivery and Discharge
Concrete shall be delivered and discharged from a truck mixer or agitator truck within the periods
specified in Table 4.6-1. Delivery tickets shall have this time clearly shown and be checked for
conformance by the Staff. Delivery tickets shall also show the date of the delivery, the Concrete
mix supplied, and the design compressive strength. All delivery tickets shall be delivered to Staff.
Any Concrete which is not plastic and workable when placed shall be rejected.
TABLE 4.6-1:MAXIMUM CONCRETE DISCHARGE TIME
AIR TEMPERATURE MAXIMUM DISCHARGE TIME
Up to 85 degrees Fahrenheit 1.5 hours
More than 85 degrees Fahrenheit 1 hour
(G) Curing
Concrete shall be cured in accordance with Section 601.03.17 of the KYTC specification.
(H) Expansion and Isolation Joints
Expansion and Isolation Joint material used herein shall be preformed one inch thick material, the
full depth of the Concrete, and shall conform to KYTC specifications for use in Concrete
pavements.
Street 4.6-2 Pavement Requirements
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates for Concrete Street pavement shall be a blend of No. 467 crushed limestone, No.
8 gravel and concrete sand.
(2) The No. 467 crushed limestone aggregate shall meet the gradation limits shown in Table 4.6-
2.
TABLE 4.6-2:NO. 467GRADATION LIMITS
SIEVE SIZE PERCENT PASSING
2” 100
1½” 93-98*
1” ----
¾” 35-70
½” ----
⅜” 10-30
#4 0-5
#8 ----
*Note that the specified percent passing the 1½” sieve
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 105
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(3) Gradation of the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand shall meet the requirements of Section
800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
(4) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(5) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(6) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(7) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(8) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(9) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(10) Workability factor shall be between 38 high to 33 low.
(11) Coarseness factor shall be between 73 high to 68 low.
(B) Thickness Requirements
Pavement thicknesses for various classifications of Streets shall be as shown in Table 4.4-2:
Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses. Various critical Concrete pavement design and
construction details that shall be used in Concrete Subdivision pavements are shown in Appendix
A: Standard Construction Drawings.
(C) Testing Requirements
(1) One set of three test cylinders shall be made for each day’s placement of Street. An
additional set of three test cylinders shall be made for each additional 100 cubic yards of
placement. One slump, air entrainment and temperature test shall be performed for each set
of Concrete test cylinders.
(2) One cylinder shall be tested for compressive strength at no later than seven days and two
cylinders at 28 days.
(3) Part of the plastic Concrete sample used for the test cylinders shall be washed to visually
confirm that crushed limestone coarse aggregate was used in the Concrete mix.
(4) All Concrete testing shall be performed by a Qualified Materials Testing firm in accord with
applicable ASTM specifications, latest editions. The results of all Concrete testing are
required to be provided to Staff by the Developer prior to the approval of a Final Plat.
(D) Reinforcing Steel
The use of continuous reinforced concrete pavements is not required but can be considered for
streets serving commercial/industrial uses.
differs from Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge
Manual, latest edition, for No. 467 gradation. The No.
467 crushed limestone for Street pavement in the
Regulation must have 2% to 7% retained on the 1½”
sieve.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 106
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(1) Bent bars are not considered reinforcing steel in the contents of this section.
(2) The use of wire mesh in concrete pavements is prohibited.
(E) Placement
(1) Formwork
a) Fixed forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the thickness of the pavement.
b) Forms shall be of such cross-sections and strength and so secured as to resist the
pressure of the Concrete when placed, and the impact and vibration of any equipment
which they support, without springing or settlement.
(2) Setting
The Subgrade under the forms shall be compacted and shaped so that the form set shall
provide the specified elevation.
(3) Grade and Alignment
The alignment and grade elevation of the forms shall be checked by the Contractor
immediately ahead of Concrete placement and corrections made when necessary.
(4) Placement Method
a) All Concrete placement shall conform to ACI Specifications, latest edition.
b) The Concrete shall be mixed in quantities required for immediate use and shall be
deposited on the Subgrade to the required depth and width of the construction lane in
successive batches and in a continuous operation. The terminus of a continuous pour
shall be a Construction Joint per Figure A.1-N: Detail #12.
c) The Concrete shall be placed as uniformly as possible in order to minimize the amount
of additional spreading necessary.
d) The Concrete shall be vibrated and consolidated with suitable tools while being placed
so that the formation of voids or honeycomb pockets is prevented.
e) Concrete shall not be placed around manholes or other structures until they have been
brought to the required grade and alignment.
f) Additional tamping and compaction of surrounding fill material may be required after
raising manholes.
(5) Consolidating and Finishing
a) Concrete pavement shall be struck off and consolidated with a mechanical finishing
machine, vibrating screed, slipform paver, or by hand-finishing methods such that,
after consolidation and final finishing, it shall be at the elevation shown on the
approved plans.
b) The finishing method shall incorporate a screed, which will consolidate the Concrete
by pressure, vibration, or both.
c) The Concrete shall be brought to a true and even surface, free from rock pockets.
d) Hand-finishing tools shall be kept available for use in case the mechanical finishing
machine breaks down.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 107
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
e) When hand finishing, the pavement shall be struck off and consolidated by a vibrating
screed to the elevation as shown on the plans. When the forward motion of the
vibrating screen is stopped, the vibrator shall be shut off and not be allowed to idle on
the Concrete.
(6) Scraping and Straight Edging
a) The Inspector may require that the pavement be scraped with a straightedge with a
minimum width of six feet, equipped with handles long enough to permit it to be
operated from the edge of the pavement.
b) When irregularities with the surface elevation are discovered, they shall be corrected
by adding or removing Concrete. All disturbed areas shall be floated with a wooden or
metal float not less than four feet long and not less than six inches wide and straight
edged.
(7) Edging
Before final finishing is completed and before the Concrete has taken its initial set, the edges
of the slab and Curb shall be carefully finished with an edger.
(8) Final Surface Finish
a) The final surface of the Concrete pavement and Curb shall have a uniform gritty
texture at the grades and cross-sections shown on the plans.
b) A burlap drag or medium broom shall be used as the final finishing method for
Concrete pavement.
c) A burlap drag finish shall have a minimum width of at least three feet and have a
length that is long enough to cover the entire pavement width.
d) The burlap drag shall be pulled forward across the pavement in the direction in which
the pavement is being placed.
e) A broom finish shall be drawn transversely across the pavement using overlapping
strokes to produce surface corrugations of uniform appearance approximately 1/16
th
inch in depth.
f) Curbs shall be finished using the same method as the pavement.
(9) Integral Curb
a) Curbs shall be constructed monolithically with pavement extrusion equipment or hand
formed prior to the finishing operation.
b) The integral barrier and sloped Curb shall be constructed with or prior to the finished
paving operation. Special care shall be taken so that the Curb construction does not
create a “cold joint.”
c) Curbs placed immediately following the paving operation shall be sufficiently
consolidated with the paving slab and shall not contain voids within or along the back
face of the Curb.
d) Integral barrier Curbs along the edges of Street pavement shall contain depressed
Curbs not less than 1-3/4 inches above the gutter line at all Driveway entrances and at
such other locations as designed on the approved plans.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 108
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
e) When barrier Curb is used, the Curb may be sawed horizontally to facilitate residential
Driveways, approaches, and Sidewalks.
(F) Concrete Street Pavement Joints
(1) Contraction Joints
a) All Contraction Joints shall be placed a maximum of 15 feet on center. Commercial/
industrial Subdivision pavements shall have sawed transverse Contraction Joints with
steel dowels that are cut perpendicular across the pavement. All residential pavements
shall have tooled or sawed Contraction Joints without dowels. Residential pavement
transverse Contraction Joints shall be skewed (except at intersections, paired catch
basins and in Cul-de-sacs). See Figure A.1-O: Detail #13.
b) Sawed joints shall be equal to a depth of one-fourth (1/4) of the pavement thickness
continuous across the slab.
c) The timing of the installation of joints shall conform to ACI specifications, latest
edition.
d) Contraction Joints cut into fresh Concrete with a jointing tool shall be a minimum 1½
inches deep.
(2) Expansion Joints
There shall be no Expansion Joints in any pavements except at bridge abutments and where
required by construction details in Figure A.1-R: Detail #16, Figure A.1-S: Detail #17,
Figure A.1-T: Detail #18, Figure A.1-U: Detail #19, and Figure A.1-V: Detail #20.
(3) Longitudinal Joints
a) All pavements wider than 15 feet require Longitudinal Joints. Longitudinal Joints may
be Construction Joints or tooled/sawed joints.
b) Longitudinal Construction Joints will require 18 inches long #4 deformed bars
embedded into each slab at the mid-slab height, no more than four feet on center and
no closer than 18 inches to each Contraction Joint.
c) Bent bars may be inserted into fresh Concrete before its initial set.
d) Bent bars shall not be straightened until the Concrete has cured sufficiently to enable
bending without fracture of the Concrete slab.
(4) Other Pavement Joints
Other Contraction Joints and Isolation Joints shall be constructed per Figure A.1-N: Detail
#12.
(G) Manholes and On-Street Inlets
Manholes, on-Street inlets, and water valves encountered in the areas to be paved shall be raised or
lowered to the surface of the new pavement. On-Street inlets may be separated from the pavement
and Curb by boxing out around the inlet. Details for Joint construction at manholes and catch
basins are in Figure A.1-P: Detail #14, Figure A.1-Q: Detail #15, and Figure A.1-R: Detail #16.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 109
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(H) Protection and Opening to Traffic
(1) Traffic shall be prohibited from the pavement until the Concrete has attained a compressive
strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch.
(2) Prohibited traffic shall include Contractor’s vehicles.
(3) Prior to opening to public traffic, the Developer is responsible for completing, curing and
sealing the pavement, including box outs, backfilling the Street, sealing the joints and
cleaning the pavement of all debris.
(I) Concrete Pavement Lugs
The purpose of pavement lugs in Subdivision pavements is to provide some additional resistance to
Contraction Joints separating during repeated expansion and contraction cycles over the life of the
pavement in certain open ended and relatively steep downhill pavement conditions. In these open
ended and downhill conditions, resistance to pavement lengthening at contraction joints is
substantially reduced as compared to Contraction Joints in long stretches relatively straight
pavement. In the long, relatively straight streets, the repetitive adjacent slabs help keep the
contraction joints from separating during repeated expansion and contraction cycles. Those
conditions which shall require lugs are related to the geometry of the Streets and are as follows (see
Figure A.1-J: Detail #8, Figure A.1-K: Detail #9, and Figure A.1-L: Detail #10).
(1) The ends of Cul-de-sacs where the Street grade approaching the Cul-de-sac decreases more
than 20 feet vertically, at an average grade of more than six percent, before there is a change
in direction of Street Drainage. In this condition, install a lug near the end of the Cul-de-sac
across the extension of the two lanes of pavement.
(2) At T-intersections, place a lug on the intersecting street near the intersection, where grade on
the intersecting Street is going up from the intersection more than 20 feet vertically, at an
average grade of more than six percent, before there is a change in the Drainage direction.
(3) On the main line of a Street pavement where the pavement is going straight and downhill
more than 20 feet vertically, at an average grade of more than six percent and the direction of
centerline deflects horizontally by more than 30 degrees, place a lug just uphill of the start of
the horizontal curve.
a) Lugs shall be placed at least 20 feet uphill from any shallow utility excavation
transverse to the pavement.
(4) The Design Engineer may add other lugs in conditions he considers critical to Contraction
Joint integrity.
(5) Lug locations are to be shown on construction design and as-built drawings.
(J) Joint Sealing Compound
(1) Joint sealing compound shall conform to the following standard designations:
a) Hot-poured elastic type, as specified by AASHTO, latest edition; or
b) Silicone rubber sealant type (non-sag, self-leveling, or rapid cure) conforming to the
KYTC Department of Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition; or
c) An approved equal, as determined and approved by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 110
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(2) The application of joint sealant is prohibited at temperatures below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
Concrete Curb and Gutter Requirements 4.6-3 for Asphalt Streets
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates for Concrete Curb and Gutter shall be a blend of No. 57 crushed limestone, No. 8
gravel and concrete sand .
(2) Gradation of the No. 57 crushed limestone, the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand shall meet
the requirements of Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
(3) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(4) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(6) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(7) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(8) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(9) Workability factor shall be between 40 high to 35 low.
(10) Coarseness factor shall be between 63 high to 58 low.
(B) Curb Design
(1) 24-inch wide Concrete Curb and gutter shall be used for all Streets Types with Asphalt
pavements.
(2) The Developer may choose between using the sloped Curb or the six inch barrier Curb
profile shown in Figure A.1-H: Detail #7.
(3) All Streets serving industrial/commercial developments shall use the six inch barrier Curb.
(C) Concrete Curb over Asphalt Base
Concrete Curb over Asphalt base shall be a minimum of six inches thick at the Curb apron.
Concrete Curb over crushed stone base shall be a minimum of seven inches thick at the Curb
apron.
(D) Expansion Joints
(1) Expansion Joints shall be placed in Concrete Curbs at each side of Curb inlet catch basins.
(2) Two ¾-inch diameter, 18-inch long smooth dowels with expansion caps shall be placed in
each Expansion Joint location.
(3) Expansion material must go completely through the Curb cross section, preventing Concrete
to Concrete contact. See Figure A.1-R: Detail #16.
(E) Contraction Joints
Contraction Joints shall be installed in the Curb at a spacing of no more than 10 feet on center.
(F) Standard Details
Details for Concrete Curb and gutter are shown in the exhibits in Figure A.1-H: Detail #7 and
Figure A.1-I: Detail #7A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 111
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(G) Testing Requirements
(1) One set of three test cylinders shall be made for each day’s placement of Street. An
additional set of three test cylinders shall be made for each additional 100 cubic yards of
placement. One slump, air entrainment and temperature test shall be performed for each set
of Concrete test cylinders.
(2) One cylinder shall be tested for compressive strength at no later than seven days and two
cylinders at 28 days.
(3) Part of the plastic Concrete sample used for the test cylinders shall be washed to visually
confirm that crushed limestone coarse aggregate was used in the Concrete mix.
(4) All Concrete testing shall be performed by a Qualified Materials Testing firm in accord with
applicable ASTM specifications, latest editions. The results of all Concrete testing are
required to be provided to Staff by the materials testing firm prior to the approval of a Final
Plat.
Concrete Public Sidewalks, Pathways, Driveway Aprons a 4.6-4 nd Other Infrastructure Uses Not
Specified Elsewhere in These Regulations
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates shall be a blend of No. 57 gravel or crushed limestone, No. 8 gravel and concrete
sand .
(2) Gradation of the No. 57 gravel or crushed limestone, the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand
shall meet the requirements of Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest
edition.
(3) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(4) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(6) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(7) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(8) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(9) Workability factor shall be between 40 high to 35 low.
(10) Coarseness factor shall be between 63 high to 58 low.
(B) Subgrade
(1) Subgrade for Sidewalks, pathways, and Driveway aprons shall be non-organic and consist of
natural clay or sand soils.
(2) Clay soils must be knit together without any loose clay soils. Any material used to finish
grade Subgrade shall be bank run sand, KYTC crushed limestone DGA, or crushed recycled
Concrete.
(3) Any granular material in excess of two inches thick shall be compacted with a vibrating plate
compactor or equivalent.
(4) No gravel and no other crushed limestone gradation will be used for finish grade fill material.
(C) Thickness Requirements
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 112
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(1) Concrete for public Sidewalks and pathways shall be a minimum of four inches thick.
(2) Residential Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of five inches thick.
(3) Commercial and industrial Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of seven inches thick.
(D) Drive/Apron Requirements
Required Driveway apron layouts and construction details, including required Expansion Joint
thickness and location, are shown in Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings. Special care
must be taken during construction to make sure there is no Concrete-to-Concrete contact under all
Expansion Joints.
(E) Edge Drain Installation
When installing Driveway aprons, special care must be taken not to damage the edge drain
installed on the outside of the Curb. If the edge drain is damaged, the damaged section must be
properly replaced to assure water flow through the edge drain.
(F) Contraction Joint Spacing
For Sidewalks, the maximum spacing of Contraction Joints shall not exceed five feet, except when
the Sidewalk or pathway is wider than five feet when the spacing shall not exceed the width of the
slab.
Asphalt Section 4.7: Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and
Construction Specifications
4.7-1 General
(A) All Subdivision Streets in Kenton County Subdivisions shall be constructed in accordance with the
latest edition of the KYTC Roadway Manual, Division 400, except where noted otherwise in this
specification.
(B) All Contractors must be prequalified by KYTC or demonstrate experience and success on similar
projects in order to perform this work.
(C) All construction materials incorporated into the work shall conform to the requirements set forth in
the KYTC Roadway Manual.
(D) The Contractor shall notify Staff of the intent to start the project within 24 hours of beginning
production.
4.7-2 Mixture Designation and Design
(A) Volumetric Mix Design
The Contractor shall perform the volumetric mix design according to AASHTO R35 and
conforming to AASHTO M323 and utilize 50 gyrations.
(B) Mix Design Submittal
At least 72 hours prior to the start of production, the Contractor shall submit the mix design to the
Staff and the Applicant’s Qualified Material Testing Lab for review.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 113
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(C) Aggregate Gradation
Aggregate gradations for base, intermediate and surface mixtures shall conform to KYTC Roadway
Manual Division 400 and Table 4.7-1.
TABLE 4.7-1:AGGREGATE GRADATIONS
SIEVE SIZE 1.0BASE MIXTURE 0.75 INTERMEDIATE
MIXTURE SURFACE MIXTURE
1½” 100 -- --
1” 90-100 100 --
¾” <90 90-100 --
½” -- <90 100
⅜” -- -- 90-100
#4 -- -- <70
#8 19-45 23-49 25-55
#16 -- -- --
#200 1-7 2-8 2-10
(D) Voids in Mineral Aggregate (VMA), Asphalt Content (AC) and Air Voids (AV)
VMA, AC and AV for residential streets shall be as specified in Table 4.7-2 and for commercial /
industrial streets as specified in Table 4.7-3.
TABLE 4.7-2:VMA,ACAND AVFOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS
MINIMUM VMA MINIMUM AC AV
Base Mixture 12% 4% 4%
Intermediate Mixture 13% 4.3% 4%
Surface Mixture 14% 5.4% 3%
TABLE 4.7-3:VMA,ACAND AVFOR COMMERCIAL / INDUSTRIAL STREETS
MINIMUM VMA MINIMUM AC AV
Base Mixture 12% 4% 4%
Intermediate Mixture 13% 4.3% 4%
Surface Mixture 14% 5.4% 4%
(E) Remaining Mix Design
The remaining mix design shall conform to the applicable KYTC mix designations Class 2 BASE
0.75D PG64-22 or Class 2 BASE 1.0D PG64-22 “Base and Intermediate Mixture” and Class 2
SURF 0.38D PG64-22 “Surface Mixture”.
(F) Recycled Asphalt Pavement and Recycled Asphalt Shingles
Recycled Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be used but is limited to 25 percent of the mixture by
weight in the surface and 30 percent of the mixture by weight in the base. Recycled Asphalt
Shingles (RAS) may be used but is limited to 3.0 percent of the mixture by weight. However,
when combined, the total amount of RAP and RAS may not exceed 25 percent in the surface and
30 percent in the base with no more than three percent RAS. Warm mix Asphalt technology is
allowed on a permissive base similar to the KYTC Standard Specifications. See Table 4.7-4.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 114
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
TABLE 4.7-4:MAXIMUM RECYCLED RAP AND RASIN ASPHALT PAVEMENT
MAXIMUM RAP MAXIMUM RAS MAXIMUM RAPAND RAS
Base Mixture 30% 3% 30%
Intermediate Mixture 30% 3% 30%
Surface Mixture 25% 3% 25%
4.7-3 Plant Mix Operation
(A) Plant Requirements
(1) All Asphalt mixing plants shall conform to KYTC standards.
(2) Maximum asphalt temperature during plant operations is 330o F.
(3) Minimum asphalt temperature in the truck at the plant is 220o F.
(B) Plant Testing Requirements
(1) The Contractor shall monitor the plant production and perform quality control testing at the
Asphalt mixing plant.
(2) Staff shall be provided access to the facility during production and may be present to observe
sampling and testing by the Contractor personnel.
(3) A minimum of one test shall be performed per day of paving and additional tests shall be
performed for each 1,000 tons produced.
a) The Contractor may perform additional testing as desired to control mix properties.
b) When multiple test samples are obtained, the average value of those results shall be
used for acceptance.
c) At the start of production on the project, the first sample shall be obtained after a
minimum of 50 tons have been loaded.
d) Samples shall be tested for conformance to gradation and Asphalt content requirements
(AASHTO T164 & AASHTO T30).
e) Testing results from any offsite laboratory testing shall be reported to Staff, the
applicant and the Qualified Material Testing Lab within 24 hours.
4.7-4 Minimum and Maximum Lift Thicknesses
Minimum and maximum thicknesses for asphalt lifts are indicated in Table 4.7-5.
TABLE 4.7-5:MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIFT THICKNESSES
MINIMUM LIFT MAXIMUM LIFT
Base 3” 5”
Intermediate 2¼” 4½”
Surface 1¼” 1¾”
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 115
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
4.7-5 Placement Procedures
(A) General
(1) All Contractors must be prequalified by KYTC or demonstrate experience and success on
similar projects in order to perform this work.
(2) Immediately before placing Asphalt materials, remove loose and deleterious materials using
a power broom or street sweeping equipment.
(B) Subgrade
(1) Asphalt placement is prohibited on subgrade with free water on the surface.
(2) Pavement Subgrade cross slopes shall vary from 3.7 percent to 5 percent depending on the
applicable Street cross section.
(C) Overlay
(1) A tack coat shall be evenly applied across the width of the lane at a rate of 0.05 gallons per
square yard. Adjust spray bars as necessary to avoid streaks.
(2) A tack coat is not required when placing Asphalt base mixtures on granular base layers.
(3) When Asphalt surface abuts a barrier Curb or similar vertical surface, the abutting surface
shall be tack coated prior to construction of the Asphalt course.
(D) Equipment
(1) The Contractor shall furnish dump trucks with clean, smooth metal beds to transport
materials and shall use approved and environmentally friendly release agents.
(2) Use of diesel fuel is strictly prohibited in truck beds.
(3) Sufficient trucks should be scheduled to allow for a continuous paving operation without
significant delays between trucks.
(4) The Contractor shall furnish a self-propelled paver with the capacity of spreading and
finishing all courses to the indicated widths, depths, line, grade and cross section, with a
smooth finish, uniform in density and texture.
(5) Rollers must also be self-propelled and capable of reversing smoothly. Steel wheel rollers
must be equipped with adjustable scrapers, spray bars, and/or wetting pads to keep wheels
clean at all times.
(6) Hand tampers may also be used in tight areas inaccessible by rollers.
(E) Temperatures for Asphalt, Ambient Air and Subgrade
(1) Do not place Asphalt mixtures when the ambient air temperature and existing surface
temperatures on the project are less than those specified below or when weather conditions
otherwise prevent the proper handling or finishing of the Asphalt mixtures.
a) Minimum ambient air and existing surface temperature shall be 35o F (and rising) prior
to placement of Asphalt Base Mixture.
b) Minimum ambient air and surface temperature shall be 40o F (and rising) prior to
placement of Asphalt Surface Mixture:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 116
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(2) The maximum temperature of the mixture shall not exceed 330o F at any time, and the
minimum temperature (measured in the truck at the project site) shall not fall below 200o F
for all mixtures.
(3) Compaction efforts shall be completed before the Roadway mix temperature falls below 150o
F.
(F) Application of Asphalt Mixes
(1) All courses shall be placed and spread as continuously as possible, keeping the number of
joints to a minimum.
(2) The longitudinal joint in the final surface course shall be placed along the dividing line
between the lanes.
(3) Best paving practices shall be utilized to ensure the proper amount of material at the joint and
to make the same number of passes over the joint as the middle of the mat.
(4) The finished Joint shall be smooth and tight and free from voids or coarse material.
(G) Surface Course Application
(1) The surface course application shall be provided no later than 12 months from the date the
base Asphalt was placed.
(2) Prior to the surface course application, Staff shall inspect the Asphalt base course. Damage
to the Asphalt base course that will affect the structural integrity or future maintainability of
the pavement section shall be repaired prior to placement of the surface course.
(3) Damage to Curb and gutter sections identified by Staff that will affect the structural integrity
and/or future maintainability of the Curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced prior to
the placement of surface Asphalt course.
(4) The surface course shall be compacted to between ⅛” and ½” above adjacent Concrete Curb
apron.
(5) The pavement surface cross slope shall be three percent.
(6) The joint between Curb and gutter and Asphalt pavements shall be sealed in accord with
Subsection 4.7-7: Joint Sealing.
Density 4.7-6 Testing Requirements
(A) Sampling
All base and surface Asphalt and aggregate materials shall be sampled, tested, and reported by a
Qualified Material Testing Lab in accordance with the KYTC Roadway Manual Division 400.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 117
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(B) Testing Frequency and Results
(1) Density tests shall be performed at least every 150 feet along each lane of asphalt placed.
(2) At the discretion of Staff, a quality assurance check (including cores) of the sampling and
testing may be required if deficiencies are suspected.
(3) Asphalt base and surface courses shall be compacted to an average density of between 90 and
97 percent of solid volume.
(4) Density testing shall be per ASTM D2950 “Density of Bituminous Concrete In Place by
Nuclear Density Methods” or ASTM D7113 “Density of Bituminous Mixtures In Place by
Electromagnetic Surface Contact Methods”.
4.7-7 Joint Sealing
(A) Compound Material
The Joint Sealing Compound shall conform to the following standard designations:
(1) Hot-Poured Elastic Type, as specified by AASHTO, latest edition; or
(2) Silicone Rubber Sealant Type (Non-Sag, Self-Leveling, or Rapid Cure) conforming to the
KYTC Roadway Manual, latest edition; or
(3) An approved equal, as determined and approved by Staff.
(4) The use of AC-20 as joint sealant is prohibited.
(B) Air Temperature
The application of joint sealant is prohibited at air temperatures below 40o F.
(C) Application
(1) Joint Sealant shall be applied to all Joints abutting the Asphalt, which includes the Joint
between the base Asphalt and the Curb if the surface course is not going to be applied
immediately.
(2) Joint sealant shall be applied to the Curb line immediately upon placement of the surface
Asphalt.
4.7-8 Acceptance
(A) All Asphalt pavement materials shall be evaluated by the Staff, per the requirements set forth in
this specification and the KYTC Roadway Manual. Asphalt mixtures will be considered
acceptable if the test results determine the materials are within the acceptable limits, as shown in
Table 4.7-6 and Table 4.7-7. Any materials deemed to be outside of these ranges shall be re-tested
for compliance.
TABLE 4.7-6:ACCEPTABLE RANGES FOR ACAND DENSITY
ASPHALT CONTENT DENSITY
±0.6% 90% - 97%
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 118
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
TABLE 4.7-7:ACCEPTABLE GRADATION RANGES
SIEVE SIZE
ACCEPTANCE RANGES PERCENT PASSING
1.0BASE MIXTURE 0.75 INTERMEDIATE
MIXTURE 0.38 SURFACE MIXTURE
1½“ 94-100 -- --
1” 84-100 94-100 --
¾“ <90 84-100 --
½“ -- <90 94-100
⅜” -- -- 84-100
#4 -- -- <90
#8 14-50 18-54 32-73
#16 -- -- --
#200 1-10 1-10 1-10
(B) When test results are in the “Acceptable Ranges,” the material will be accepted. Staff shall require
the Applicant to “Remove and Replace” the materials when the test results indicate they are outside
the limits of the “Acceptable Ranges”.
(C) The surface of each course shall be inspected for uniformity and adequate thickness. Base courses
shall be placed within a ½ inch tolerance and surface courses within ¼ inch tolerance. All
irregularities exceeding the allowable tolerances must be repaired as directed by the Staff.
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
NOTE: THIS SECTION IS NOT REGULATORY BUT SETS OUT IMPORTANT PAVEMENT
FACTS AND SUPPORT FOR HOW THE REGULATIONS REGARDING STREET PAVEMENT
AND EARTHWORK WERE DERIVED AND INCORPORATED INTO Article 4: Public and Private
Infrastructure AND Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements.
4.8-1 Purpose
Pavement in Public Streets, including Subdivision Streets, is one of the largest physical assets by dollar
value owned by various Kenton County legislative bodies (city/county). The purpose of this section is
twofold. The first is to inform all in Kenton County who have responsibilities in the design, construction
and maintenance of Subdivision Streets of important facts about the nature of pavements and their
individual responsibilities in obtaining good long-term pavement performance in new Kenton County
Subdivisions.
The second is to set out some of the critical engineering analysis and reasoning used to establish the
pavement, pavement Subgrade, and pavement Drainage specifications for future Subdivision pavement
contained in Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure, Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and
Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction
Specifications, and Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements of
these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 119
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Existing Subdivision Pavement 4.8-2 Performance Analysis
During the process of reviewing this 2014 update of the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations there
was a substantial community discussion on Subdivision pavement design, construction and performance.
During the late stages of this community discussion, at the suggestion of the Kenton County Judge
Executive and several city Mayors, and authorization of the Planning Commission Chairman, a
committee of five local pavement professionals with extensive and long-term experience in the design,
construction, and maintenance of Subdivision pavements was formed. This committee was asked, as a
voluntary community service, to do the following: analyze existing Subdivision pavement performance,
evaluate that performance compared to reasonable expectations for pavement performance, and make
recommendations that would improve pavement customer value in future Subdivision pavements. All
earlier community discussion on pavement performance was to be considered as input into their process.
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report contains this committee’s final report to the Planning
Commission in this regard. The recommendations of this report were an important source of information
that was used in the formation of these Subdivision pavement regulations.
4.8-3 Important Pavement Facts
There is no perfect pavement, no pavement lasts indefinitely, and all pavements require maintenance,
repair and refurbishment on a timely basis in order to minimize long term pavement costs. All
professional pavement design procedures recognize that all pavements will eventually fail, regardless of
how well they are built, either by the impacts of weathering, the impacts of repetitive heavy vehicle axle
loads, or both. Professional engineering pavement design also recognizes pavement will have local
failures during its life because of the imperfect nature of the natural soil Subgrade, pavement materials,
and construction techniques. Pavements designed by pavement professionals are, therefore, designed
with assumptions and calculations of the need for maintenance, repair of isolated failures, and
refurbishment during the pavement life. All pavement literature recognizes that the three essential
components of good pavement performance are (A) proper pavement design for the in situ conditions,
(B) proper construction consistent with the design, and (C) proper and timely maintenance and repair.
Failure in the proper execution of any one of these three components will lead to very substantial
increases in long term pavement cost and/or inadequate pavement serviceability. These three
components are discussed further below.
(A) Pavement Design
The following is a discussion of certain important elements of the engineering approach taken to
establish the pavement design, materials and construction methods specified for Subdivision
Streets in Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7:
Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications, and Article 6:
Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements.
(1) Proper pavement engineering design requires economic analysis of pavement design
alternatives. For an in-depth discussion of the engineering economics of pavements, see
Chapter 3 of the AASHTO ’93 Pavement Design Manual. The economic engineering design
objective used herein is to minimize pavement 50 year net present value life cycle costs to
the pavement Customer while maintaining adequate pavement serviceability. The pavement
“Customer” is defined as the amalgamation of the Subdivision Lot/home purchaser,
occupant, tax payer and citizen. There is no attempt to differentiate any of these Customer
subgroups. Collectively, they are the pavement Customer.
The Customer pays all of the costs of pavement through Lot/home purchase price, rent, and
various forms of taxes.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 120
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Pavement cost over the pavement life cycle includes construction costs; maintenance, repair
and refurbishment costs; and costs related to the time value of money (thus net present
value). These various costs include any overhead and profit that is related to the goods and
services provided.
A 50 year life cycle was chosen for the analysis period because there is substantial local
experience that demonstrates Subdivision pavements, when properly designed, built,
maintained, and resurfaced, can last 50 years or more. A longer analysis period was not
chosen because transportation modes and pavement loading, maintenance and repair methods
and materials, and all sorts of other related factors, are simply not foreseeable beyond 50
years. Pavement designs herein are also designed with a 20 year design life or performance
period, defined as the time that an initial pavement will last before it needs rehabilitation.
Pavement designs presented herein are designed to last at least 50 years, as long as properly
constructed, maintained, and resurfaced over the 50 year period as shown in Subsection 4.8-
3(C): Pavement Maintenance herein. Figure A.1-AA: Detail #25 also shows a method of
extending the pavement life past 50 years using existing refurbishment and resurfacing
methods.
Any alternate pavement design submitted for a particular Subdivision by a pavement design
professional must also include a 20 year design life and a 50 year life cycle maintenance,
repair, and resurfacing analysis, including relevant traffic loading.
(2) The pavement Subgrade is the soil directly under the pavement. Pavements rely on the
Subgrade for structural support. Subgrades must, therefore, be constructed of soils with
adequate load bearing capacity, properly prepared.
Portland Cement Concrete (“Concrete”) is a rigid pavement and spreads traffic loads over a
larger Subgrade area as compared to Asphalt Cement Concrete (“Asphalt”) pavement which
is a flexible pavement. Because of this wheel load distribution difference in the nature of
these two pavement types, Asphalt pavements require a higher minimum Subgrade bearing
capacity than Concrete pavements.
Pavement specifications herein require Subgrade soils that, when properly prepared, will
produce a bearing capacity or California Bearing Ratio (“CBR”) of 2 or greater for Concrete
pavement and CBR of 3 or greater for Asphalt pavement.
A substantial majority (not all) of potential future Subdivision sites in Kenton County have
natural soils that, when properly prepared, will produce an adequate Subgrade bearing
capacity to support Concrete or Asphalt, but not necessarily both. For Subdivision locations
with in situ soils that will not produce these minimum bearing capacities for the pavement
type that the Developer selects, properly designed and built Subgrade improvements will be
required.
Quality control of as-built Subgrades is a very important component of assuring the expected
pavement design performance.
(3) The repetition of Equivalent 18,000 Pound Single Axle Loads (“ESALs”) going over the
pavement during its life is one mode of eventual pavement failure. Therefore, estimates of
ESALs are required to properly design pavements. Pavement designs herein include ESAL
loading estimates during land development construction, building construction, and traffic
activity after full building occupancy. The estimate methods and quantities are shown in
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 121
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Figure C.1-A: Exhibit A. Any alternate pavement designs must be based on these ESAL
estimates, or greater.
(4) Pavement surface and subsurface storm water conditions are another important consideration
in pavement design. The primary engineering design methods for minimizing the negative
effects of storm water on pavement and pavement Subgrades are (1) preventing water from
entering the pavement, (2) providing Drainage that quickly removes excess water that enters
the pavement, and (3) building the pavement strong enough to resist the combined effects of
wheel load and water. Because Asphalt is more porous and has higher reliance on Subgrade
strength as compared to Concrete pavement, accounting for the potential negative effects of
water entering Asphalt pavements and pavement Subgrade is more critical for Asphalt
pavements.
The design features specified in these regulations use all three methods listed above to
minimize the negative effects of storm water on Subdivision pavement.
The primary pavement requirements used in these regulations for effective storm water
surface and subsurface management are as follows:
a) Rural Development Streets
i) Three percent surface cross slope, as shown in Figure A.1-E: Detail #5 and
Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
ii) Subgrade cross slope of three percent for Concrete Streets and three percent +2
inches for Asphalt Streets, as shown in Figure A.1-C: Detail #3, Figure A.1-D:
Detail #4, Figure A.1-E: Detail #5, and Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
iii) Drainage ditches on both sides of the Street where the ditch depth is always
deeper than the Subgrade at the outside edge of pavement, as shown in Figure
A.1-E: Detail #5, and Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
b) Suburban and Urban Streets
Most Subdivision pavements likely to be built in Kenton County will be classified as
urban or suburban. These Streets are built with curb and gutter. The pavement with
curb and gutter serves as a surface storm water conduit which is designed to collect
surface storm water off the Street and off adjoining Subdivision lots and transport that
storm water to Street catch basins which connect to storm sewers. Street design
requirements herein are designed to get and keep storm water in the gutter flow line of
these Streets as much as practical.
i) All Streets
a) Curb and gutter and three percent surface cross grade to get and keep storm
water in the gutter line until it is collected at catch basins (see Figure A.1-C:
Detail #3 and Figure A.1-D: Detail #4.
b) Build Public Sidewalk so that the edge nearest the Street is built six inches
above the adjacent Curb on sloped Curbs and three inches above the Curb on
Barrier Curbs. This maintains positive street Drainage even after multiple
pavement overlays (see Figure A.1-C: Detail #3 and Figure A.1-D: Detail
#4).
c) Install continuous edge drain at the outside edge of the pavement on both
sides of the Street, as shown in Figure A.1-C: Detail #3, Figure A.1-D:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 122
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Detail #4, Figure A.1-X: Detail #22, and Figure A.1-Y: Detail #23. This
edge drain will help drain the Subgrade, help keep surface water from the
outside edge of the pavement out of the Subgrade, and will help drain Joints
in Concrete and the Asphalt/Concrete Curb and gutter interface.
d) Provide for Subgrade Drainage and edge drain Drainage at all paired catch
basins, as shown on the Required Street Cross Section Construction at Catch
Basin Crossings in Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
ii) Concrete Streets
a) All pavement Joints are properly sealed with joint sealing compound to
minimize water penetrating those Joints and getting into the Subgrade.
b) All pavements are built with a three percent Subgrade cross grade (see
Figure A.1-C: Detail #3 and Figure A.1-E: Detail #5) continuous from
centerline to edge of Curb, which will help any water that gets into the
Subgrade to the outside of the Curb and to the edge drain.
iii) Asphalt Streets
a) The surface course of Asphalt has been designed to minimize the water that
will penetrate the pavement and get into the Subgrade.
b) The finish course of Asphalt is built ¼ inch above the Curb apron to force
any surface water toward the gutter line rather than allow the water to lay out
in the pavement surface for extended periods of time.
c) The Curb apron is built with a six percent cross pitch to keep water in the
gutter line.
d) The Asphalt Joint at the Concrete Curb apron is sealed with Joint sealer to
keep water from penetrating through that Joint into the Subgrade.
e) The Subgrade is built with a three percent plus two inch cross slope and is
built continuously from the centerline to the outside of the Curb to help drain
the Subgrade and help minimize the potential for water penetrating into the
Subgrade from the outside edge of the pavement.
f) The first course of pavement base (Asphalt or KYTC crushed stone base) is
continuous from the centerline to the outside edge of the pavement, and the
Concrete Curb and gutter is built on top of the first course of base, which
will help keep water from penetrating the Subgrade at the outside edge of the
pavement and will help support the Curb and reduce potential for Curb
breakage.
In regards to “…building the pavement strong enough to resist the combined effects of wind
and water,” the Subgrade design parameters used in Table 4.4-1 account for substantial
Kenton County seasonal variability in Subgrade support consistent with substantial change in
water content of Subgrade soils season-to-season.
(5) There are many other design, material, and construction method details set out in Section 4.4:
Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete
(Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications, Article 6: Geotechnical
Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements, and Appendix A: Standard
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 123
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Construction Drawings that are important to good pavement performance. Because these
details are not discussed here does not diminish their importance.
(B) Pavement Construction Quality Control
Construction quality control, which means building the pavement with good construction practices
and in substantial conformance with these Subdivision regulations and the approved construction
design drawings, is the responsibility of the Subdivision Developer and its agents who are the
Engineers and construction Contractors hired by that Developer to design and build that
Subdivision’s improvements. The Planning Commission’s role in construction quality control is,
through its Staff or other quality control service provider, to confirm and document that the
Subdivision design drawings satisfy these regulations and that the in-place Subdivision
improvements are built in substantial accordance to these Subdivision regulations and the
Subdivision design drawings.
(C) Pavement Maintenance
The need for and benefit of timely and adequate maintenance by the Street pavement’s owners is
documented throughout the pavement literature. Failure to properly and timely maintain
pavements will lead to substantially increased Customer pavement costs and/or diminished
pavement serviceability.
(1) Recommended 50 Year Life Cycle Maintenance
The following is a schedule for maintenance, repair, and resurfacing that can be expected in
an effort to minimize Customer 50 year life cycle costs for Subdivision pavements.
a) Recommended Asphalt Pavement Owner Maintenance
Minor Maintenance:
• Joint and crack seal every three years
• Spot Curb repair
• Spot pavement repair
Major Maintenance:
• At approximately +17 years:
- Spot Curb repair, as necessary
- Spot base repair
- Mill Asphalt two inches deep at the Concrete Curb apron to zero inches at
six feet out from the Curb Apron
- Install new two inch Asphalt surface with a four percent Curb apron to
centerline cross slope.
- Seal the Asphalt/Curb Apron interface
• At approximately +34 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot base repair
- Pavement fabric over joint between Asphalt and Curb
- New two inch Asphalt surface overlay
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 124
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
b) Recommended Concrete Pavement Owner Maintenance
Minor Maintenance:
• Joint and crack seal every three years
• Inspect Driveway apron expansion material for signs of pavement lengthening;
take remedial action as necessary (See Subsection 4.8-3(C)(1)c): Management
of Concrete Pavement Lengthening, below.)
• Localized failure repairs
Major Maintenance:
• At approximately +17 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot slab repair
• At approximately +34 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot slab and Joint repair
- Inspect for erosion (tunneling) under pavement, mud jack as necessary
- Mill Concrete two inches deep at or near the Concrete gutter line to zero
inches deep six feet out from the gutter line.
- Install Asphalt skim coat and Stress Absorbing Asphalt Membrane
Interlayer (SAMI) over the width of the pavement.
- Install 1½-inch deep Asphalt surface overlay with a four percent gutter line
to centerline cross slope.
c) Management of Concrete Pavement Lengthening
Concrete pavements can expand in length later in the pavement’s life as described on
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report - Problem #12(b). While the
pavement design features incorporated into this regulation along with proper owner
pavement maintenance will minimize this lengthening, the potential for lengthening
and the related potential negative impacts cannot be eliminated.
The design feature incorporated into these regulations which will allow for the
identification and management of any potential negative impacts to improvements on
private property is the placement of a total of three inches of expansion joint material
within the Street Right-of-way at each Driveway apron, as shown in Figure A.1-T:
Detail #18, Figure A.1-U: Detail #19, and Figure A.1-V: Detail #20.
The pavement owners’ regular inspection (every three years) of the expansion material
to see if the three inches of expansion material has “closed up” to two inches or less is
required. If the expansion material has “closed up” to two inches or less, remedial
action consisting of saw cutting the Driveway apron next to the Curb to allow for
additional expansion is required.
The preceding is one set of proven long-term pavement management strategies that
have been used on Northern Kentucky Subdivision Streets. There are others that have
been effective. When these strategies are properly and timely executed on pavement
designs in these regulations (properly constructed), the result should be satisfactory
pavement performance for at least 50 years without pavement replacement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 125
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
As new, more cost effective maintenance and repair strategies are developed over time,
they should be adopted for use.
(2) Extending Pavement Life Beyond 50 Years
Figure A.1-AA: Detail #25 shows a methodology of extending pavement life that should
allow most Subdivision pavements, properly built and maintained under these regulations, to
have their life extended beyond 50 years without replacement. Obviously, many things can
and likely will change over the next 50 years that will substantially change the best course of
action for refurbishment or replacement of these Subdivision pavements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 126
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.1: Purpose
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.1: Purpose
5.1-1 Green infrastructure uses natural processes to ameliorate the negative effects of urban development,
including reducing heat island effects, air pollution, water pollution and excess storm water runoff.
Integrated stormwater management is a subset of green infrastructure. The use of integrated stormwater
management is encouraged because of its connection to effective development practices and
environmental quality. The influence of the natural flow regime (hydrology) of a given watershed on
overall stream integrity (chemical, physical, biological) is well established, and as such, maintaining the
natural flow regime is a priority for stormwater managers. The proper use of integrated stormwater
management practices can achieve this goal and dramatically improve stormwater runoff quality,
decrease runoff volume, reduce infrastructure costs, protect the integrity of downstream streams and
rivers, and create more interesting places to live. Stormwater management practices include a broader
understanding of watershed management and ecosystem function, coupled with overall site design and
layout, and implementation of an impervious area reduction strategy. The creation of impervious
surfaces on a site can dramatically impact a community’s watersheds, wastewater treatment systems, and
water supplies by altering the landscape’s inherent ability to slow, filter, and absorb stormwater runoff
(i.e. alters the natural flow regime). Development or redevelopment of a site can be accomplished while
reducing the overall negative impact to receiving streams, by applying carefully considered stormwater
management techniques which mimic natural hydrology. To further these more general purposes, this
article:
(A) Establishes site design components to promote more effective use of individual stormwater
management techniques to prevent negative impacts rather than mitigating them;
(B) Provides the ability to utilize simple, nonstructural methods for stormwater management that are
lower cost and lower maintenance than structural controls;
(C) Encourages the management of stormwater as close to the point of origin as possible and
minimizes collection and conveyance, establishing a strategy to determine what portions of
stormwater are to be filtered into the ground on site and what portions of stormwater are to flowthrough
the site for management elsewhere;
(D) Provides benefits to the environment as well as to the development community by improving water
quality and restoring aquatic habitats while controlling flooding. This approach can increase
rainfall infiltration and groundwater recharge with potentially large environmental benefits and
potentially lower net costs – both to the environment and to the Developer. The integrated
stormwater management techniques provide innovative options for Developers to rethink overall
site design and layout to utilize a site more efficiently while providing better stormwater
management opportunities than traditional gray infrastructure;
(E) Uses multiple impervious area reduction techniques within the context of an overall site design to
reduce the negative runoff impact created with the development or redevelopment of a site and
ideally reduce the amount of underground pipe infrastructure necessary on a site;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 127
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies
(F) Promotes the aesthetic value of integrated stormwater management. In addition to the benefits of
maintaining healthy waterways and the multiple environmental benefits supporting healthy
communities found in the use of integrated stormwater management, the use of these techniques
can provide aesthetic value to a community with the use of added vegetation to the landscape. By
integrating natural processes into the built environment, these techniques provide stormwater
management, Flood mitigation and control, and air quality management with more aesthetic appeal
than standard gray stormwater infrastructure.
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies
5.2-1 Overall site layout strategies are encouraged to be incorporated into an integrated stormwater
management plan. Site layout strategies are the first step in managing stormwater in a way that mimics
natural hydrology. Using land more efficiently for development, preserving critical ecological areas, and
reducing runoff through better site design are vital to maintaining a healthy watershed. Stormwater
management works most effectively in conjunction with an overall site design strategy which identifies
how the stormwater impacts created by the development will be addressed.
5.2-2 A site design strategy should include identification of which portions of expected stormwater will be
managed using either infiltration methods, retention methods, or flow-through methods. Shifting the
focus toward the utilization of rainwater as a resource that should be managed as close to where it falls as
possible and away from addressing rainwater solely as a waste that should be removed from a site will
increase the efficiency of stormwater management.
5.2-3 Effective stormwater management will utilize multiple methods aimed at managing runoff through both
infiltration into natural systems as well as use of management methods which remove water from the site
through piping infrastructure without adding significant impacts to local waterways and watersheds. The
elements work collectively to lessen the negative impacts to nearby waterways and watershed systems.
5.2-4 Efficiently designing a site should include conscious efforts to minimize the impervious areas created by
new streets, pedestrian pathways, parking Lots, and/or buildings.
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
5.3-1 The following elements are examples of integrated stormwater management which, when used in
coordination with effective site design strategies, can aid in lowering the negative impact to local
waterways and watersheds. Once a strategy has been established to minimize collection and conveyance,
these elements can be utilized, in varying combinations, to successfully implement stormwater to be
filtered into the ground on site and stormwater to flow-through the site for management elsewhere.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 128
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(A) Narrower Right-of-way Widths
Whether used in conjunction with narrower pavement widths or traditional width pavements,
narrowing the Right-of-way established within a site is a significant opportunity to reduce the
quantity and increase the quality of storm water runoff by allowing structures to be set closer to the
street. Because of the topography that is typical for this region, many developments involve land
that includes ridge tops, hillside slopes and headwater streams. As such, development plans often
include streets and structures constructed along ridge tops with back yards that extend down the
hillside slopes and into headwater streams. Placing structures closer to the ridge top lessens the
need for earthwork and tree removal along these hillside slopes which keeps more undisturbed land
on the slopes and near the headwater streams. In addition to the added benefit of helping to ensure
hillside stability, lessening hillside disturbance and tree removal will result in a lesser impact to the
natural flow regime, and therefore a lesser impact to water quantity and water quality in these
headwater streams as well as the corresponding receiving streams downstream of the site. See
Figure 5.3-A.
Figure 5.3-A: Illustration of Narrower Right-of-way Widths
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 129
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(B) Grassy Swales (Bioretention Swales) Without Curb and Gutter and Grassy Swales With
Curb and Gutter Containing Cut-outs and Flumes
Swales are long and narrow depressions in the landscape which incorporate vegetation to gradually
move stormwater through a site by use of gentle slopes to guide runoff through the system. Swales
are primarily used to slow the speed of stormwater runoff as it moves through a site though some
infiltration can occur when slopes (less than five percent) and soils are favorable. The vegetation
used within swales typically requires lower ongoing maintenance than that of traditional
landscaping. When used in combination with Curb and gutter containing cutouts and flumes, the
swales provide the same benefit as traditional swales without Curb and gutter by collecting
stormwater outside of traditional gray infrastructure associated with the site and decreasing the
impacts of development to the overall man-made stormwater management system. However this
system offers the added benefit of providing Curb and gutter along the edge of streets to help
buttress asphalt pavements, create a well-defined pavement edge and increase the overall pavement
edge lifespan. See Figure 5.3-B and Figure 5.3-C.
Figure 5.3-B: Illustration of a Grassy Swale without Curb and Gutter
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 130
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-C: Illustration of a Grassy Swale with Curb and Gutter
(C) Infiltration Gardens (Biofiltration Swales or Rain Gardens)
Infiltration gardens are shallow depressions in the landscape which provide larger, often unused or
left-over areas on a site to filter stormwater into the natural soils and groundwater system. Use of
infiltration gardens can significantly lessen the amount of stormwater collected into piping
infrastructure. The vegetation used within infiltration gardens typically requires lower ongoing
maintenance than that of traditional landscaping. See Figure 5.3-D.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 131
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-D: Illustration of an Infiltration Garden
(D) Pedestrian Walkways as a Design Element
Alternative pedestrian ways which are outside of the requirements set forth in Table 4.1-1 can be
created to constitute a pedestrian circulation system equal to the level of effectiveness that
traditional Sidewalk on one or both sides of the street would provide. Rather than including
Sidewalks only within the Right-of-way along the Street, integrating a well thought out pedestrian
circulation system throughout a site can reduce impervious surface while potentially lowering the
construction cost and raising the stormwater management benefits of the overall site. Incorporating
a strategic system of Pedestrian Walkways linking key destinations within a site (in conjunction
with aligning connections for travel outside the site) will increase usability of walkway networks.
Additionally, incorporating materials such as mulch, gravel, or other pervious material can further
reduce the hard surface runoff. When adding Sidewalks to one or both sides of every street, often
important pedestrian connections are not made, the Sidewalks themselves are under (if-at-all)
utilized, and excessive impervious surfaces are created.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 132
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-E: Illustration of Pedestrian Walkways as a Design Element
(E) Planter Boxes
Planters are long narrow, often rectangular landscaped areas with vertical walls and flat, unsloped
bottoms, and are able to store a greater volume of water than swales, because they are typically
deeper, and provide more capacity. Water flows into the planter, absorbs into the topsoil and
plants, fills to a predetermined overflow elevation, and discharges into the overflow system
provided. Two types of planters are used for stormwater management.
(1) Flow-through Planters
Flow-through planters have a sealed bottom and sides and absorb only as much water as the
soil and plants in the planter can accommodate. They allow water to slowly travel through
the soil profile prior to overflowing into a subsurface underdrain system. See Figure 5.3-F.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 133
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-F: Illustration of a Flow-Through Planter Box
(2) Infiltration Planters
The bottom of an infiltration planter is open to the native soil. Water in the planter is
absorbed by topsoil, and infiltrates into native soils below. See Figure 5.3-G.
Figure 5.3-G: Illustration of Infiltration Planter Box
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 134
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(F) Permeable Pavement
If underlying soils allow for the natural infiltration of rain water, constructing pavement using
permeable materials can allow for stormwater to filter through the pavement and into the natural
ground water system while still providing the structural integrity necessary for the site’s
automobile and pedestrian traffic. The use of Permeable Pavement can mitigate the overall impact
of the development to the piping infrastructure systems while maintaining full functionality of the
developed site. See Figure 5.3-H, Figure 5.3-I, and Figure 5.3-J.
Figure 5.3-H: Illustration of Permeable Pavers
Figure 5.3-I: Illustration of Permeable Pavement
Figure 5.3-J: Illustration of Permeable Pavement with an Underdrain
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 135
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(G) Preserving Existing Trees and Planting New Trees
Preserving trees and planting new trees on a site adds to the ability to effectively slow, absorb, and
filter rainwater. Trees naturally work to physically slow the flow of water through a site by
intercepting stormwater on their leaf surfaces as well as through their root structure. Not only do
trees collect water for their growth, their physical presence on the landscape intercepts the flow of
water downhill and slows its movement. See Figure 5.3-K.
Figure 5.3-K: Illustration of Preserving Existing Trees and Planting New Trees
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 136
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.4: Criteria for Integrated Stormwater Management
Criteria for I Section 5.4: ntegrated Stormwater Management
5.4-1 Staff will approve the use of Integrated Stormwater Management provided the following criteria have
been substantiated:
(A) The Integrated Stormwater Management is proposed to utilize the landscape’s ability to reduce,
slow, filter, and/or absorb stormwater runoff from Streets, parking lots, and buildings by
maintaining key elements of the natural flow regime and minimizing impacts to receiving streams.
(B) The Integrated Stormwater Management is consistent with Sanitation District No. 1’s Stormwater
Rules and Regulations.
(C) The Integrated Stormwater Management has been designed by a Professional Engineer.
(D) For Integrated Stormwater Management within the public Right-of-way, the element(s) shall be
approved by the authority designated by the applicable Legislative Body in writing.
Section 5.5: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management allowed
By-Right
5.5-1 The following two Integrated Stormwater Management elements are permitted to be used in two separate
and distinct methods. These elements are permitted to be used as elements of Integrated Stormwater
Management anywhere in Kenton County when the criteria outlined in Section 5.4-1 have been
substantiated. However, the “by-right” use of the following Integrated Stormwater Management
elements can be utilized without requiring that any special conditions be met, as long as the element is
being used in the specific applications outlined as follows:
(A) Narrower Pavement Widths
Narrowing pavement widths is a significant opportunity to reduce stormwater runoff by reducing
the total amount of impervious surface and therefore, reducing the amount of stormwater requiring
collection into pipe infrastructure for maintenance off-site. The use of narrower pavement widths
is allowed by-right when used in conjunction with a Rural Development type. Rural Development
types are single and two-family residential developments that contain lot widths equal to or greater
than 300 feet and contain no on street parking. See Subsection 4.1-10: Allowable Pavement
Design.
(B) Grassy Swales and Shoulders Without Curb and Gutter
Swales are long and narrow depressions in the landscape which incorporate vegetation to gradually
move stormwater through a site by use of gentle slopes to guide runoff through the system. Swales
are primarily used to slow the speed of stormwater runoff as it moves through a site though some
infiltration can occur when slopes (less than five percent) and soils are favorable. When used
without curb and gutter systems, swales can more easily collect stormwater uninhibited by the
physical barriers created by traditional Curbs. Additionally, without the traditional gutter system,
stormwater can more easily flow directly into swales (infiltration systems) rather than into manmade
stormwater management system. Grassy swales and shoulders without curb and gutter is
allowed by-right when used in certain situations such as: (1) in developments that prohibit on-street
parking and contain minimum Lot widths that equal or exceed 300 feet; or (2) along streets that
serve as an entrance to the development and contain no residences and no parking. See Subsection
4.1-13: Roadside Swales.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 137
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and
Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
6.1-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292 by determining that: (1) important in situ Subdivision soils and geologic features that will impact
the functional use of public and private improvements have been identified; and (2) that soils and
geologic aspects of the design and construction of public and private improvements within the Public
Street Right of way or Private Street easements meet the support requirements of their intended use.
(A) All earthwork and geotechnical exploration requirements within Article 6 shall apply to areas
within the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements, and areas structurally
supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements;
(B) All Geotechnical Engineering and Geotechnical Technician work and reporting required under this
Article shall be provided by the Applicant of the proposed Subdivision. The Geotechnical
Technician must be under the direction and control of the Geotechnical Engineer who has been
employed by the Applicant for the proposed Subdivision. The proposed Subdivision’s
Geotechnical Engineer shall have substantial professional engineering discretion to determine
when the Geotechnical Engineering intent of the requirements of this Article is being met.
(C) The Applicant shall submit all Geotechnical Engineering and Geotechnical Technician reports and
testing results to staff at the appropriate submittal time, as noted in this Article.
6.1-2 Geotechnical Explorations Outside of the Public Right-of-Way, Private Street Easements, and
Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements
(A) Prior to the approval of the preliminary plat, a geotechnical engineer shall complete a preliminary
report that addresses the soil and bedrock types and any existing slope stability issues that are
expected in the proposed Subdivision.
(1) The Geotechnical Engineer’s preliminary report will render a preliminary engineering
opinion about the suitability of those soil and bedrock types and existing slopes to provide
the necessary support for the intended private property use of the Subdivision.
(2) The opinion of expected soil and bedrock types and opinion of soil support suitability can be
based on the Geotechnical Engineer’s local soil and bedrock knowledge, USGS maps, and a
visual field reconnaissance.
(B) The requirement for preliminary and final geotechnical explorations outside of the Public Right-ofway
may be further regulated by the applicable legislative body’s zoning ordinance.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 138
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
Geotechnical Explorations Within the Public Street Right-of-Way, 6.1-3 Private Street Easements, and
Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements
(A) Preliminary Geotechnical Exploration
(1) Prior to the approval of the preliminary plat a geotechnical engineer shall complete a
preliminary geotechnical exploration report. The report will address the soil and bedrock
types that are expected on the project site, and present an engineering opinion about the
suitability of the soil and bedrock types—when properly prepared and constructed—to
provide adequate proposed Public Street Right-of-way structural support, including the
minimum required CBR (subgrade support) values for asphalt and/or concrete pavements
described herein.
(2) The opinion of expected soil and bedrock types and opinion of Subgrade support suitability
can be based on the Geotechnical Engineer’s local soil and bedrock knowledge, USGS maps,
and a visual field reconnaissance.
(3) Kenton County soil types that may require replacement or other form of remediation during
Subgrade construction in order to provide the minimum required CBR values for Concrete
and Asphalt pavement designs shown in Table 4.4-1 are non-plastic silts (soils that classify
ML according to the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS)) and highly plastic silts and
clays (MH and CH soils) with standard Proctor maximum dry densities less than 100 pounds
per cubic foot and plasticity indices greater than 30 percent.
(B) Final Geotechnical Exploration
Prior to approval of the Improvement Plans or Grading Plans a Geotechnical Engineer shall
complete a final geotechnical exploration report that identifies the soil and bedrock types present
on the project site covered by the Improvement Plans or Grading Plans and presents a written
engineering opinion about the suitability of the soils and bedrock to provide stable Right of way
earthwork construction, and to provide the minimum CBR values for Asphalt and Concrete
pavement.
(1) This written report shall be submitted to staff and be based on the results of soil borings, test
pits, field and laboratory soil testing, etc. that are sufficient for the Geotechnical Engineer to
render his/her engineering opinion.
(2) If the soils are not suitable to provide the minimum CBR values, the Geotechnical Engineer
shall include recommendations in the written report for subgrade improvement or alternate
pavement designs.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 139
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
Earthwork Specifications, Section 6.2: Evaluation, Material Testing
and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas
Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way
and Private Street Easements
6.2-1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish the appropriate earthwork specifications and material testing
requirements so that the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements have adequate
earthwork structural support and the required pavement subgrade support.
6.2-2 Earthwork Excavations
The following shall apply to earthwork excavations other than trenches or temporary excavations:
(A) All topsoil shall be stripped from proposed cut, fill and pavement areas.
(B) Excavations shall be made to approximate grade or Subgrade elevations consistent with approved
plans.
(C) Final cut slopes shall not be steeper than a slope of 3.0 horizontal to 1.0 vertical unless otherwise
designed by a Geotechnical Engineer, but in no case shall be steeper than 2.0 horizontal to 1.0
vertical.
(D) Any spongy, unstable, or organic material that is exposed at the finished Subgrade level must be
removed to expose stiff, non-yielding, non-organic soils and the excavated material replaced with
soils capable of producing the required Subgrade CBR for the pavement design being used for the
project (see Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses of these regulations).
(E) When excavating at the cut/fill transition during earthwork, remove spongy or unstable material,
organic matter, or other unsuitable materials that are exposed. The Contractor shall remove same
to expose stiff, non-yielding, non-organic soils and shall replace with approved materials, placed
and compacted in accordance with these regulations and the recommendations of the geotechnical
engineer.
(F) Excavations can be backfilled with the same soils that were removed, provided they meet the
requirements of Subsection 6.2-3: Controlled Fill, Subsection 6.2-4: Trench Backfill, Subsection
6.2-5: Shallow Trench Backfill, and Subsection 6.2-6: Deep Trench Backfill.
6.2-3 Controlled Fill Other than Trench Backfill
(A) Construction of controlled fills shall be observed and tested by a Geotechnical Technician. Density
testing and reporting is required at a minimum frequency of one density test per 500 cubic yards.
(B) Organic or vegetative soils shall not be used in the construction of the controlled fill.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 140
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(C) Controlled fills shall be constructed of natural soils or bedrock to approximate Subgrade elevation
in level lift thicknesses that are approved by the Geotechnical Engineer. All shale used in
controlled fills shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned the same as
a soil. Limestone shall be laid flat and shall be broken up and dispersed in the fill so that it does
not nest or impede compaction. The incorporation of limestone floaters in the fill shall be in
accordance with the recommendations of the Geotechnical Engineer.
(D) Except for the top one foot of earthwork finished grades, which is the pavement subgrade,
controlled fills shall be constructed with soils that are within two percent below to three percent
above their optimum moisture content and compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition and to dry
densities at least 95 percent of the maximum dry density, as determined by the standard Proctor
moisture-density test (ASTM D698, latest edition), or 87 percent of maximum dry density as
determined by the modified Proctor moisture-density test (ASTM D1557, latest edition).
(E) Clean granular soils that do not exhibit a well-defined moisture-density curve shall be compacted
to a firm, non-yielding condition and to at least 75 percent relative density as determined by the
testing methods contained in ASTM D4253 and D4254, latest edition.
(F) Controlled fill slopes shall not be steeper than 3.0 horizontal to 1.0 vertical unless otherwise
designed by a Geotechnical Engineer. See Figure 6.2-A. In no case shall unreinforced fill slopes
be steeper than 2.5 horizontal to 1.0 vertical.
Figure 6.2-A: Illustration of the maximum slope for controlled fills
(G) Lime stabilization in controlled fills is prohibited unless designed and approved by a Geotechnical
Engineer.
(1) Prior to using lime stabilization, staff shall approve the recommended lime stabilization
specifications from a Geotechnical Engineer.
(2) The Geotechnical Engineer shall be required to monitor the lime stabilization process in the
field to determine that it is consistent with their recommended specifications.
(3) A letter from the Geotechnical Engineer shall be submitted to staff confirming that the lime
stabilization process used in the field was consistent with their written recommendations.
(H) Heavy equipment used for compaction shall be capable of producing the required controlled fill
densities without lamination.
(1) Cohesive soils shall be compacted with kneading type compaction equipment.
(2) Cohesionless soils shall be compacted with smooth face vibratory equipment.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 141
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
6.2-4 Trench Backfill
The following general information shall apply to all trench backfill:
(A) Trench backfill is defined as the backfill material used to refill the trench excavation above the
initial utility conduit bedding and cover that is a part of underground utility installation.
(B) Natural non-organic soils, bedrock, approved aggregates, and Controlled Low Strength Material
shall be used to backfill utility trenches as defined herein.
(C) Backfill shall not be flushed with water to obtain compaction.
(D) A Geotechnical Technician shall observe, test and report on the trench backfill compaction at least
once per day when said trench backfill operations are occurring.
6.2-5 Shallow Trench Backfill
The following shall apply to shallow trench backfill:
(A) Shallow trenches are defined as the utility trenches where the backfill material (the material above
the granular utility conduit bedding and cover material) is less than three feet deep to finish
earthwork grade.
(B) Shallow trench backfill under the pavement and within a 1 horizontal to 1 vertical projection
downward from the bottom edge of curb shall be dense graded aggregate (DGA), No. 57 crushed
limestone (only when connected to a Drainage structure) or controlled low strength material
(CLSM) as set out in Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2. Aggregates shall be
compacted as shown in the above noted details.
(C) Shallow trench backfill within the Right of Way but outside of the pavement and beyond a 1.0
horizontal to 1.0 vertical projection downward from the bottom edge of curb shall be natural, nonorganic
soil or bedrock (no pieces of limestone thicker than six inches or more than 12 inches
long/wide or specified aggregates as set in Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
(1) All shale shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned as a soil.
(2) All limestone shall be laid flat, broken up, and dispersed so it does not nest or impede
compaction.
(3) All backfill shall be moisture-conditioned to within two percent below to three percent above
the optimum moisture content for compaction, shall be placed in layers of 8 to 10 inches in
thickness, and each lift shall be thoroughly compacted to densities not less than 90 percent of
the standard Proctor maximum dry density, or 82 percent of the modified Proctor maximum
dry density for that soil.
(4) Backfill method shall be either a sheepsfoot roller attachment on a track mounted excavator
or a self-propelled kneading-type compactor operating longitudinally in the trench
excavation.
6.2-6 Deep Trench Backfill
The following shall apply to deep trench backfill:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 142
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(A) Deep trench backfill is defined as any trench with backfill deeper than shallow trench backfill.
(B) Deep trench backfill shall consist of natural non-organic soil or bedrock (no pieces of limestone
thicker than six inches or more than 12 inches long/wide) or specified aggregates as set out in
Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
(1) All shale shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned as a soil.
(2) All limestone shall be laid flat, broken up and dispersed so that it does not nest or impede
compaction.
(3) All backfill shall be moisture-conditioned to within two percent below to three percent above
the optimum moisture content for compaction.
(4) Backfill lifts shall be 10 inches thick or less (unless otherwise specified by the Geotechnical
Engineer), and compacted to not less than 95 percent of the standard Proctor maximum dry
density for that soil.
(5) Backfill method shall be either a sheepsfoot roller attachment on a track mounted excavator
or a self-propelled kneading-type compactor operating longitudinally in the trench
excavation.
(C) Where depths of trenches are more than four feet and worker safety is at risk, the technician shall
observe the compaction process in layers with an appropriate type of compaction equipment and
document observations until worker safety is assured when compaction testing, as required, is
resumed.
6.2-7 Street Pavement Subgrade
(A) Subgrade Preparation During Excavation
Subgrade is defined as the top one foot of the soils under the pavement. The pavement Subgrade
must provide adequate support for the pavement structure as defined in these regulations.
(1) During earthwork and initial pavement subgrade preparation, the Geotechnical Engineer or
Geotechnical Technician shall evaluate in situ pavement subgrade materials on the site and
develop an opinion about their suitability to provide the minimum CBR values when
compacted to the required densities at the specified moisture contents.
(2) Any soils identified as unsuitable to prove the minimum CBR values will be removed from
the subgrade and replaced with suitable soils, or otherwise improved as recommended by the
Geotechnical Engineer.
(B) Final Subgrade Preparations and Testing
(1) At the time of final Subgrade preparation, density testing and proofrolling before paving, the
Subgrade shall be within two percent of its optimum moisture content and compacted to a
firm, non-yielding condition and to dry densities at least 98 percent of the maximum dry
density, determined by the standard Proctor moisture-density test (ASTM D698, latest
edition) or 89 percent of the maximum dry density as determined by the modified Proctor
moisture-density test (ASTM D1557, latest edition). Cohesive Subgrade material shall be
properly knit together and free of loose, dry, crumbly, baked or crusted soil material.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 143
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(2) The Subgrade shall consist of cohesive soils, clean #57 crushed limestone, crushed stone
base, or Controlled Low Strength Material (CLSM). Any aggregate material used to replace
part of the cohesive Subgrade soil must be drained, per Figure A.1-W: Detail #21 so that no
standing water can collect and be held in the aggregate Subgrade.
(3) Clean granular soils that do not exhibit a well-defined moisture-density curve shall be
compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition and to at least 80 percent relative density as
determined by the testing methods contained in ASTM D4253 and D4254, latest edition.
(4) The Subgrade shall be shaped to plan elevation and cross-section and checked by the Staff
inspector for conformity with the cross section shown on the approved Improvement
Drawings immediately prior to placing the pavement. Pavement shall not be placed on any
part of the Subgrade which does not conform to the cross section shown on the approved
Improvement Drawings.
(C) Final Subgrade Proofrolling
(1) Proofrolling is the final test to be performed immediately prior to beginning the paving
operations.
(2) Prior to the placement of pavement materials and after confirming proper density and
moisture content of the Subgrade soils, all Street Subgrades shall be proofrolled to test the
stability and uniformity of Subgrade materials.
(3) Proofrolling shall be performed with a dual axle dump truck fully loaded with clayey soils or
aggregate.
(4) Proofrolling shall be performed at walking speed with at least two passes made in each drive
lane direction with the outside wheel generally traveling along the inside line of the future
Curb during one pass, and the wheel-paths offset one-half of the truck width during the
second pass to maximize subgrade coverage. Extra proofroll passes shall be made at the
discretion of the Staff inspector.
a) Where proofrolling indicates areas of soft or unsuitable Subgrade soils or areas of nonuniform
Subgrade stability, the area shall be delineated and repaired.
b) Areas of soft or unsuitable Subgrade soils or areas of non-uniform Subgrade stability
shall be identified by observing Pumping and/or Rutting (See Definitions Subsection
2.3-95: Pumping (or deflection) and Subsection 2.3-102: Rutting).
c) Rutting in excess of one inch in depth shall be deemed a Subgrade failure requiring
Subgrade repair.
d) Pumping or deflection of less than one inch is acceptable so long as the Subgrade soil
rebounds back to its original position after the wheel load passes. Pumping or
deflection greater than one inch or areas of permanent deflections shall be deemed a
Subgrade failure requiring Subgrade repair.
e) For larger areas of subgrade proofroll failure, the alternative pavement design
procedures in Subsection 4.4-2(B) can be implemented by the Applicant.
(5) Subgrade repairs shall be performed by scarifying, aerating and recompacting the Subgrade
soils. As an alternative, the failed Subgrade soils can be removed and replaced with properly
compacted soils capable of producing the required CBR value.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 144
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(6) In all cases, repaired areas shall be retested for compaction and proofrolled again before
proceeding with the placement of pavement materials. Rutting can typically be repaired by
scarifying, aerating, and recompacting, while areas of pumping will more likely require a
more significant repair with depth often including the removal and replacement of unsuitable
Subgrade materials.
(D) Final Subgrade Inspection Testing and Reporting Requirements
(1) Both the Staff inspector and the Geotechnical Technician have final Subgrade review,
testing, and reporting responsibilities.
(2) The Geotechnical Engineer shall provide soil testing to develop an opinion of adequate
bearing characteristics of the final Subgrade soils. Those tests will include, but are not
limited to, moisture content testing, density testing, and verification of soil types being
adequate to produce the required CBR values for the pavement. Moisture content testing,
density testing, and verification of soil types being adequate to produce the required CBR
values for the pavement shall be performed by the Geotechnical Engineer at intervals no less
than one test per 100 lineal feet of Street for Streets of 500 lineal feet or less, or one test per
200 lineal feet for Streets over 500 lineal feet.
(3) The Geotechnical Technician and the Staff Inspector shall review the proofrolling described
in Subsection 6.2-7(C): Final Subgrade Proofrolling and determine whether the Subgrade
passes the proofroll.
(4) Paving operations shall only be permitted to begin after passing inspection results are
achieved from Subsection 6.2-7: Street Pavement Subgrade, Subsection 6.2-7(C): Final
Subgrade Proofrolling, and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2). Inspection reports referenced in Clause 6.2-
7(D)(1) and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2) shall be placed in the Staff project file and Staff shall make
their inspection records available to the Developer.
(5) Street paving shall occur within 30 hours after passing inspection results are achieved from
Clause 6.2-7(D)(1) and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2). A ¼ inch rain event or sub-freezing temperature
occurrence between a passing proofroll and Street paving shall void the proofroll and
geotechnical testing and shall require re-evaluation.
(6) For concrete pavements, small pours of up to one hundred square yards to complete
intersections, cul-de-sacs, etc. do not require subgrade re-proofrolling after initially passing a
proofroll as part of a large subgrade preparations and testing. Moisture conditioning and rerolling
may be required.
Controlled 6.2-8 Low Strength Material
(A) CLSM may be used in place of compacted clayey soils to uniformly backfill utility trenches,
manholes, etc.
(B) CLSM shall not be used in place of clean, free-draining #57 crushed limestone specified for and
intended as Drainage backfill around catch basins and manholes or in trench drains, such as
between catch basin pairs.
(C) CLSM shall be transported by mixing truck to ensure proper suspension when placed. Constant
agitation is required.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 145
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(D) Flotation of pipes should be avoided by backfilling in 8 to 12 inch lifts until fluid head subsides.
(E) Adequate separation from aluminum pipe, such as a bituminous coating, is required.
(F) CLSM shall extend from the top of compacted bedding or other backfill to bottom of pavement
structure.
(1) CLSM placement shall begin no greater than six inches above the top of the pipe.
(G) CLSM shall have a minimum excavatable strength of 20 pounds per square inch at three days and
30 pounds per square inch at 28 days. CLSM shall have a maximum excavatable strength of 100
pounds per square inch at 28 days for potential future excavatability.
Construction E 6.2-9 quipment on Paved Surfaces
Only rubber tired or rubber tracked equipment shall be used on paved surfaces.
6.2-10 Work Adjacent to Plastic Concrete
Grading operations adjacent to Concrete Curb are prohibited for a minimum of 24 hours after Concrete
placement has been completed.
6.2-11 Final Geotechnical Reporting
After the completion of all earthwork covered under this Article, for each Subdivision section that is
constructed and is to be recorded, the Geotechnical Engineer shall complete a final written report for that
Subdivision section. The report will include the following:
(1) All relevant construction inspection results; and
(2) A statement from the project Geotechnical Engineer that, to the best of his/her knowledge
and belief, all earthwork operations within the Public Street Right-of-way, Private Street
easements and areas structurally supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street
easements were performed in general conformance with the requirements of this Article and
the recommendations for the areas within the Public Street Right-of-way, Private Street
easements and areas structurally supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street
easements contained in the associated geotechnical exploration report.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 146
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.1: Purpose of the Traffic Impact Study
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Purpose o Section 7.1: f the Traffic Impact Study
7.1-1 The purpose of a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) is to protect the function of the Street system while
providing appropriate access to a proposed development.
7.1-2 The objectives of a TIS are to:
(A) Determine the appropriate location, spacing, and design of Access Points necessary to serve the
proposed development and minimize impact to the public transportation system.
(B) Determine the extent of Improvements to the adjacent and nearby Street system necessary to
maintain a satisfactory level of service and safety.
Section 7.2: Need for a Traffic Impact Study
A TIS shall be required when the full build out potential of the proposed development requesting access meets any
or all of the criteria identified in Subsections 7.2-1 through 7.2-4. The full build out potential shall be defined as
the proposed development and future development for which connections are accommodated in the development
plan as required in Subsection 4.1-18: Geometric Design of Streets, of these Subdivision regulations. Future
development shall be assumed to be that which is identified and recommended by the Comprehensive Plan.
7.2-1 The proposed development is expected to generate greater than 100 trips per hour during its peak hour of
operation based on trip generation estimates according to the most recent edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual methodologies.
7.2-2 The proposed access location does not meet applicable access control regulations as set forth in Article 8:
Access Control Regulations.
7.2-3 The access plan proposes a change in the Traffic Control on an existing Public Street including:
(A) Installation, removal, or relocation of a stop or yield sign;
(B) Installation, removal, or relocation of a traffic signal; or
(C) Changes in the timing and/or phasing of an existing traffic signal or signal system.
7.2-4 The proposed development does not meet the conditions of Subsections 7.2-1 through 7.2-3 above, but is
deemed necessary by Staff for conditions including but not limited to the presence of congested locations
identified in previous studies or plans, the presence of high crash locations identified by the Kentucky
Transportation Cabinet (KYTC), OKI, or the applicable Legislative Body, or proximity to major planned
Street Improvements in the area.
7.2-5 In the case where a TIS has already been completed as part of the approval process, an addendum to the
original report shall be required under the following circumstances:
(A) The original report was completed more than two years prior to the initial construction phase of the
development.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 147
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.3: Study Area
(B) A change in the application, or proposed land use has caused the generated vehicle trips per hour to
increase or modify the proposed Street or access configuration.
(C) There have been major Street Improvements or significant changes in development in the area
since the original approval or major changes in traffic flow as determined by Staff. Major Street
Improvements involve any Improvements that have an effect on the Street capacity or have caused
any changes in traffic flow patterns. This may include construction or installation of a new Traffic
Control device, change in cross-section of the Street or significant changes in the Street network.
Section 7.3: Study Area
The following subsections identify the minimum study area to be addressed by a TIS. Staff may adjust the
minimum study area as appropriate to the development size, specific site conditions, and/or local and regional
issues and policies. The Applicant may extend the minimum study area described below to demonstrate potential
benefits of the proposed access plan to the community.
7.3-1 When a development meets the criteria established in Clause 7.2-1 due to traffic volumes, the study area
for the TIS shall include all proposed Access Points to the development and shall include the first
signalized Access Points in all directions, on the adjacent Street network, within a two-mile radius of the
proposed site. The closest Unsignalized Access Points to the proposed Access Points in all directions
shall also be included.
7.3-2 When a development meets the criteria established in Clause 7.2-2 due to access control deviations, the
study area for the TIS shall include all proposed Access Points to the development, and shall include all
Access Points on both sides of the Street within the distance specified by the applicable regulation, from
the proposed Access Point, which does not meet the spacing standard.
7.3-3 When a development meets the criteria established in Subsection 7.2-3 due to modifications to Traffic
Controls, the study area for the TIS shall include:
(A) All Access Points to the proposed development;
(B) All Unsignalized Access Points adjacent to the proposed Access Points; and
(C) All Access Points, with Traffic Controls, on the adjacent Street network in all directions, within a
two-mile radius of the proposed site.
7.3-4 When Staff determines that the signal modification will affect the operation of a coordinated signal
system, the study area shall include all affected signals within the system. A coordinated signal system
may be considered to be affected when:
(A) The proposed signal would require a different cycle length than currently in use to attain an
acceptable Level of Service (LOS) as defined in Section 7.5: Mitigation.
(B) The proposed signal would require adjustment of existing intersection offsets to attain acceptable
corridor performance as defined in Section 7.5: Mitigation.
7.3-5 When a TIS is required by Staff as outlined in Clause 7.2-4, the study area shall be established to address
the specific issues for which the study was required.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 148
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
7.4-1 Analysis Scenarios
(A) The TIS shall examine the before and after conditions within the study area to a degree sufficient to
document the operational and safety impacts of the proposed development and access plan. The
before and after conditions shall be termed the “No Build” and “Build” conditions.
(B) The “No Build” condition shall include:
(1) Existing traffic volumes forecasted to the appropriate analysis year;
(2) Existing Street geometry,
(3) All applicable Traffic Control devices;
(4) Any traffic generated by proposed adjacent developments;
(5) Any funded Improvements within the study area; and
(6) Any Transportation System Management (TSM) Improvements, such as signal timing and/or
phasing optimization and reconfiguration of existing lane uses that may improve the
operation of the transportation system.
(C) The “Build” condition shall include:
(1) “No Build” traffic volumes;
(2) Site generated traffic; and
(3) Any Street Improvements proposed with the development.
(D) “No Build” and “Build” analysis shall be conducted for the anticipated year of opening and a
design year assuming a 10-year horizon. Opening year “Build” analysis should only include that
portion of development which is anticipated to be completed at opening. Design year analysis
shall include the full build-out potential of the development. In the event that the full build-out of
the development is anticipated to extend beyond the 10-year horizon, the design year shall be the
anticipated year of full build-out.
(E) All scenarios evaluated shall include analysis of the weekday AM and PM peak hours. The
Applicant should work with Staff to determine whether the peak hour of the development or the
peak hour of the adjacent Street traffic is to be analyzed to evaluate the worst-case scenario. When
a proposed development is anticipated to generate a high volume of traffic during non-traditional
peaks, such as a noon peak, late night or weekend peak period, these periods should also be
examined. The need to study additional periods of operation shall be at the discretion of Staff.
7.4-2 Data Collection
The data collection efforts for the study shall be consistent with the level of analysis required. At a
minimum this shall include two-hour turning movement counts conducted in 15-minute intervals at all
study intersections for all peak periods examined. When traffic patterns are affected by the presence of
non-traditional peaks such as school trips, the peak hour turning movement count shall be expanded to
include both peak periods. The peak hours should be determined by a 24-hour count of the adjacent
Street traffic on a typical weekday (i.e., Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday). Previously collected data
and traffic volumes may be used in the analysis at the discretion of Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 149
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
7.4-3 Future Traffic Volumes
Future traffic volumes used to evaluate the opening year (if different from existing year) and design year
conditions shall be determined by applying an appropriate growth rate to reflect anticipated changes in
demand on the Street network. This growth rate shall be determined from comparison of historical traffic
volumes in the study area. Other methods of forecasting traffic volumes, such as socio-economic
analysis and the use of travel demand models may also be used to determine future traffic growth rates at
the discretion of Staff.
7.4-4 Trip Generation and Distribution
(A) Trips generated by the proposed development shall be calculated using the most current edition of
the ITE Trip Generation Manual methodologies.
(B) Trips generated by the development should be distributed onto the Public Street network consistent
with existing traffic patterns in the area, identified by origin destination studies of adjacent
developments or traffic counts of adjacent Streets. This methodology may be replaced with more
refined trip distribution approaches derived from market research studies, travel demand models, or
other methodologies at the discretion of Staff.
7.4-5 Operational Analysis
Operational analysis shall be conducted for all intersections within the study area for all analysis
scenarios identified in Subsection 7.4-1: Analysis Scenarios. At a minimum, operational analysis shall
include, but is not limited to:
(A) Intersection Level of Service LOS analysis for all intersections in the study area. LOS analysis
should be consistent with Highway Capacity Manual (HCM)/Highway Capacity Software (HCS)
methodologies for unsignalized and signalized intersections. Roundabout analysis shall utilize
RODEL/ARCADY analytical procedures. Analysis results should be summarized with LOS and
delay by lane group and intersection totals. For roundabout analysis, LOS shall be determined
using both signalized and unsignalized HCM thresholds.
(B) Analysis shall be evaluated using the following parameters unless justified by additional study at
the discretion of Staff.
(1) Peak Hour Factor (PHF) = 0.90
(2) Lost Time = 2.0 sec
(3) No right turns on red (RTOR)
(4) HCS arrival type = 3
(5) Yellow and red clearance intervals shall be calculated based on ITE recommended
procedures.
(6) Pedestrian phases and minimum clearance times shall be accommodated for all potential
pedestrian crossings.
(7) Where applicable the minimum green time per phase shall be equal to or greater than the
minimum pedestrian clearance time.
(C) Queuing analysis shall be conducted for all controlled movements in the study area. Queuing
analysis should report 95th percentile queues for all scenarios and periods examined, and identify
any conflicts between adjacent queues and/or queues and permitted turning movements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 150
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.5: Mitigation
(D) Turn lane analysis shall be conducted for all Unsignalized Access Points to the proposed
development. This analysis shall determine if a right or left-turn lane is warranted at a location to
improve operations or safety and shall identify the proper length of turn lane to accommodate any
storage or deceleration requirements. Turn lane analysis shall be conducted in accordance with
KYTC design and permit standards.
(E) Signal warrant analysis shall be conducted for all existing and proposed traffic signals providing
access to the development. Signal warrant analysis shall also be required before any existing
traffic signal is removed. Signal warrant analysis shall be conducted in accordance with most
recent version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
(F) When a TIS is required under the conditions of Subsection 7.2-3, corridor level analysis shall also
be provided. Corridor analysis shall estimate average travel speed along each contiguous Street or
Street(s) in the study area, and shall include all controlled Access Points in the study area defined
in Subsection 7.2-3. Corridor analysis shall be conducted using the latest version of Synchro
software.
7.4-6 Safety Analysis
When the study area includes a corridor or intersection which has been identified as a high accident
location by KYTC, OKI, Staff, or the applicable Legislative Body, safety analysis shall be conducted and
included in the TIS. Safety analysis shall be conducted using the three most recent years of crash data
available. Engineering judgment shall be used when reviewing and analyzing existing crash patterns in
areas where Improvements have been implemented within the period of the crash data. At a minimum
safety analysis shall include but is not limited to:
(A) Determination of crash rates for the subject location;
(B) Statistical analysis of crash data by time, light conditions, day of week, pavement conditions, crash
type, and contributing factors;
(C) Development of crash diagrams based on crash reports. This shall also include analysis of the
Street environment to identify factors which may contribute to significant recurring crashes at the
location; and
(D) Identification and analysis of potential impacts associated with site traffic and/or the proposed
access plan on the existing crash patterns.
Section 7.5: Mitigation
7.5-1 When a proposed development and/or access plan is shown to result in an unacceptable LOS, or reduce
the LOS of adjacent Access Points, intersections or corridors, as defined in Subsection 7.5-3: Operational
Thresholds, the Applicant shall identify the extent of mitigation Improvements necessary to offset the
impact of the development.
7.5-2 Mitigation Improvements may include, but are not limited to, modification to signal systems,
construction of turn lanes or Medians, access Streets, shared Access Drives, etc. When mitigation
Improvements are proposed analysis shall be conducted for the “Build” condition for the year of opening
and the design year with the proposed Improvements. This analysis shall be consistent with and in
addition to the “No Build” and “Build” analysis required in Section 7.4: Study Requirements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 151
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.6: Administration
7.5-3 Operational Thresholds
(A) The following provisions shall be used to define thresholds for acceptable operational performance
for the “Build” condition within the study area.
(B) At existing intersections the intersection LOS shall not be lower than the “No Build” LOS.
Individual turning movements at the intersection shall not operate at LOS E or F. In such cases
where individual turning movements are shown to operate at LOS E or F under the “No Build”
condition, the turning movement delay shall not increase.
(C) Proposed intersections shall operate at intersection LOS C or better. No individual turning
movements may operate at LOS E or F.
(D) On existing corridors, as identified in Clause 7.4-5(F), the average travel speed of the corridor shall
not be less than 75 percent of the “No Build” travel speed.
(E) On proposed corridors, as defined in Clause 7.4-5(F), the average travel speed shall not be less than
half of the allowable speed limit.
Section 7.6: Administration
7.6-1 Responsibility for the Traffic Impact Study
The completion of the TIS is the responsibility of the Developer/Applicant of the subject property. The
report shall be completed by a Professional Engineer, licensed within the Commonwealth of Kentucky,
with previous experience and knowledge in traffic operations and analytical studies. Each report shall
contain the stamp, signature, and date of the responsible Engineer.
7.6-2 Pre-Study Meeting
(A) It is required that a pre-study meeting be conducted prior to starting a TIS. The Applicant will be
required to provide:
(1) A conceptual layout of the proposed Subdivision/development;
(2) An aerial of the proposed site including proposed Access Points; and
(3) A map of the Street network within a two-mile radius surrounding the proposed site.
(B) At this meeting the following parameters of the TIS will be determined:
(1) Study area;
(2) Proposed ITE Trip Generation Land Use
(3) Background and build-out study year;
(4) Adjacent developments;
(5) Traffic growth rates;
(6) Future highway projects in study area; and
(7) Operational analysis parameters.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 152
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.6: Administration
(C) It is at this meeting, that any potential issues regarding the report shall be discussed. Following the
meeting Staff will prepare a memorandum of understanding summarizing the conclusions and
parameters established in the pre-study meeting that shall be used to complete the study.
(D) It is the responsibility of the Developer/Applicant to schedule this meeting prior to submission.
Pre-study meetings shall be scheduled with Staff at least one week in advance.
(E) If a pre-study meeting is not conducted, the report may not be accepted.
Study Assumptions 7.6-3 Memorandum of Understanding
Following the Pre-Study Meeting and prior to the submission of the final report, the applicant should
submit a Memorandum of Understanding that details:
(A) Existing Traffic Data
(B) Trip Generation Results
(C) Trip Distribution
7.6-4 Documentation
The results of the TIS shall be documented in the TIS report. This report shall contain:
(A) A summary of proposed development;
(B) Data collection methodologies;
(C) A summary of existing traffic conditions;
(D) Raw traffic data (may be included in appendix);
(E) Trip generation calculations and summaries;
(F) Trip generation/distribution methodology (shall include graphics showing existing traffic volumes,
generated trips and total trips for all scenarios);
(G) Adjacent developments included in the background traffic;
(H) Traffic/safety analysis methodologies;
(I) A summary of traffic analysis results;
(J) Full output/calculations from traffic/safety analysis (may be included in appendix);
(K) A summary of recommended Improvements; and
(L) A concept plan showing proposed Improvements. The concept plan shall show proposed
Improvements over aerial (if available) to a measurable scale not greater than one inch is equal to
100 feet.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 153
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.1: Purpose
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.1: Purpose
The location and design of Access Points shall be in accordance with the access control regulations in this article in
order to:
8.1-1 Promote greater safety of passage between Streets, Sidewalks, and land;
8.1-2 Improve the convenience and ease of movement of travelers and pedestrians on Streets and Sidewalks;
and
8.1-3 Permit reasonable speeds and economy of travel, and increase and protect the capacity of Streets.
Section 8.2: Applicability
These regulations shall apply to all Street classifications as outlined in the adopted Comprehensive Plan, or in the
case of new or proposed Streets, as identified on the submitted Application.
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
The following regulations shall apply unless otherwise approved by Staff after completion of a TIS that shall
document that the proposed Improvements will not adversely impact the safety or capacity of the primary Street,
with the exception of Sight Distance requirements, which must be met. Requirements for a TIS are outlined in
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
8.3-1 Access Spacing
(A) All proposed Access Points shall meet the minimum spacing standards in Table 8.3-1.
TABLE 8.3-1:ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION
SPACING
NONRESIDENTIAL
(FULL ACCESS)
NONRESIDENTIAL
(PARTIAL ACCESS)
RESIDENTIAL
ACCESS
Arterial [2] 2,400 2,400/1,200 [1] 1,200/600 [1] 600
Collector [2] 1,200 600 300 300
Local (not applicable to
residential Driveways) [2] 1,200 150 N/A N/A
NOTE:
[1] For Streets with speed limits greater than or equal to 45 miles per hour (mph), use the larger values. For Streets with
speed limits of less than 45 mph, use the lower values.
[2] For existing streets the functional classification shall be based upon the classification indicated in the Kenton County
Comprehensive Plan. For proposed streets the functional classification shall be based upon Table 4.1-1.
(B) Spacing standards shall be determined as measured from centerline of the Access Point to
centerline of the Access Point as shown in Figure 8.3-A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 154
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
Figure 8.3-A: Illustration of access spacing management
(C) No Access Point shall be permitted within 300 feet from the edge of pavement of an arterial Street
nor within the limits of auxiliary left or right turn lanes at intersections as shown in Figure 8.3-B.
Figure 8.3-B: Illustration of access spacing from Arterial Streets
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 155
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
(D) If a Tract of land has no means of access that would meet the requirements of this section, a
Restricted Access Point shall be permitted. The Restricted Access Point shall be placed so as to
maximize spacing from adjacent Access Points.
Coordination o 8.3-2 f Access Points
Access points shall be designed, located, and constructed in a manner to provide and make possible the
coordination of access with, and between, adjacent properties to maximize the efficient utilization of
Access Points. Coordination of Access Points shall be regulated as follows:
(A) With the exception of residential Driveways, Access Points on opposite sides of a Street shall be
located directly opposite each other. Where ‘T’ type intersections are used, a minimum centerline
offset of 150 feet shall be maintained on Local Streets. On collector and arterial Streets, a
minimum centerline offset capable of accommodating required left and right turn lanes shall be
maintained. When no auxiliary turn lanes are required, a minimum centerline offset of 200 feet on
collector and arterial streets shall be maintained. See Figure 8.3-C, Figure 8.3-D, and Figure 8.3-E.
Figure 8.3-C: Illustration of preferred coordination of Access Points
Figure 8.3-D: Illustration of permitted coordination of Access Points
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 156
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
Figure 8.3-E: Illustration of prohibited coordination of Access Points
(B) In cases where access spacing greater than the minimum would prohibit future access to adjacent
Parcels, Access Points may not exceed the minimum spacing requirements, except where
topographical or exceptional physical conditions exist.
(C) In cases where access coordination is not possible, turning movement restrictions may be imposed
by Staff.
8.3-3 Access Width
(A) Driveways intended for residential uses shall meet the access width requirements identified in
Subsection 4.1-24: Access Drives. All other Access Points shall not be less than 12 feet nor more
than 48 feet in width.
(B) Access width shall be measured from the edge of pavement to edge of pavement, excluding the
Curb radius as shown in Figure 8.3-F.
Figure 8.3-F: Illustration of the access width measurement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 157
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.4: Traffic Control
8.3-4 Access Throat Length
(A) The Access Throat length shall be maintained to avoid the overlapping of Driveway entrance and
parking lot circulation conflicts. The Access Throat length shall be measured from the edge of the
intersecting Street to the edge of pavement on the parking lot access or adjacent drive as shown in
Figure 8.3-G.
(B) Minimum Access Throat lengths shall not be required for residential Driveways or for Access
Points on Local Streets, Private Streets, or Access Drives.
(C) A minimum throat length of 50 feet shall be required for Access Points which intersect a Public
Street, or as otherwise required to accommodate exiting queue lengths as determined by a TIS.
(D) The Access Throat length shall be separated from vehicular and pedestrian movements adjacent to
parking facilities and drives through the construction of a raised Median, landscaping, or other
non-traversable feature.
Figure 8.3-G: Illustration of Access Throat length measurement
Section 8.4: Traffic Control
Installation of any Traffic Control measures on an existing Public Street shall not be permitted unless otherwise
approved by Staff after completion of a TIS.
8.4-1 Except as herein provided, turning movements prohibited at Partial Access Points or Restricted Access
Points shall be controlled through the use of proper Channelization. Channelization shall be constructed
in the form of a raised non-traversable Median in the center of the primary Street, sufficiently designed to
obstruct the prohibited movement. See Figure 8.4-A.
8.4-2 When the construction of a Median on the primary Street is not possible, the prohibited movements shall
be controlled through the use of a raised non-traversable channelizing island constructed on the Access
Point approach. The channelizing island shall be of sufficient size and design so as to obstruct the
prohibited movement. See Figure 8.4-A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 158
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
Median islands not designed to function as a channelizing island (i.e. an entrance 8.4-3 landscape island) shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with Figure A.1-DD: Detail #28.
Figure 8.4-A: Illustrations of Channelization techniques
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
The need for and design of auxiliary turn lanes shall be determined by auxiliary turn lanes warrants and design
standards defined or identified by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet. See Figure 8.5-A and Figure 8.5-B.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 159
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
Figure 8.5-A: Illustration of a left turn requirement
Figure 8.5-B: Illustration of a right turn requirement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 160
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.6: Provision of Access Easement and Access Drives for Nonresidential Uses
Provision of Access Section 8.6: Easement and Access Drives for
Nonresidential Uses
8.6-1 Except as herein provided, each Parcel located directly adjacent to or abutting a Street classified as either
an arterial or collector in the Comprehensive Plan, shall provide an Easement and shared Driveway or
Private Street connecting to adjacent properties.
8.6-2 The access Easement shall be unobstructed from physical features constructed on the Parcel.
8.6-3 When adjacent Parcels with existing Easements and/or Access Drives exist, the access Easement shall be
provided in coordination with existing interconnected access provision on the adjacent Parcels.
8.6-4 When adjacent Parcels are not developed, the Easement shall be provided at a location capable of:
(A) Providing cross access to adjacent Parcels; and
(B) Meeting all applicable access spacing standards specified in these Subdivision regulations.
Section 8.7: Pedestrian Access Points
8.7-1 Development along Arterial or Collector Streets shall provide pedestrian Access Points that shall connect
to any adjacent public Sidewalk and transit stops.
8.7-2 If no public Sidewalk exists along the adjacent arterial or Collector Street at the time a new development
is proposed, a Sidewalk shall be provided, along with the required pedestrian Access Points.
8.7-3 Any expansion or improvement of an existing Parking Area shall be required to be in compliance with
this section if the following applies:
(A) The new Parking Area is directly adjacent to the Arterial or Collector Street;
(B) A public Sidewalk or transit stop already exists along the Arterial or Collector Street; and
(C) The expansion will add 10 or more off-Street parking spaces that are to be located adjacent to an
Arterial or Collector Street. If a public Sidewalk already exists, then pedestrian Access Points shall
be provided.
8.7-4 The requirements of this section may be waived if sufficient proof is presented that there is not adequate
room and/or adequate need for pedestrian Access Points.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 161
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 162


ASPHALT BASE SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF 4”
THICK UNDER THE CURB UNLESS APPROVED PER
SECTION 4.4 ALTERNATIVE PAVEMENT DESIGN
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE & GEOGRID
FULL DEPTH ASPHALT
CONCRETE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE & GEOGRID

6" BARRIER CURB & GUTTER
SLOPED CURB
FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS ONLY
6" BARRIER INTEGRAL CURB
SLOPED INTEGRAL CURB
FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS ONLY





R=100'
32.5'
R=25'
52.5'
52.5'
R=25'
R=25' R=25'
15'
15' 11' 2'
11'
R=25'
R=25'
2'
14' O.C.
15' O.C. Max.
11'
15'
11'
15'
8'+_
2'
8'+_
GENERAL RULES OF TOOLED CONTRACTION
JOINT LAYOUT
1.) Skew joints 2' in each 12.5' lane; 2'-4" skew in each 14' lane.
2.) Always have the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hit the skewed
joint first.
3.) Maximum joint spacing = 15'; adjust joint spacing as necessary to
keep spacing above a 8' minimum.
4.) On horizontal curves, layout joint spacing along centerline at 14' O.C.;
visually determine a radial line from the centerline back to the curb;
measure back (forward) from that point 2' to set the skew, remembering
the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hits the skewed joint first. Tool
the joint at the skewed line.
5.) At intersections, catch basins and cul-de-sacs, follow joint layout
shown.
TYPICAL SKEWED JOINT
AND C BENT BAR LAYOUT
SCALE: N.T.S
JOINT LAYOUT FOR PAIRED CATCH BASINS
NOTE:
ALL CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
ARE DOWELED JOINTS.
L








”
”






Appendix B: Surety Templates
Appendix B: Surety Templates
1. Use the following one-page template when an insurance company issues a Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
BOND NO. _____________
The undersigned _________________________ as Principal (hereinafter called Principal) and
_____________________ as Surety (hereinafter called Surety) are held and firmly bound unto the Kenton County
Planning Commission in the penal sum of ($ _____________) Dollars, for the payment of which well and truly be
made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heir, executors, administrators, successors and assigns.
THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE SUCH THAT
WHEREAS, the Principal has presented for the approval of the Oblige a plat of a Subdivision of Lots and lands to
be known as _________________________________. .
WHEREAS, before said plat can be given final approval, it is required under ordinance or regulations of said
Oblige that the project Improvements described in the attached Engineer’s Estimate shall have been completed or
that, in lieu of such completion, the Subdivider shall furnish to the Oblige a bond guaranteeing that such
Improvements will be completed in accordance with the applicable specifications and within the period of time
allowed under the Subdivision Regulations. If the completion is not made in accordance with Subdivision
Regulations, the Commission (“Oblige”) may use said Bond proceeds to complete all Improvements required.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said principal shall fully and faithfully perform all of the work specified to be done within
the time prescribed and in accordance with the plans and specifications therefore, to which reference is hereby
made, the same being a part hereof as though fully incorporated herein; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
to remain in full force and effect until the public Improvements are completed.
SIGNED AND DATED THIS ___________ DAY OF ________________ 20______.
Principal:
By: __________________________________________
Title
Printed
Name: _______________________________________
Surety:
By: __________________________________________
Title
Attachments:
(1) Insurance Company Power of Attorney
(2) Estimate of Costs
Figure B.1-A: Subdivision Bond Issued by Insurance Company
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 194
Appendix B: Surety Templates
2. Use the following two-page template when an Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit is used for a Subdivision
bond.
(BANK LETTERHEAD)
Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit No. ___________________ Date: __________________
Kenton County Planning Commission
2332 Royal Drive
Fort Mitchell, Kentucky 41017
To the Kenton County Planning Commission:
We hereby issue our Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit # ____________________________ in your favor for the
account of (Name and Address of Developer), up to an aggregate amount of U.S. $ _______________ available
by our draft(s) at sight drawn on (Name of Bank).
We are informed that this Letter of Credit is to ensure performance by (Name of Developer) with respect to
completing (Describe Work) in Section _________________ Subdivision ____________________.
, Kentucky.
Draft(s) must be marked “Drawn under (Name of Bank) Credit No. _____________________________ dated
___________________.
We hereby agree with you that the drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this credit will be duly
honored by us upon presentation at this office on or before 24 months from the date hereof.
Except as otherwise expressly stated herein, this Letter of Credit is subject to Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credit (1983 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 400.
(BANK)
By:________________________________
Signature
Page 1 of 2
Figure B.1-B: Subdivision Bond via Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit
(Continued on next page)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 195
Appendix B: Surety Templates
(Continued from previous page)
SUBDIVISION BOND
We, (Name of Developer), as principal and surety, are held firmly bound unto the Kenton County Planning
Commission in the sum $_________________ dollars (_____________________) for the payment of which well
and truly to be made we do hereby severally bond our company, our successors, executors and administrators
firmly by these presents. Said Bond to be secured by a Letter of Credit from the (Name of Bank) to remain in
effect until completion of the project, or of Developer fails to timely complete the project, this Letter of Credit will
be renewed to remain in effect up to 24 months.
The conditions of this obligation are the completion of Public Improvements, in (Subdivision Name), as shown on
the Engineer’s estimate of costs. If completion is not made in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations, the
Commission may draw on said Letter of Credit to complete all work needed to finish the project.
Now, if the principal shall well and duly perform the completion of the Public Improvements, and shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Commission for or on account of any injury or damage to persons or property arising from or
growing out of said work, then this obligation shall be void and the Letter of Credit shall be released to the
principal upon authorization of the Commission; otherwise this obligation shall remain in full force and effect until
the Public Improvements are completed.
WITNESS my/our signatures this ____________ day of ___________ , 20
_____.
(NAME OF DEVELOPER)
By: ________________________________
Title: ______________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY
COUNTY OF KENTON
Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me, a Notary Public, this_________________ day of
______________, 20_______.
___________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires:_________________
Attachments:
(1) Original Letter of Credit
(2) Estimate of Cost
Page 2 of 2
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 196
Appendix B: Surety Templates
3. Use the following one-page template when cash, a check, a money order, or a cashier’s check is used for a
Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
The undersigned as Principal (hereinafter called Principal) and (cash, check, money
order or cashier’s check – circle correct one) as Surety (hereinafter called Surety) are held and firmly bound unto
the Kenton County Planning Commission in the penal sum of ($ ) Dollars, for the payment of
which well and truly be made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heir, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns.
THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE SUCH THAT
WHEREAS, the Principal has presented for the approval of the Oblige a plat of a Subdivision of Lots and lands to
be known as .
WHEREAS, before said plat can be given final approval, it is required under ordinance or regulations of said
Oblige that the project Improvements described in the attached Engineer’s Estimate shall have been completed or
that, in lieu of such completion, the Subdivider shall furnish to the Oblige a surety guaranteeing that such
Improvements will be completed in accordance with the applicable specifications and within the period of time
allowed under the Subdivision Regulations. If the completion is not made in accordance with Subdivision
Regulations, the Commission (“Oblige”) may use said surety proceeds to complete all Improvements required.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said principal shall fully and faithfully perform all of the work specified to be done within
the time prescribed and in accordance with the plans and specifications therefore, to which reference is hereby
made, the same being a part hereof as though fully incorporated herein; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
to remain in full force and effect until the public Improvements are completed.
SIGNED AND DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
Principal:
By:
Title
Printed
Name: _____________________________
Attachments: $___________Check #_______________
(1) Cash / Check in the amount of
(2) Estimate of Costs
Figure B.1-C: Subdivision Bond via Cash, Check, Money Order, or Cashier’s Check
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 197
Appendix B: Surety Templates
4. Use the following three-page template when a Certificate of Deposit is used for a Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
We (Company Name), as principal and surety, are held firmly bound unto the Kenton County Planning
Commission in the sum of $ dollars ( ) for the payment of which well and truly
to be made do hereby severally bond our company, our successors, executors and administrators firmly by these
presents. Said bond to be secured by a certificate of deposit from the (Name of Bank) to remain in effect until
completion of the project, or if Developer fails to timely complete the project, this certificate of deposits will be
renewed to remain in effect up to 24 months.
Page 1 of 3
Figure B.1-D: Subdivision Bond via Certificate of Deposit (Continued below and on next page)
(Continued below)
(Use Corporate Letterhead)
Date
INSERT BANK NAME HERE
AND ADDRESS HERE
Correspondent:
This letter is in reference to the Certificate of Deposit (hereafter called CD), which was issued by your bank in the
amount of ($ ). The CD was issued as a guarantee from ( Name of
Company) as it relates to the completion of public Improvements at the Subdivision,
Section . You are hereby notified that (Name of Company) is waiving its signature to the withdrawal of
funds in the event that the public Improvements are not completed. (Name of Company) also agrees that no funds
may be withdrawn without authorization from the Kenton County Planning Commission.
Sincerely,
_____________________________________
Title
cc: Kenton County Planning Commission
Page 2 of 3
(Continued on next page)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 198
Appendix B: Surety Templates
(Continued from previous page)
(Use Bank Letterhead)
Date
Kenton County Planning Commission (Insert Company Name
2332 Royal Drive and Address Here)
Fort Mitchell, KY 41017
To Whom It May Concern:
Our Bank acknowledges the issuance of a $ Certificate of Deposit in the above names. The
Certificate Number is and it will mature on . In order for any withdrawal to
be processed it will require specific authorization of the Planning Commission.
The Company as co-holder of the Certificate of Deposit be separate letter attached hereto has waived its signature
to the withdrawal of funds in the event that the public Improvements are not completed. This Certificate of Deposit
is to serve as surety for the Subdivision Performance Bond which is attached, specifying the dollar amount and the
specific Subdivision project involved.
Thank You,
Title
Page 3 of 3
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 199
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
REPORT TO THE KENTON COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
FROM THE KENTON COUNTY STREET STANDARDS ENGINEERS COMMITTEE (SSEC)
Members: Mark Brueggemann, P.E.; Joe Kramer, P.E.; Jim Viox, P.E.; Ted Vogelpohl, P.E.;
Henry Fischer, Chairman
BACKGROUND
In 2008 the Kenton County Planning Commission (KCPC) initiated an effort to update the Kenton County
Subdivision Regulations. As a part of the update process, input was solicited from various interested groups in
Kenton County. Among those responding, the Kenton County Mayors’ Group, the Kenton County Judge
Executive, the Land Development Council of the Home Builders Association of Northern Kentucky (HBANKY),
and the Northern Kentucky Society of Professional Engineers (NKSPE) were particularly active in their response.
By mid-2013, there was consensus agreement among the interested groups and the KCPC staff on most parts of the
updated draft regulations. The area where there remained substantial disagreement among the parties mentioned
above was that part of the regulation draft that dealt with requirements for future subdivision street pavements.
During the late stages of this community discussion, at the suggestion of the Kenton County Judge Executive and
several city Mayors, and authorization of the Planning Commission Chairman, a committee of five local pavement
professionals with over 150 years of collective experience in the design, construction, reconstruction, and
maintenance of subdivision pavements was formed and took on the name of Kenton County Street Standards
Engineers Committee (SSEC). The committee members are listed above. This committee was asked, as a
voluntary community service, to do the following: analyze existing subdivision pavement performance, evaluate
that performance compared to reasonable expectations for pavement performance, and make recommendations that
would improve pavement customer value in future subdivision pavements. All earlier community discussion on
pavement performance was to be considered as input into their process.
The committee established a problem analysis and decision making approach with the objective of providing
Kenton County subdivision pavement customers (home purchaser/owner, home occupant, taxpayer, citizen)
maximized long-term pavement value. Over the course of a year, the committee met for two hour meetings,
normally twice weekly, to generate their analysis and recommendations. In addition, there were meetings and
conversations with many other individuals and groups seeking their advice, input, and consensus agreement. Those
groups included:
• The Kenton County Planning Commission Subdivision Regulations Committee
• Kenton County Planning Commission
• Kenton County Mayors’ Group Subdivision Regulation Review Committee
• Various Northern Kentucky city and county engineers
• Various Northern Kentucky city and county public works officials
• Brian Wood, P.E. – Executive Director of Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
• Local concrete and asphalt producers
• Local subdivision improvement contractors
• The Northern Kentucky Society of Professional Engineers continuing education session (Feb. 24, 2014)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 200
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT IN
THE KENTON COUNTY SUBDIVISION REGULATION STREET STANDARDS
The following represents the consensus problem identification and recommendations for improvement in Kenton
County subdivision street regulations by the SSEC. Besides many hours of analysis and discussion by our
Committee, input into the analysis and decision making process was solicited, received, and considered from a
broad spectrum of those involved in the design, construction and maintenance of subdivision streets, especially
those who have been involved in the KCPC subdivision regulation update process. In addition, many sources from
the professional pavement design and maintenance literature were considered and used.
It is noteworthy that the recommendations contained in this report are the unanimous recommendations of the
members of the SSEC.
The SSEC hereby respectfully requests that the KCPC accept the following analysis and incorporate these
recommendations into the revised Subdivision Regulation street standards now under their consideration.
PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION
Realistic problem solving requires accurate definition of the problems and their root causes. That is the aim of the
following as it relates to problems in existing Kenton County subdivision pavements and improvements for the
design and regulation of future pavements.
The following is a list of the most critical problems and opportunities for improvement that have been identified in
Kenton County subdivision pavements installed from roughly 1985 (28 years old) to 2000 (13 years old). The
significance of 1985 is that, in 1985, there was a substantial effort by the Northern Kentucky engineering,
homebuilding, and local government community to improve new subdivision pavement performance. This 1985
effort resulted in a substantial upgrade and standardization of subdivision pavement regulations across Northern
Kentucky, including Kenton County. The subdivision pavements built from 1985 to 2000 in Kenton County were
built under those 1985 regulations. There was little to no change in the pavement regulations during that period.
Jim Viox, Henry Fischer, and Thelen Associates, Inc. (George Thelen then and Ted Vogelpohl now) have been
participants in both the 1985 update effort and this current update effort. This continuity has benefitted this current
effort greatly. It is also noteworthy that very significant improvements in pavement performance and citizen/
homeowner/ taxpayer pavement value resulted from that 1985 effort. Hopefully, as much or more value can be
gained from this current effort.
PROBLEMS COMMON TO ASPHALT AND CONCRETE PAVEMENT
1. Pavement performance standards are not clear in the current regulations. Pavement design parameters,
performance expectations, and procedures for and the importance of proper pavement maintenance are not
set out. This has often resulted in unclear and unrealistic expectations for pavement performance and
maintenance within the Kenton County community.
2. Quality assurance efforts in pavement construction in some cases have been lacking, leading to premature
pavement failure. Related to this problem is the fact that some construction and material specifications in
the current subdivision regulations are inadequate to insure quality pavement performance. In other
instances, the existing regulations don’t provide an adequate description of material and construction
specification tolerances that can be achieved using good material control and construction practices. This
lack of proper tolerances leads to ambiguity, confusion, and arbitrary decision making during construction
on what the acceptable material and construction standards are. Various aspects of this quality assurance
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 201
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
effort are the responsibility of the developers, the design and geotechnical engineers, the construction
contractor, and the KCPC and its designated inspection agency.
3. In many cases, subdivision streets in Kenton County communities have not been adequately maintained by
their owners, thus shortening pavement life and substantially increasing ultimate customer long-term
pavement costs.
4. There is no consideration given in existing regulations pavement design of how to extend pavement life
beyond the 20 year design life.
5. Subgrade strength is, in some cases, being degraded because of water penetrating into and weakening the
subgrade. There is a need for improvement in the drainage characteristics of subdivision pavements (both
surface and subsurface); there are design shortfalls as well as construction quality control and maintenance
shortfalls. This problem is much more critical in asphalt pavements because of asphalt’s high reliance on
subgrade strength as compared to concrete’s reliance on uniform subgrade support.
6. Pavement failures caused by utility ditch settlement under the street. This is a more costly per occurrence
but less frequent problem for concrete pavements.
7. Existing subdivision regulation standards for streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions are often
inadequate for the heavy truck traffic loading these streets must support.
PROBLEMS SPECIFIC TO ASPHALT STREET PAVEMENTS
8. When asphalt pavements came into common use in Kenton County in the early 1990’s, there was a failure
to recognize and address the fact that asphalt pavements are more dependent on subgrade strength than
concrete pavements. Often there was an assumption that subgrade strength that was good enough for
concrete was good enough for asphalt. This isn’t true. This assumption led to some asphalt pavement
failures caused by inadequate subgrade preparation and/or inadequate subgrade materials.
9. Asphalt pavement subgrade weakening caused by inadequate pavement surface and subsurface storm water
management. Root causes include inadequate subgrade and surface cross slope, both in design and
inadequate quality control; water penetrating the asphalt/curb apron interface due to the asphalt being
finished below the curb apron; inadequate curb apron cross slope to the gutter line; the asphalt subgrade
being cut lower than the adjacent curb subgrade, thus trapping water under the asphalt; water penetrating
the subgrade from the area outside the curb; and inadequate sealing and maintenance of the asphalt/curb
apron interface. Another problem in this area relates to the improper use of more brittle asphalt materials
designed specifically for highway use. When more brittle asphalt materials are used in subdivision
pavements, premature surface cracks develop in the body of the pavement, allowing water to penetrate
through the pavement into the subgrade and accelerating deterioration of the pavement subgrade.
10. There are inadequate quality assurance requirements in the current regulations for asphalt material and no
asphalt in-place density requirements or testing.
11. In some limited cases, there have been excessive premature asphalt street concrete curb and gutter failures.
Some causes include: improper or inadequate isolation joints at structures (catch basins); inadequate curb
cross section bending strength and/or inadequate subgrade support; and inadequate concrete material
quality leading to D-cracking and other freeze-thaw concrete deterioration.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 202
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
PROBLEMS SPECIFIC TO CONCRETE STREET PAVEMENTS
12. Premature pavement failures caused by in-place concrete not being resistant enough to natural multi-year
freeze-thaw and expansion/contraction cycles. Causes include:
a) Concrete mixes (coarse aggregate type and cement content) that are not resistant enough to concrete Dcracking
and the use of appropriate de-icers. Note that some inappropriate de-icers will cause concrete
deterioration even with appropriate concrete mixes. The D-cracking problem leads to deterioration at
the joints as well as total concrete failure in the body of the concrete slabs.
b) Excessive concrete street lengthening or “growth” problems that are caused by the use of expansion
joints in the pavement, expansive gravel 57’s coarse aggregate, premature load transfer failures at
contraction joints, joint seal failure and poor maintenance. Another pavement condition that can
contribute to the problem is where pavement lengthening is relatively unrestricted, such as at the end of
downhill cul-de-sacs. Measures to manage potential pavement growth impacts on private property
outside of the pavement can also be improved.
13. Premature contraction joint load transfer failure which causes rough vehicle ride and eventual slab failure.
This problem is caused by the separation of the contraction joints due to the use of expansion joints and
more recently (since 1990) by the use of substantial amounts of #8 gravel in pavement concrete mixes. The
addition of #8 gravel and corresponding reduction in 57’s gravel decreases the percentage of total aggregate
above ½” in size, and thus decreases the aggregate interlock across the contraction joint. Inadequate joint
seal maintenance is another contributing factor to this problem. This type failure also contributes
significantly to concrete problems described in number 12 above.
RECOMMENDATION OBJECTIVE
The most serious and improvable existing subdivision pavement problems have been identified along with their
root causes. The objective now is to find solutions to those problems that yield the pavement customer (house
purchaser, home owner, occupant, taxpayer, citizen) the lowest possible 50 year net present value for the pavement
life cycle costs. Net present value accounts for the time value of money, which is the basis for evaluating any
pavement option. Initial construction costs, pavement joint maintenance, localized failure repair, and resurfacing
costs are the primary life cycle costs. 50 years was selected as the reasonable period to evaluate pavement use,
performance, and maintenance. It is anticipated that the life of most subdivision pavements as designed here can be
extended beyond 50 years when properly constructed and maintained with additional refurbishment and repair
some time after 50 years.
The following Committee recommendations are consistent with this preceding objective. Note that local suburban
subdivision streets, which represent the bulk of subdivision streets built in Kenton County, are used as examples in
many of these recommendations and exhibits. These recommendations are easily adapted to other classes of
subdivision streets.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. For all engineering, material, and construction specifications in the subdivision regulations, including those
recommended herein, establish realistically achievable definitions, including allowable variances and
tolerances.
Benefit: Meeting this objective will substantially help clarification of pavement expectations for all
involved in the subdivision process. It will also help minimize ambiguity and arbitrary decision making on
as-constructed pavement variances in the future.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 203
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
2. Include a Pavement Performance and Design section in the subdivision regulations that sets out a 20-year
design life and 50-year life cycle maintenance and resurfacing plan. Also include other subdivision
regulation pavement design parameters, the proper expectations for pavement performance, the differences
in performance characteristics between asphalt and concrete, the need for maintenance, and other related
subjects. Figure C.1-A:Exhibit A contains the SSEC parameter selection and example design calculations
for subdivision pavements. Exhibit B contains the SSEC 50-year life cycle expected minimum
maintenance requirements.
Benefit: Addresses problem #1 and helps address problems #3 and #4.
3. After revised regulations are adopted, establish an effort whereby a group of local engineers, contractors,
developers and governmental officials collaborate to improve the governmental pavement construction
inspection program. The focus should be to determine those factors or items that are most important to be
inspected to insure proper pavement performance. Then once those factors are determined, train inspection
personnel how to inspect those factors and document those inspections. The formation of a longer term
inspection oversight group should also be considered.
Benefit: Addresses problem #2.
4. Suggest to the Kenton County Mayors’ Group that a pavement management system such as the one used
currently by the City of Florence would be a good idea for implementation in Kenton County. Properly
implemented, this type of system will significantly improve long-term customer pavement value.
Benefit: Helps solve problem #3.
5. Adopt a structural subgrade strength minimum for the standard subdivision pavement design of CBR = 2 or
greater for concrete and CBR = 3 or greater for asphalt. Require site specific improvements in design and
construction of the subgrade and/or pavement by a Registered Engineer where these CBR requirements
can’t be met with the proposed subdivision’s natural soils and proper compaction.
Benefit: Help address problems 5 and 8.
6. Adopt a requirement for geotechnical reports regarding pavement design and subgrade support at multiple
stages of subdivision approval, as described in Exhibit C. These reports will also address other important
soil slope stability and structural issues.
Benefit: Assures adequate subgrade structural support for pavements. Helps address problems 5 and 8.
7. Establish minimum subdivision regulation pavement design for industrial and commercial subdivisions
with stated design parameters, including ESAL loading. Require planned traffic (ESAL) loading analysis
by a registered engineer for all commercial and industrial subdivisions. Where planned traffic loading
exceeds standard design loading or where minimum required CBR’s are not met, require the necessary
improvements in pavement design and construction. See Exhibit A for proposed industrial/commercial
pavement designs.
Benefit: Solves problem #7.
8. Increase subgrade cross slope from the current 2%. Use a subgrade cross slope of 3% for concrete and
4.5%+ for asphalt pavements (see Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit F).
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
9. Increase finish surface cross slope of all pavements from 2% to 3% (see Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit
F).
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
10. Use concrete sloped curb (see Exhibit E) and eliminate use of current concrete rolled curb.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 204
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Benefit: Helps solve problems 4 and 11 and improves vehicle ride when accessing driveways.
11. Use ODOT 6” chair back curb or equivalent instead of KTC 6” vertical curb. Allow horizontally sawed
driveway apron cuts in this curb type.
Benefit: The ODOT curb is more approachable when parking a car adjacent to the curb and less likely to
damage wheel rims.
12. Require that the front top edge of the sidewalk along the street be constructed 6” +1” above the top of
sloped curb (see Exhibit G).
Benefit: Help solve problem #4 by allowing for future significant asphalt overlays while still maintaining
adequate street drainage (see Exhibit H).
13. Require edge drains along all curb lines as depicted in Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit F.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
14. Require that telephone and electric crossovers under the street and three feet beyond the street to be
installed as follows: Separate the parallel ducts by at least 2” horizontally using spacers; cover with 6” of
fill sand; properly compact with a vibratory plate compactor; add additional conduit as necessary, properly
separated. Cover with fill sand properly compacted. Backfill remaining trench with KTC dense grade
aggregate (DGA) properly compacted up to subgrade (see Exhibit G). Other shallow utility ditches under
the pavement, other than those described in 15 below, are to be similarly bedded, covered, and backfilled.
Benefit: Helps solve problem #6.
15. Require storm catch basins and catch basin storm crossovers to be bedded, covered, backfilled, and drained
into one catch basin as depicted on Exhibit H. Make sure 57’s crushed stone is exposed to the base of the
pavement. Properly compact all materials.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5, 6 and 9.
16. Adopt subdivision street classifications, including number of lots served, street width, subgrade slope,
pavement thicknesses, and curb type, as shown in Exhibit I.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 1, 4, 5 and 9.
17. Adopt the standard of always having the pavement base course, whether stone-based or full-depth asphalt,
extend under the curb as shown in Exhibit D and Exhibit E.
Benefit: Allows for the required use of a 24-inch wide curb instead of the current standard 30-inch wide
curb and helps solve problems 5, 9 and 11.
18. Adopt asphalt material standards which more narrowly define those KTC asphalt material standards which
are appropriate for residential subdivision pavements. Set out testing requirements for asphalt aggregate
and liquid asphalt content. Also establish density testing requirements for in-place pavement. Use KTC
crushed stone base material for stone-based pavements. Require regular reporting and passing results of
KTC gradation requirement from base material sources.
Benefit: Helps solve problems #2 and #10.
19. For asphalt pavements, increase the cross slope of the apron of the 24” concrete curb and gutter section to
6% (see Exhibit D and Exhibit E). Require the asphalt surface at the apron to be finished 1/4” + 1/8” above
the apron and properly sealed.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
20. Install finish course of asphalt no later than one year from the date of installation of the asphalt base and
intermediate course (see Exhibit D and Exhibit E). When the finish course of asphalt is installed
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 205
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
immediately as a part of initial construction, asphalt base material may be substituted for intermediate base
material.
Benefit: Insures that asphalt streets are completed on a timely basis.
21. Specify concrete mixes used for concrete pavements to have six bags of cement per cubic yard. Require all
large aggregates (above #8’s) to be crushed limestone. Require that #4 limestone be included in the
pavement mix. A maximum aggregate size of 57’s is appropriate for concrete curb and gutter. Require
KTC approval of hardness requirements for crushed limestone aggregate sources. See Exhibit J for SECC
recommended concrete aggregate content and a discussion of the importance of large aggregate size in
concrete pavement.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 12 and 13.
22. Eliminate expansion joints in concrete pavements. Use skewed contraction joints as shown in Exhibit K.
Place contraction joints at a maximum spacing of 15’ O.C.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 12 and 13.
23. For concrete pavements, provide 3” of expansion joint material in the driveway apron area within the right
of way (see Exhibit L) to provide for the management of any concrete pavement growth that does occur.
Inspect placement when inspecting driveway apron/sidewalk construction. City/County street maintenance
personnel will monitor any closing of expansion joints, as a part of normal street maintenance, and take
appropriate action.
Benefit: Provides for management of street growth problems outside of the pavement, when they do occur
(problem #12.b).
24. Use pavement lugs in concrete pavement as shown in Exhibit M to help minimize potential pavement
growth in critical pavement geometric conditions. These critical conditions, which are identified in Exhibit
N and Exhibit O, have historically been the pavement geometric conditions where subdivision pavement
growth problems have been more likely to occur.
Benefit: This should help mitigate the problem described in problem #12.b.
25. The KCPC should consider the merits of replacing the current cul-de-sac design with the Hamilton County
teardrop cul-de-sac design (see Exhibit P).
Benefit: This teardrop design might make turn around for public service vehicles easier than the current
design.
The preceding represents our group consensus problem identification and recommendations for improvement in
future Kenton County subdivision pavements.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
As a part of the SECC’s work, they solicited and received the cooperation from three local developers (Arlinghaus,
Drees, and Fischer), several local governmental entities, local construction contractors, and material suppliers in the
construction of several pavement demonstration projects. These demonstration projects were built in 12 different
new subdivision sections throughout Northern Kentucky during the period of September 2012 through July 2014.
The purpose of these demonstration projects was to evaluate the constructability, ease of quality control, cost,
and—to the extent possible—probable long-term performance characteristics of various material specifications,
construction methods, and construction details. Included among the tested alternatives were many of the final
recommendations of this report which have been suggested for adoption in the Revised Subdivision Regulations for
Kenton County. There were also alternatives tested that were not used in the SECC’s final recommendations.
These demonstration projects greatly enhanced the confidence of the SSEC in their final recommendations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 206
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Among the final SSEC recommendations contained in this report that were tested in these demonstration projects
were critical parts of recommendations number 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24.
CONCLUSION
The recommendations for improvement are in the areas of design, construction standards, construction quality
control, and maintenance of pavements, which are interdependent and all necessary to insure good
homeowner/taxpayer pavement value. The SECC also recognizes that proper pavement performance expectation
setting for all involved in the regulation, design, construction, and maintenance of subdivision pavements is a
critical component of obtaining good pavement value. Hopefully, our work here will help improve communication
in this regard.
Our work on problem definition and recommendations is now complete. We now respectfully ask the Commission
to accept our work product and have your staff help us incorporate this work product into the current Kenton
County draft subdivision regulations which will be considered for adoption by the KCPC at public hearing.
Thank you for your consideration.
The undersigned members of the Kenton County Street Standards Engineers Committee,
Mark Brueggeman, P.E. Joseph Kramer, P.E.
Henry Fischer James Viox, P.E.
Ted Vogelpohl, P.E.
After this report was submitted to the Kenton County Planning Commission in draft form, the Commission
Chairman asked this Committee to work with the KCPC Staff to integrate these recommendations into the KCPC
draft subdivision regulations for consideration of adoption by the Planning Commission. This Committee did so, as
requested.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 207
EXHIBIT A
PARAMETER SELECTION AND EXAMPLE
CALCULATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION PAVEMENTS
Parameter selection and example calculation references include:
• American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
Guide For Design of Pavement Structures, 1986 and 1993.
• Pavement Analysis and Design, Yang H. Huang, University of Kentucky, Prentice
Hall, 1993.
• The Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 1 (MS-1), September 1981.
• Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, Pavement Design Guide (2007 Revision),
Division of Highway Design, Pavement Branch, February 2007.
• Pavement Design Manual, Ohio Department of Transportation, Office of
Pavement Engineering, July 2008.
• American Concrete Pavement Association.
• Pavement Design & Analysis, Life Cycle Cost Analysis, created by Thomas P.
Harman, M.S.C.E., in conjunction with Randall C. Riley, P.E., William Feltz, P.E.,
American Concrete Pavement Association, and The Ohio Ready Mixed Concrete
Association, 1988.
• Asphalt Institute, SW-1 Asphalt Pavement Thickness Design Software, User’s
Guide, 2005.
PARAMETER SELECTION
The subdivision pavement design parameters used in this document are presented in
Table 4.4-1, which is also included here for reference.
This space intentionally left blank.
2
TABLE 4.4-1 - SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT DESIGN PARAMETERS USING AASHTO
METHOD
DESIGN VALUES
PARAMETER CONCRETE ASPHALT
Design Life 20 years 20 years
Life Cycle Analysis 50 years 50 years
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 --
Reliability 80% 80%
Deviation 0.35 0.45
Initial Serviceability 4.2 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.5
Modulus of Rupture 600 psi --
Modulus of Elasticity 3,600,000 psi --
CBR, Minimum 2 (K=50 pci) 3 (MR=2700 psi)
Load Transfer 4.4 (no dowels) --
Load Transfer 3.2 (dowels) --
20 Year ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 81,000 81,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots
served
203,000 203,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots
served
406,000** 406,000**
20 Year ESAL, Commercial/Industrial Street 3,500,000* 3,500,000*
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 53,000 53,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 133,000 133,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 265,000** 265,000**
ESAL, Arterial Per KYTC Specification
Asphalt Surface Layer Coefficient 0.44
Asphalt Base Layer Coefficient 0.40
Crushed Stone Base Layer Coefficient 0.14
Crushed Stone Base with Tensar TX5 Geogrid Layer
Coefficient
0.25 for CBR ≥ 3
0.21 for 2≤ CBR < 3
Thickness conversion factor, 17 year old asphalt 0.7
Thickness conversation factor, 34 year old asphalt 0.6
*Engineer shall submit documentation of project-specific design ESAL for each commercial/industrial
Subdivision pavement. If project-specific 20-year ESAL are less than 3,500,000, the required street thicknesses
in Table 4.4-2 shall be used. If project-specific 20-year ESAL loading is greater than 3,500,000, a project-specific
pavement design is required.
**Project specific design required for developments with more than 1,000 lots
This space intentionally left blank.
3
Design Life: The service or performance period before a new
pavement requires rehabilitation, or the time during which
a new pavement deteriorates from its initial serviceability
to its terminal serviceability. Selected as 20 years.
Life Cycle Analysis: The extended pavement service or analysis period
including maintenance, resurfacing and rehabilitation
beyond the Design Life. Selected as 50 years.
Drainage Coefficient: Selected as 1.0 based on poor quality of drainage and
pavement structure being exposed to moisture levels
approaching saturation up to 5 percent of the time.
Reliability: Factor that incorporates some degree of certainty that the
designs will last for the pavement design life and life
cycle. Selected 80 percent.
Deviation: Standard deviation that accounts for reliability of AASHTO
Road Test data for local conditions. Selected 0.35 for
concrete pavement and 0.45 for asphalt pavement.
Initial Serviceability: Serviceability is described as the ability of a pavement to
serve its intended traffic. The AASHTO serviceability
scale is 0 to 5, with 5 being a flawless pavement and 0
being a pavement that is impossible to travel. Initial
serviceability is a function of pavement type and
construction quality. Selected 4.2 for concrete and 4.5 for
asphalt.
Terminal Serviceability: The lowest serviceability that will be tolerated before
rehabilitation. Selected 2.5 for concrete and asphalt
4
pavements.
Modulus of Rupture: Average 28-day third point flexural strength of concrete.
Selected as 600 psi.
Modulus of Elasticity: Selected as 3,600,000 psi for concrete.
CBR: California bearing Ratio of subgrade soils. Selected 2
(minimum) for concrete pavements and 3 (minimum) for
asphalt pavements. Selected a modulus of subgrade
reaction (K) of 50 pci to correlate with CBR = 2 for
concrete pavements. Selected a resilient modulus (MR)
of 2,700 psi to correlate with a CBR = 3 for asphalt
pavements, which accounts for seasonal environmental
and climatic factors, roadbed soil quality and roadbed soil
moisture and freeze-thaw conditions.
Load Transfer: Load transfer factor for transverse joints in concrete
pavement. Selected 4.4 for undoweled joints and
aggregate interlock only, and 3.2 for doweled joints.
Equivalent 18,000-pound
Single Axle Loads
(ESAL):
The estimated average truck traffic for site development
work, average truck traffic for single-family house
construction, and average post-construction residential
traffic are presented in the following Tables 1-3.
This space intentionally left blank.
5
TABLE 1
Average Truck Traffic for Site Development Work for 25-Lot Subdivision Street
Equipment/Material
Delivered
Number of
Non-Steering Tandem
Axles
ESAL Per
Loaded
Truck
Trips Per
Loaded
Truck
ESAL Per
25 Lots
Pans, Off-Road Trucks,
Excavator, Compactor, Dozers 3 17 6 102
Loader, Small Dozer,
Gravel/Sand, Structures,
Manholes, Pipe, Asphalt
2 2.379 89 212
Concrete, Loader, Backhoe,
Paver, Rollers 2 1.695 33 56
TOTAL ESAL PER 25 LOTS = 370
TABLE 2
Average Truck Traffic for One Single-Family House Construction
Equipment/Material
Delivered
Number of
Non-
Steering
Tandem
Axles
Number of
Non-
Steering
Single
Axles
ESAL Per
Loaded
Truck
Trips Per
Loaded
Truck ESAL
Trusses - 2 1.473 - 1.5
Concrete and Gravel 2 - 2.379 16 38.1
Gravel, Brick, Stone/Cultured
Stone, Sand, Shingles 2 - 1.600 8 12.8
Steel (Beams/Columns),
Lumber, Drywall 1 - 1.419 9 12.8
Misc. Construction Deliveries - 1 0.0927 25 2.3
Heavy Construction
Equipment, 953 Loader, etc. 1 1 0.998 8 8.0
Light Construction Equipment,
Backhoe, D3, etc. 1 1 0.129 16 2.1
Dumpsters 1 - 0.714 2 1.4
TOTAL ESAL PER HOUSE CONSTRUCTED = 79
(EST. 80)
TABLE 3
Average Post-Construction Residential Traffic Per 100 Lots
Vehicle ESAL Per Vehicle
Vehicle Trips Per 20 Year
Design Life
ESAL Per 20
Years
Garbage Truck 4.189 4,160 17,426
School Bus 1.699 8,000 13,592
Car 0.0014 73,000 102
TOTAL POST-CONSTRUCTION
ESAL PER 100 LOTS PER 20 YEARS = 31,120
6
The 20-year design ESAL values are:
Residential local street serving ≤199 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
80424ESAL
31,120ESAL 199Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 199Lots
25Lots
ESAL 199 Lots
=
+  


 

+  


 

= −
Residential subcollector street serving 200 to 500 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
202,630 ESAL
31,120ESAL 500Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 500Lots
25Lots
ESAL 500Lots
=
+  


 

+  


 

= −
Residential collector street serving 501 to 1000 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
405,630 ESAL
31,120ESAL 1000Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 1000Lots
25Lots
ESAL 1000Lots
=
+  


 

+  


 

= −
Commercial/Industrial Street
Reviewed several existing Northern Kentucky commercial/industrial subdivisions to
evaluate truck traffic. Selected 3,500,000 ESAL for 20-year design life as base value
for commercial/industrial pavements. Each project to have documentation of projectspecific
ESAL. If project-specific ESAL greater than 3,500,000, then a project-specific
design is required.
Year 17 to Year 34 and
Year 34 to Year 50 ESAL:
For residential streets, 85% (17/20) of average 20-year
post-construction ESAL, without site development work
and house construction traffic. For commercial/industrial,
85% of 20-year ESAL.
Layer Coefficients: Selected asphalt and crushed stone base layer structural
coefficients for relating layer thicknesses to Structural
Number.
7
Thickness Conversion
Factors:
Selected factors for estimating equivalent thicknesses of
aged asphalt.
PAVEMENT THICKNESS CALCULATION
The pavement thicknesses in the following table were calculated for each of the street
classifications using the AASHTO pavement design methods:
TABLE 4
Calculated Pavement Thicknesses for Street Classifications
Street Classification ESAL
Structural
Number Pavement Type
Calculated
Thickness (in.)
Local
(≤199 Lots) 81,000 3.07
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/6.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/3.5/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/2.5/6***
Concrete 5.75
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 3.54
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/7.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/4.75/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/3.75/6***
Concrete 6.75
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 3.93
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/8.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/5.75/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/4.0/6***
Concrete 7.5
Commercial/Industrial 3,500,000 5.34
Full-Depth Asphalt N/A
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/9.25/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.5/7.25/7***
Concrete Over
Stone Base 9/4****
* Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course
** Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course / Crushed Stone Base
*** Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course / Crushed Stone Base / TX5 Geogrid
**** Doweled Joint Concrete / Crushed Stone Base
8
50-YEAR LIFE CYCLE CONSIDERATION
Full-depth asphalt subcollector street example:
New: Thickness
(inch)
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
1.25” Surface Course 1.25 0.44 0.55
7.5” Base Course 7.5 0.40 3.00
3.55 > 3.54
Year 17:
From Table 4.4-1, use 133,000 ESAL from Year 17 to Year 34. Required Structural
Number =3.32
Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Surface Course Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.7 0.44 0.39
7.5” Old Base Course 7.5 0.7 0.40 2.10
3.37 > 3.32
Year 34:
From Table 4.4-1, use 133,000 ESALS from Year 34 to Year 51. Required Structural Number
=3.32
Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Mill & Surface Course
Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.6 0.44 0.33
7.5” Old Base Course 7.5 0.6 0.40 1.80
3.01 < 3.32
Need more initial pavement structural capacity to achieve the required 50-year life
cycle. Increase the asphalt base course thickness for the initial 20-year design life from
7.5” to 8.75”. Then:
Year 34: Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Mill & Surface Course
Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.6 0.44 0.33
8.75” Old Base Course 8.75 0.6 0.40 2.10
3.31 ≅ 3.32
9
Concrete Commercial/Industrial Street Example:
Using applicable parameters from Table 4.4-1, the calculated doweled concrete
pavement thickness for 3,500,000 ESAL (20-year Design Life) is 9 inches. For a
50-year Life Cycle, the total ESAL are:
(3,500,000 ESAL) 8,750,000 ESAL
20 Years
ESAL 50 Years 50 = 



= 
Increasing the doweled concrete pavement thickness to 10 inches yields a
calculated ESAL = 8,982,500, which is greater than ESAL50 (8,750,000).
After the asphalt and concrete pavement thickness adjustments for 50-year Life Cycle
considerations are made, the calculated thicknesses in Table 4 become the required
thicknesses in Table 4.4-2.
1Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
2 Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Appendix A Detail #12 and Detail #13)
3 Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints (see Appendix A Detail #11)
4 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can
be replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses are
maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector, and
7.5 inches commercial/industrial
5 Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where
a number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a
Local Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
6 Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
TABLE 4.4-2 REQUIREDSUBDIVISION STREET THICKNESSES
Street
Classification
With Number of
Lots Served5
Concrete
Concrete
Over 4”
Crushed
Stone Base
Full-Depth Asphalt Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB)
Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB) + Geogrid6
Surface Base1 Surface Base CSB1 Surface Base CSB1
Residential
Local
≤199 Lots
7”2 NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”4 1.5” 3” 7”4
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”2 NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”4 1.5” 4” 7”4
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”2 NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”4 1.5” 5.75” 7”4
Commercial/
Industrial Not
Permitted 10”3 Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7” 4 1.5” 12” 7”4
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
10
ALTERNATE PAVEMENT DESIGNS
The above calculations are based upon a CBR of 2 for concrete pavements and a CBR
of 3 for asphalt pavements, per Table 4.4-1. The following Table 5 presents the
Structural Numbers for Alternate Asphalt Pavement Designs for CBR values ranging
from 2 to 7, for use in Alternate Designs when the documented CBR value is not 3.
Design for CBR values less than 2 is not recommended; rather, the subgrade soils
should be improved to CBR = 2 or greater. The Structural Numbers in Table 5 include
the adjustment for the 50-year Life Cycle consideration.
TABLE 5
Structural Numbers for Alternative Asphalt Pavement Designs
Street Classification STRUCTURAL NUMBER
CBR 2 CBR 3 CBR 4 CBR 5 CBR 6 CBR 7
Local
(≤199 Lots) 4.09 3.75 2.85 2.50 2.24 2.04
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 4.92 4.05 3.52 3.14 2.84 2.60
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 5.60 4.69 4.09 3.65 3.34 3.07
Commercial/
Industrial 8.40 7.24 6.47 5.92 5.47 5.12
The calculated concrete pavement thicknesses for CBR values between 2 and 7 are
presented in Table 6.
TABLE 6
Calculated 20-Year Concrete Thicknesses
Street Classification
CALCULATED CONCRETE THICKNESS (INCH)
20 Year
ESAL CBR 2 CBR 3 CBR 4 CBR 5 CBR 6 CBR 7
Local
(≤199 Lots) 81,000 5.62 5.29 5.16 5.09 4.99 4.95
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 6.68 6.37 6.24 6.17 6.08 6.03
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 7.55 7.26 7.15 7.08 7.00 6.96
Commercial/
Industrial 3,500,000 8.98* 8.71* 8.61* 8.55* 8.49* 8.45*
* Doweled Joints
11
The thicknesses in Table 6 illustrate that there is very little variation in calculated
pavement thicknesses with changes in CBR. For all street classifications, there is only
0.53” to 0.67” variation in concrete thickness when the CBR changes from 2 to 7.
Therefore, it is recommended that all alternative concrete pavement designs use the
same required thicknesses as the base or standard designs. The required thicknesses
for each street classification, adjusted for 50-year Life Cycle considerations, are given in
Table 7.
TABLE 7
Required Concrete Pavement Thicknesses
Street Classification
20 Year
ESAL CBR Required Concrete Thickness (inch)
Local
(≤199 Lots) 81,000 2-7 7.01
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 2-7 8.01
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 2-7 9.01
Commercial/
Industrial 3,500,000 2-7 10.02
1Plain concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels.
2Plain concrete, on at least 4 of crushed stone base, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse
Contraction Joints.
EXHIBIT B
50 YEAR LIFE CYCLE MAINTENANCE STRATEGY
ASPHALT PAVEMENT
Minor Maintenance
• Joint and crack seal every three (3) years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot pavement repair
Major Maintenance – at approximately +17 years
• Spot curb repair, as necessary
• Spot base repair
• Mill asphalt 2 inches deep at the concrete curb apron to 0 inches at 6 feet out
from the curb apron
• Install new 2 inch asphalt surface with a 4 percent curb apron to centerline
cross slope
• Seal the asphalt/curb apron interface
Major Maintenance – at approximately +34 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot base repair
• Pavement fabric over joint between asphalt and curb
• New 2 inch asphalt surface overlay
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
Minor Maintenance
• Joint and crack seal every three (3) years
• Inspect driveway apron expansion material for signs of pavement lengthening;
take remedial action as necessary
• Localized failure repairs
Major Maintenance – at approximately +17 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot slab repair
Major Maintenance – at approximately +34 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot slab repair
• Inspect for erosion (tunneling) under pavement, mud jack as necessary
• Mill concrete 2 inches deep at or near the concrete gutter line to 0 inches deep
out from the gutter line
• Install asphalt skim coat and Stress Absorbing Asphalt Membrane Interlayer
(SAMI) over the width of the pavement
• Install 1½ inch deep asphalt surface overlay with a 4 percent gutter line to
centerline cross slope
EXHIBIT C
SUBGRADE QUALITY VERIFICATION
A qualified geotechnical engineer will provide the verification of the site specific subgrade support. The City of
Cincinnati’s list of qualified geotechnical engineers will be used as the base “approved” list for geotechnical
engineers with the ability of KCPC to add to or delete from that list. The following steps will be taken:
a. At the preliminary subdivision plan stage, the geotechnical engineer will use his local soils
knowledge, USGS soils mapping, and a visual field reconnaissance to report on the likelihood of soils
on that specific site meeting the minimum CBR values for subgrade. The report will also include
observations relative to the site’s suitability for building support.
b. At construction drawing submittal, the geotechnical engineer will submit a report on the soil types,
the expected CBR of those soil types that exist on that section of lots being submitted (or possibly
on the subdivision as a whole). This submittal will also include information on other issues of
structural subsurface stability for proposed subdivision public land improvements planned for the
site. These judgments will be based on the results of soil borings, open trench exploration, soil
testing, etc. that are sufficient for the geotechnical engineer to render his engineering opinion.
c. During mass earthwork, subgrade materials will be evaluated as to their meeting required densities
and as to the subgrade materials being used being capable of producing the CBR required to meet
the base subdivision street design when compacted to the required densities. Reports as to these
results will be submitted by the geotechnical engineer to the KCPC prior to the installation of
pavement. If subgrade soils are substandard, remedial subgrade/pavement enhancement will be
designed and submitted to KCPC.
d. Prior to pavement being installed, the subgrade will be tested for density, moisture content, proof
rolled, inspected for uniformity and proper subgrade profile according to approved procedures of
the KCPC by properly qualified and supervised inspectors.
EXHIBIT "D"
EXHIBIT "E"
EXHIBIT "F"
EXHIBIT "G"
EXHIBIT "H"
1
EXHIBIT I
RECOMMENDED SUBDIVISION STREET CLASSIFICATIONS AND THICKNESSES*
*The Design criteria are contained in Exhibit A of this report
1Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
2 Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Exhibit K)
3 Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints
4 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can
be replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses
are maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector,
and 7.5 inches commercial/industrial
5 Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where
a number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a
Local Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
6 Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
7 Parking one side
8 No on-street parking
9 All residential collector streets serving above 1,000 lots and industrial or commercial streets are to include heavy vehicle (ESAL)
traffic analysis.
Street
Classification
With Number of
Lots Served5
Concrete
Concrete
Over 4”
Crushed
Stone Base
Full-Depth Asphalt Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB)
Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB) + Geogrid6 Street
Surface Base1 Surface Base CSB1 Surface Base CSB1 Width
Residential
Local
≤199 Lots
7”2 NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”4 1.5” 3” 7”4 25’7
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”2 NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”4 1.5” 4” 7”4 28’7
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”2 NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”4 1.5” 5.75” 7”4 30’7 28’8
Commercial/
Industrial9 Not
Permitted 10”3 Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7” 4 1.5” 12” 7”4 28’8
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
EXHIBIT J
RECOMMENDED AGGREGATE TYPE AND WEIGHT
FOR SUBDIVISION CONCRETE MIXES
Concrete Use #57 Crushed
Limestone
#57
Gravel
#4 Crushed
Limestone
#8
Gravel
Concrete
Sand
Street pavement 1,100# 400# 300# 1,310#
Curb & gutter asphalt pavement 1,500# 300# 1,320#
Driveway aprons and public sidewalks
1,500# 300# 1,320#
OR
1,413# 350# 1,280#
There are numerous issues to consider in the selection of aggregate type and distribution in concrete
mixes. In un-reinforced concrete pavement with non-doweled contraction joints (all Kenton County Sub
Reg pavements except commercial/industrial), having a relatively high percentage of large, angular
aggregate supports good long-term contraction joint performance. The comparative measure of
aggregate size distribution used for concrete is the percentage retained on various size sieves.
The following table compares aggregate distribution for typical pavement mixes used in Northern
Kentucky in the 1980’s and earlier, the mid 1990’s through today, and the SSEC recommended
pavement aggregate mix.
AGGREGATE COMPARISON, CUMULATIVE PERCENT RETAINED
ON VARIOUS SIZE SIEVES
Sieve Size 1980’s Mix Mid-1990’s to Current SSEC Recommended
Pavement Mix
1” 0% 0% 8%
¾” 5% 6% 15%
½” 28% 21% 32%
⅜” 46% 31% 40%
Passing ⅜” 54% 69% 60%
R=100'
32.5'
R=25'
52.5'
52.5'
R=25'
R=25' R=25'
15'
15' 11' 2'
11'
R=25'
R=25'
2'
14' O.C.
15' O.C. Max.
11'
15'
11'
15'
8'+_
2'
8'+_
GENERAL RULES OF TOOLED CONTRACTION
JOINT LAYOUT
1.) Skew joints 2' in each 12.5' lane; 2'-4" skew in each 14' lane.
2.) Always have the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hit the skewed
joint first.
3.) Maximum joint spacing = 15'; adjust joint spacing as necessary to
keep spacing above a 8' minimum.
4.) On horizontal curves, layout joint spacing along centerline at 14' O.C.;
visually determine a radial line from the centerline back to the curb;
measure back (forward) from that point 2' to set the skew, remembering
the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hits the skewed joint first. Tool
the joint at the skewed line.
5.) At intersections, catch basins and cul-de-sacs, follow joint layout
shown.
TYPICAL SKEWED JOINT
AND C BENT BAR LAYOUT
SCALE: N.T.S
JOINT LAYOUT FOR PAIRED CATCH BASINS
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINT PLAN
NOTE:
ALL CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
ARE DOWELED JOINTS.
L
EXHIBIT K
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY APRON
SLOPED CURB
EXHIBIT L
PAVEMENT LUG DETAIL EXHIBIT M
EXAMPLE PAVEMENT LUG LOCATION EXHIBIT N
EXAMPLE PAVEMENT LUG LOCATION EXHIBIT O
EXHIBIT "P"
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 


