
Fort Wright Code of Ordinances


Fort Wright, Kentucky
Code of Ordinances




2019 S-20 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 09-19, passed 10-16-19; and
State legislation current through KRS 2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com










[City of Fort Wright, Kentucky  Home Page]




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 378-1987




   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY, APPROVING, ADOPTING,
AND ENACTING AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING COMPANY'S KENTUCKY CODE AS THE
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT






   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and welfare of the City and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and






   WHEREAS, The American Legal Publishing Company has published a Code of
Ordinances which arranges and classifies the City of Fort Wright's ordinances
for adoption by the City; and






   WHEREAS, KRS 83A.060(8) establishes requirements for the maintenance
and indexing of the ordinances of the City; and






   WHEREAS, KRS 83A.060(5) authorizes the City to adopt standard codes and
codifications of entire bodies of local legislation by reference.






   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY:










                                 SECTION I






   American Legal Publishing Company's Code of Ordinances, as reviewed and
approved by the legislative body and dated June 3, 1987, is adopted.






                                 SECTION II






   A summary of the subjects contained in the Kentucky Basic Code, as
adopted, is as follows:






                                 TITLE I:  GENERAL
PROVISIONS






   Chapter 10.  General Provisions.  This chapter contains general
provisions and rules of construction that are operative throughout the code.






   Chapter 11.  Ordinances Repealed and Saved.  This chapter lists
ordinances of the city specifically saved and those specifically repealed by
adoption of the code.






                                 TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION






   Chapter 30.  Mayor-Council Plan.  This chapter contains provisions
dealing with the Mayor, City Council, and the Mayor-Council Plan of
government.






   Chapter 31.  City Officials.  This chapter contains provisions
dealing with city officers and employees.






   Chapter 32.  City Council.  This chapter contains provisions dealing
with Councilmembers, rules of procedure, and passage and maintenance of
ordinances.






   Chapter 33.  Finance and Revenue.  This chapter contains provisions
dealing with municipal financial administration and municipal improvements
financed by assessments.






                                 TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE






   Chapter 70.  General Provisions.  This chapter contains provisions
applicable to the entire title and provisions dealing with traffic-control
devices.






   Chapter 71.  Traffic Rules.  This chapter contains provisions
governing the operation of vehicles, as well as provisions concerning
accidents and parades.






   Chapter 72.  Parking Regulations.  This chapter contains provisions
governing the parking of vehicles, impoundment of vehicles, and snow
emergencies.






   Chapter 73.  Bicycles and Motorcycles.  This chapter contains
provisions governing the operation of bicycles, motorcycles, and similar
vehicles.






                                 TITLE IX:  GENERAL
REGULATIONS






   Chapter 90.  Animals.  This chapter contains provisions dealing with
animals running at large; the control and treatment of animals in general;
and the control, treatment, and licensing of dogs in particular.






   Chapter 91.  Streets and Sidewalks.  This chapter contains provisions
governing streets and sidewalks in the areas of excavations and construction;
road and bridge projects; and obstructions.






   Chapter 92.  Nuisances.  This chapter contains provisions governing
conditions which constitute nuisances and the procedure for abatement of
nuisances.






   Chapter 93.  Fireworks and Explosives.  This chapter contains
regulations dealing with fireworks, explosives, and fire prevention.






   Chapter 94.  Littering.  This chapter contains regulations dealing
with littering, hauling loose materials, and posting notices.






                                 TITLE XI:  BUSINESS
REGULATIONS






   Chapter 110.  General Licensing Provisions.  This chapter contains
general provisions dealing with the licensing of trades, businesses, and
professions in the city.






   Chapter 111.  Prohibited Business and Commercial Activities. This
chapter lists references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters
500 through 534) which relate to business and commercial activities and the
appropriate penalty classes.






   Chapter 112.  Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors. This
chapter contains provisions dealing with the licensing and regulation of
peddlers, itinerant merchants, and solicitors.






                                 TITLE XIII:  GENERAL
OFFENSES






   Chapter 130.  Offenses Against Persons.  This chapter lists
references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through
534) which relate to offenses against persons and the appropriate penalty
classes.






   Chapter 131.  Family Offenses.  This chapter lists references to
sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which
relate to offenses against the family and theappropriate penalty classes.






   Chapter 132.  Offenses Against Property.  This chapter lists
references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through
534) which relate to offenses against property and the appropriate penalty
classes.






   Chapter 133.  Offenses Against Public Morals.  This chapter lists
references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through
534) which relate to offenses against public morals and the appropriate
penalty classes.






   Chapter 135.  Offenses Against Public Administration and Justice.





This chapter lists references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS
Chapters 500 through 534) which relate to public administration and justice
and the appropriate penalty classes.






   Chapter 136.  Offenses Against Public Order.  This chapter lists
references to sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through
534) which relate to public order and the appropriate penalty classes.






   Chapter 137.  Sexual Offenses.  This chapter lists references to
sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which
relate to sexual offenses and the appropriate penalty classes.






   Chapter 138.  Inchoate Offenses.  This chapter lists references to
sections of the Kentucky Penal Code (KRS Chapters 500 through 534) which
relate to inchoate offenses and the appropriate penalty classes.






   Chapter 139.  General Penalty for Title XIII.  This chapter sets out
statutory provisions governing fines and imprisonment for misdemeanors and
felonies listed in Title XIII.






                                 SECTION III






   A copy of the Code of Ordinances, as adopted, shall accompany this
ordinance and shall be made a part of the permanent records of the City
pursuant to KRS 83A.060(5).






                                 SECTION IV






   Any and all ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance shall be and
hereby are repealed to the extent of said conflict.






                                 SECTION V






   This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after
its passage, publication and recording, according to law.






   PASSED by the City Council this lst day of July, 1987.






                        CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY
a municipal corporation of the fourth class






                        BY:     Joseph E.
Nienaber   





                                 MAYOR





FIRST READING:  June 3, 1987






SECOND READING:  July 1, 1987






ATTEST:      Linda Meeks   





      CITY CLERK






PUBLISHED:  July 22, 1987






APPROVED:  July 1, 1987




ORDINANCE NO. 511-95




AN ORDINANCE RE-ENACTING AND RE-ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT AS REVISED BY THE 1994 S-8 SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE
PREPARED BY BURLINGTON PUBLISHED SYSTEMS.






      WHEREAS, Burlington Publishing Systems of Florence, Kentucky has
prepared the 1994 S-8 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Fort Wright, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature duly enacted by the city since the S-7 revision of the Code
was approved by ordinance; and






      WHEREAS, the 1994 S-8 Supplement to the Fort Wright Code of
Ordinances contains revisions to various code provisions made necessary by
changes in the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and






      WHEREAS, the adoption of these revisions will bring the Fort
Wright Code of Ordinances up-to-date and into conformance with the Kentucky
Revised Statutes; and






      WHEREAS, the Fort Wright City Council acknowledges the necessity
of revision and updating the code so that all current laws of the city of a
general and permanent nature are set forth therein and so that the Code is in
conformance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.






      NOW, THEREFORE, Be it ordained by the City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky as follows:






      1.   That the Fort Wright Code of Ordinances, as revised and
updated by the supplement prepared by Burlington Publishing Systems which
supplement is attached hereto, be and the same is hereby re-enacted and
re-adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this ordinance.






      2.   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and publication according to law.






      Duly enacted after second reading by the Fort Wright City Council
on this the 14th day of September, 1995.










                        Cindy J. Pinto    /s/





                        Mayor






ATTEST:   Jody Anderson    /s/





      City Clerk






Published:   7/21/95






First Reading:   9/6/95






Second Reading: 9/14/95




Ordinance No. 544-97




   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A
CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND
COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE.






   WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and






   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
empower and authorize the Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend,
restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate the
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and






   WHEREAS, the Legislative Body of the City of Fort Wright has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
City of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in
book form:






   NOW, THEREFORE, Be it ordained by the legislative body of the City of
Fort Wright, Kentucky that:






   SECTION 1





The general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright as herein revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright."






   SECTION 2





The code as adopted in Section I shall consist of the attached titles,
(attachment A).






   SECTION 3





All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects, treated in the Code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the Code, except as they
are included and preordained in whole or in part in the Code; provided that
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of the Code, nor shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating
money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises or granting
special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements or plats, accepting dedications of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall such repeal affect any other ordinances of a temporary or special
nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.






   SECTION 4





The Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval
by the City Legislative Body and the Clerk of the City of Fort Wright is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of the Code in the Office of the
City Clerk.






   SECTION 5





The Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of
passage, approval and publication as required by law. The Code shall be
presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained, and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved, and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.






Passed by the City Council this 5th day of March, 1997







            City of Fort Wright, Kentucky





            A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class.






            Cindy J. Pinto    /s/





            Mayor







First Reading: 02/18/97





Second Reading: 3/5/97





Published: 3/13/97







Attest:  Judy Anderson    /s/





       City Clerk




Ordinance No. 554-97




      AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE,
A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING
AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE.






   WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and






   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
empower and authorize the Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend,
restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate the
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and






   Whereas, the Legislative Body of the City of Fort Wright has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
City of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in
book for;






   NOW, THEREFORE, Be it ordained by the legislative body of the City of
Fort Wright, Kentucky that:






   SECTION 1




The general ordinances of the City of Fort Wright as herein revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort Wright."





   SECTION 2




The code as adopted in Section I shall consist of the attached titles,
(attachment A - Zoning; attachment B - General).





   SECTION 3




All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects, treated in the Code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the Code, except as they
are included and preordained in whole or in part in the Code; provided that
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of the Code, nor shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating
money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises or granting
special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements or plats, accepting dedications of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall such repeal affect any other ordinances of a temporary or special
nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.





   SECTION 4




The Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval
by the City Legislative Body and the Clerk of the City of Fort Wright is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of the Code in the Office of the
City Clerk.





   SECTION 5




The Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of
passage, approval and publication as required by law. The Code shall be
presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained, and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved, and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.




Passed by the City Council this 5th day of March, 1997






               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky





               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class.







               Cindy J. Pinto        /s/ 





               Mayor, Cindy J. Pinto





First Reading: 08/23/97



Second Reading: 9/03/97



Published: 9/12/97





Attest: Jody Anderson    /s/




   City Clerk




ORDINANCE NO. 574-98




AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.










   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 1998 supplement to the Code of Ordinances and the Zoning Code
of the City of Fort Wright.  The supplement contains all ordinances of a
general nature and zoning issues enacted since the prior supplement to the
Code of Ordinances and the Zoning Code of the municipality;










   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances and the
Zoning Code which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes;










   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;










NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT
WRIGHT, KENTON COUNTY.










   SECTION I










That the 1998 supplement to the Code of Ordinances and Zoning Code of the
City of Fort Wright, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set out in its entirety.










   SECTION II










This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.










Passed by the City Council this 2nd day of September, 1998.















               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky





               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class















               Paul Hiltz      /s/





               Mayor Paul C. Hiltz










ATTEST:   Jody Anderson    /s/





      City Clerk










First Reading:      8/18/98





Second Reading:   9/2/98





Published:      9/10/98




ORDINANCE NO. 11-01



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.



 



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2001 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, which Supplement contains all Ordinances of a general
nature and zoning issues enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of this city; and



 



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;



 



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



 



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT
WRIGHT, KENTON COUNTY.



 



   SECTION I



 



That the 2001 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set out in its entirety.



 



   SECTION II



 



All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent
of such conflict, if any, hereby repealed.



 



   SECTION III



 



This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.



 



Passed by the City Council this 24th day of October, 2001.



 



 



               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky



               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class



 



 



                           Gene Weaver      /s/



                           Mayor Paul C. Hiltz



 



ATTEST:   Joyce Woods    /s/



         City Clerk



 



First Reading:      10/10/01



Second Reading:   10/24/01




Published:   10/31/01




ORDINANCE NO. 1-06




AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.










   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2005 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, which Supplement contains all Ordinances of a general
nature and zoning issues enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of this city; and










   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;










   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;










NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT
WRIGHT, KENTON COUNTY.










SECTION I










That the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set out in its entirety.










SECTION II










All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent
of such conflict, if any, hereby repealed.










SECTION III










This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication and recording, according to law.










Passed by the City Council this 11th day of January, 2006.











               City of Fort Wright, Kentucky





               A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth Class










                           Gene Weaver      /s/





                           Mayor Paul C. Hiltz










ATTEST:   Joyce Woods    /s/





      City Clerk










First Reading:      12-07-05





Second Reading:   1-11-06





Published:      1-23-06




ORDINANCE NO. 03-12



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.



 



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



 



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;



 



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



 



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT
WRIGHT, KENTON COUNTY.



 



   SECTION I



 



That the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set out in its entirety.



 



   SECTION II



 



That this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.



 



                       City of Fort Wright, Kentucky



                  A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth
Class



 



                       Joseph Nienaber, Jr.      /s/



                       Joseph Nienaber, Jr., Mayor



ATTEST:   Joyce Woods    /s/



      City Clerk



 



First Reading:      02-01-12



Second Reading:   03-07-12



Published:      03-12-12



ORDINANCE NO. 03-15



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY.



 



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature enacted
since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this municipality; and



 



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances, which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;



 



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updates sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



 



NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT,
KENTON COUNTY, KENTUCKY.



 



   SECTION I



 



That the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fort
Wright, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.



 



   SECTION II



 



Any and all Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance shall be, and hereby
are, repealed to the extent of said conflict.



 



   SECTION III



 



This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its
passage, publication, which may be in summary form, and recording, according
to law.



 



Passed by the City Council this 7th day of January 2015.



 



                       City of Fort Wright, Kentucky



                  A Municipal Corporation of the Fourth
Class



 



                       Dave Hatter      /s/



                       Dave Hatter, Mayor



 



ATTEST:   Joyce Woods    /s/



      City Clerk



 



First Reading:      02-04-15



Second Reading:   03-03-15



Published:      03-21-15



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS




   Chapter






      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY






      11.   CORPORATE NAME




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




Section






   10.01   Short titles





   10.02   Definitions





   10.03   Rules of construction





   10.04   Computation of time





   10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent





   10.06   Writings and signatures





   10.07   Severability





   10.08   Revivor





   10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance





   10.10   Construction of section references





   10.11   Ordinances repealed





   10.12   Ordinances unaffected





   10.13   Ordinances saved





   10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language





   10.15   Conflicting provisions





   10.16   Reference to offices





   10.17   Errors and omissions





   10.18   Historical and statutory references






   10.99   Penalty




§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES




   (A)  All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Ft. Wright Code, for which designation "codified ordinances" or "code" may be
substituted.  Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.  (KRS 446.140)






   (B)  All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01."  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.




§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.




   “ACTION.”  Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.




   “AND.”  May be read “OR,” and “OR” may be read “AND,”
if the sense requires it.



 



   “ANIMAL.”  Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a
human being.  (KRS 446.010(2))



 



   “AVIS.”  The automated vehicle information system established and
maintained by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration
information on vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle
operator’s licenses and personal identification cards. (KRS 446.010(55))



 



   “CITY,” “MUNICIPAL CORPORATION,” or “MUNICIPALITY.”  When
used in this code shall denote the City of Ft. Wright irrespective of its
population or legal classification.



 



   “COMPANY.”  May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
person, partnership, joint stock company, or association.



(KRS 446.010(9))



 



   “CORPORATION.”  May extend and be applied to any corporation,
company, partnership, joint stock company, or association.



(KRS 446.010(10))



 



   “COUNCIL.”  The city legislative body.  (KRS 83A.010(5))



 



   “COUNTY.”  Kenton County, Kentucky.



 



   “CRUELTY.”  As applied to animals, includes every act or omission
whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or
permitted.  (KRS 446.010(12))



 



   “DIRECTORS.”  When applied to corporations, includes managers or
trustees.  (KRS 446.010(13))



 



   “DOMESTIC.”  When applied to corporations, a corporation,
partnership, business trust, or limited liability company, means all those
incorporated or formed by authority of this state.  (KRS 446.010(14))



 



   “DOMESTIC ANIMAL.”  Any animal converted to domestic habitat. (KRS
446.010(15))



 



   “EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY.”  The Mayor.  (KRS 83A.010(6))



 



   “EXECUTIVE ORDER.”  An order issued by the Mayor which is binding
upon the officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over
which the city has jurisdiction.  (KRS 83A.010(7))



 



   “FEDERAL.”  Refers to the United States.  (KRS 446.010(17))



 



   “FOREIGN.”  When applied to corporations, a corporation,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, statutory trust, or limited
liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of
any other state. (KRS 446.010(18))



 



   “KEEPER” or “PROPRIETOR.”  Includes all persons, whether
acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



 



   “KRS.”  Kentucky Revised Statutes.



 



   “LAND” or “REAL ESTATE.”  Includes lands, tenements, and
hereditaments and all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a
chattel interest.  (KRS 446.010(23))



 



   “LEGISLATIVE BODY.”  The City Council.  (KRS 91A.010(8))



 



   “LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER.”  A city councilmember. (KRS 83A.010(8))



 



   “LIVESTOCK.” Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes, or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine,
equine, or camelid species. (KRS 446.010(25))



 



   “MAY.”  The act referred to is permissive.  (KRS 446.010(26))



 



   “MISDEMEANOR.”  An offense for which the criminal fine can not
exceed the amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(a), or a term of imprisonment
not to exceed the periods set forth in KRS 532.090(1) or both.  (KRS 83A.065)



 



   “MONTH.”  Calendar month.  (KRS 446.010(27))



 



   “MUNICIPALITY.”  The City of Ft. Wright, Kentucky.



 



   “OATH.” Includes “AFFIRMATION” in all cases in which an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath.  (KRS 446.010(28))



 



   “OFFICER.”  Any person elected to a position by the voters or any
person appointed to a position which:



 



      (1)   Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly, or
a city;



 



      (2)   Possesses a delegation of a portion of the sovereign
power of government;



 



      (3)   Has powers and duties to be discharged which are
conferred directly or by implication by the city;



 



      (4)   Has duties performed independently and without control
of a superior power other than the law;



 



      (5)   Has some permanency;



 



      (6)   Requires an official oath;



 



      (7)   Is assigned by a commission or other written authority;
and



 



      (8)   Provides for an official bond if required by proper
authority.



(KRS 83A.010(10))



 



   “ORDINANCE.”  An official act of the City Council which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law
or is an appropriation of money.



 



   “PARTNERSHIP.”  Includes both general and limited partnerships.
(KRS 446.010(30))



 



   “PEACE OFFICER.”  Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners,
jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional officers,
marshals, policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make
arrests.  (KRS 446.010(31))



 



   “PERSON.”  May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and
corporate, societies, communities, the public generally, individuals,
partnerships, joint stock companies, and limited liability companies.  (KRS
446.010(33))



 



   “PERSONAL PROPERTY.”  Includes all property except real.



 



   “PREMISES.”  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



 



   “PROPERTY.”  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



 



   “PUBLIC AUTHORITY.”  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



 



   “PUBLIC PLACE.”  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery,
school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other
place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



 



   “REAL PROPERTY.”  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



 



   “REGULAR ELECTION.”  The election in even numbered years at which
members of Congress are elected and the election in odd numbered years at
which state officers are elected.  (KRS 446.010(37))



 



   “SHALL.”  The act referred to is mandatory.  (KRS 446.010(39))



 



   “SIDEWALK.”  That portion of the street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



 



   “STATE.”  The Commonwealth of Kentucky.



 



   “STREET.”  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



 



   “SUBCHAPTER.”  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
an underlined heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in
the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the
subject matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



 



   “SWORN.”  Includes “AFFIRMED” in all cases in which an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath.  (KRS 446.010(43))



 



   “TENANT” or “OCCUPANT.”  As applied to premises, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or
any part of such premises, alone or with others.



 



   “VACANCY IN OFFICE.”  Such as exists when there is an unexpired
part of a term of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the
person elected or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law,
or when there has been no election to fill the office at the time appointed
by law; it applies whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation,
removal from the state, county, city, or district, or otherwise.  (KRS
446.010(46))



 



   “VIOLATE.”  Includes failure to comply with.  (KRS 446.010(47))



 



   “VIOLATION.”  An offense for which the criminal fine can not
exceed the amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(c).  (KRS 83A.065)



 



   “YEAR.”  Calendar year.  (KRS 446.010(50))



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.




   (A)  Singular includes plural.  A word importing the singular number
only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to
one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend
and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or
things.  (KRS 446.020(1))






   (B)  Masculine includes feminine.  A word importing the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males. (KRS
446.020(2))






   (C)  Liberal construction.  All sections of this code shall be
liberally construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the
intent of Council.  (KRS 446.080(1))






   (D)  Retroactivity.  No ordinance shall be construed to be
retroactive, unless expressly so declared.  (KRS 446.080(3))






   (E)  Technical terms.  All words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such meaning. (KRS
446.080(4))




§ 10.04  COMPUTATION OF TIME.




   (A)  In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act,
event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on
which the public office in which a document is required to be filed is
actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of
the next day which is not one of the days just mentioned.  When the period
of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.






   (B)  When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an act
to be done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the
day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in
computing the time.  If the day thereby computed on which or by which the
act is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a
day on which the public office in which the act is required to be completed
is actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is
none of the days just mentioned.






   (C)  If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday,
the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day
that is not a legal holiday.





(KRS 446.030)






   (D)  In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.




§ 10.05  MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.




   (A)  Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
officers or other persons.  (KRS 446.050)






   (B)  When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well
be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed
to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.




§ 10.06  WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.




   (A)  When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party
thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is
subscribed at the end or close of the writing.






   (B)  Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.





(KRS 446.060)




§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.




   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is
apparent that Council would not have enacted the remaining parts without the
unconstitutional part, or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
Council.





(KRS 446.090)




§ 10.08  REVIVOR.




   (A)  A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived
when the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted
at the same meeting of Council.






   (B)  A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by
the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or
any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the
effective date of the original repealer.






   (C)  An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting
of Councilwhich enacted the amendment.






   (D)  An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the
amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as
long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original amendment.






   (E)  No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment
shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the repealer or
amendment as the case may be.





(KRS 446.100)




§ 10.09  RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.




   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to
any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, 
or penalty, forfeiture,  or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the 
new ordinance takes effect,  except  that the  proceedings  thereafter
had shall conform,  so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time
of such proceedings.  If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated
by any provision of the new ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of
the party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new
ordinance takes effect.





(KRS 446.110)




§ 10.10  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.




   (A)  Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of
a section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.






   (B)  References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.






   (C)  Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.




§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.




   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.




§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.




   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.




§ 10.13  ORDINANCES SAVED.




   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance,
all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose
effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain
in effect and are saved.




§ 10.14  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.




   (A)  Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code
by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. 
Any chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be
excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.  Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.






   (B)  The method of amendment set forth in § 32.37 should be used by
the city to amend, add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division of this
code of ordinances.




§ 10.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.




   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.




§ 10.16  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.




   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.




§ 10.17  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.




   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.




§ 10.18  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.




   (A)  As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed l-l-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed l-l-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed





l-l-85)










   (B)  If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the
text of the section reads word-for-word the same as the statute.  Example: 
(KRS 83A.090) (Ord. 10, passed l-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed l-l-85).  If a
KRS cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the
section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information, Example:






      § 31.10  MAYOR.





         The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and
exercised by the Mayor.





      (Ord. 10, passed l-l-80)





      Statutory reference:





         For powers and duties of the Mayor, see KRS 83A.130




§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.




   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall
be deemed a violation and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for
each offense.




CHAPTER 11:  CORPORATE NAME




Section






   11.01   Corporate name changed




§ 11.01  CORPORATE NAME CHANGED.




   The corporate name of this city shall be:  "The City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky."





('77 Code, § 2-l)  (Ord. 57-1969, passed 12-31-69)




TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION




   Chapter






      30.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN






      31.   CITY OFFICIALS






      32.   CITY COUNCIL






      33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE






      34.   PUBLIC RECORDS






      35.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS






      36.   PERSONNEL POLICIES






      37.   TAXATION






      38.   CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT




CHAPTER 30:  MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN




Section






   30.01   Form of government





   30.02   Governing officers




§ 30.01  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.




   The form of government provided for this city shall be known as the
"Mayor-Council Plan."





(KRS 83A.130 (1))




§ 30.02  GOVERNING OFFICERS.




   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall
be called Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the
City Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by
statute or city ordinance.  (KRS 83A.130 (2))






   (B)   The City Council shall be composed of six members.





(KRS 83A.030 (1)) ('77 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 21-1968, passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord.
148-1977, passed 12-8-77; Am. Ord. 188-1979, passed 6-8-79)




CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS




Section






   General Provisions






   31.01   Oath; bond





   31.02   Compensation





   31.03   Removal from office






   Elected Officials






   31.20   Election procedure





   31.21   Mayor





   31.22   Councilmembers






   Nonelected City Officials






   31.35   Establishment of nonelected city offices





   31.36   City Clerk





   31.37   City Administrative Officer





   31.38   City Treasurer





   31.39   Fire/EMS Chief.





GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.01  OATH; BOND.




   (A)  Oath.  Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the
discharge of duties of his office, take the following oath:  "I do solemnly
swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of
this Commonwealth, and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful
and true to the Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I continue a citizen
thereof, and that I will faithfully execute, to the best of my ability, the
office of         , according to law; and I do further solemnly swear (or
affirm) that, since the adoption of the present Constitution, I being a
citizen of this United States, have not fought a duel with deadly weapons
within this State, nor out of it, nor have I sent or accepted a challenge to
fight a duel with deadly weapons, nor have I acted as a second in carrying a
challenge, nor aided or assisted any person thus offending, so help me God",
as established by section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.






   (B)   Certification.  Certification of the person administering the
oath of office to an elected official shall certify in writing that the oath
was administered and the date of its administration.  Said certification
shall be filed in accordance with KRS 62.020.










   (C)   Bond.










      (1)      All officers, officials, and employees of cities,
urban-county governments, charter county governments, a regional wastewater
commission and special districts who handle public funds in the execution of
their duties shall give a good and sufficient bond to the local governing
body for the faithful and honest performance of his or her duties and as
security for all money coming into that person's hands or under that person's
control.  The bond amount shall be based upon the maximum amount of public
funds the officer, official, or employee handles at any given time during a
fiscal year cycle.  The local governing body shall pay the cost of the bond.










      (2)      Elected officials who post bond as required by
statute, and employees of their offices covered by a blanket or umbrella
bond, shall be deemed to have complied with division (C)(1) of this section.





(KRS 65.067)




§ 31.02  COMPENSATION.




   (A)   City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected
city officer not later than the first Monday in May in the year in which the
officer is elected.  An elected officer's compensation shall not be changed
after his election or during his term of office.










      (1)      In order to equate the compensation of Mayors and
Councilmembers with the purchasing power of the dollar, the Department  for
Local Government computes by the second Friday of every  year the annual
increase or decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding year by
using 1949 as the base year in accordance with Section 246 of the
Constitution of Kentucky, which provides that the Mayor in cities of the
first class shall be paid at a rate no greater than $12,000 per annum and
Mayors in cities other than the first class and Councilmembers shall be paid
at a rate no greater than $7,200 per annum.










      (2)      The City Council shall set the compensation of
these officers in accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that
stipulated by the Department for Local Government.










   (B)   The City Council shall fix the compensation of each appointed
city officer by ordinance and may change it by ordinance.










   (C)   The City Council shall establish the compensation of city
employees in accordance with the personnel and pay classification plan
ordinance of the city.










   (D)   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into
the city treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by
any officer or employee.










Statutory reference:





   Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075




§ 31.03  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.




   (A)  Elected officers.  Any elected officer, in case of misconduct,
inability, or willful neglect in the performance of the duties of his office,
may be removed from office by a unanimous vote of the members of the City
Council exclusive of any member to be removed, who shall not vote in the
deliberation of his removal.  No elected officer shall be removed without
having been given the right to a full public hearing.  The officer, if
removed, has the right to appeal to the circuit court of the county and the
appeal shall be on the record.  No officer so removed is eligible to fill
the office vacated before the expiration of the term to which originally
elected.






   (B)  Nonelected officers.  Nonelected city officers may be removed by
the Mayor at will, unless otherwise provided by state law or ordinance.





Statutory reference:





   Removal of elected officers, see KRS 83A.040(9)





   Removal of nonelected officers, see KRS 83A.080(2)





ELECTED OFFICIALS




§ 31.20  ELECTION PROCEDURE.




   (A)   The nomination and election of candidates for city office in a
nonpartisan election within the city shall be conducted pursuant to the
following provisions:






      (1)   There shall be no nonpartisan primary election for the
nomination of candidates to city office regardless of the number of
candidates running for each office.






      (2)   All candidates must file their nomination papers with
the County Clerk not earlier than the first Wednesday after the first Monday
in November of the year preceding the year in which the office will appear on
the ballot and not later than the first Friday following the first Mondayin
January before the day fixed by KRS Chapter 118 for holding a regular primary
for nominations for the office. Signatures for nomination papers shall not be
affixed on the document to be filed prior to the first Wednesday after the
first Monday in November of the year preceding the year in which the office
will appear on the ballot. (KRS 83A.045(2)(b)1.)










      (3)   All nomination papers shall be filed no later than 4:00
p.m. local time when filed on the last day on which such papers are permitted
to be filed.






      (4)   The election of candidates to city office shall be
governed by the provisions of this section, KRS 83A.175(2) through (7), KRS
Chapters 116 through 121, KRS 83A.050, and KRS 83A.045 (2) (B).






      (5)   Candidates for city office shall not be required to make
pre-election reports to the Registry of Election Finance pursuant to KRS
121.180 but shall be required to make post-election reports within 30 days
after the regular election in November.






      (6)   The number of candidates equal to the number of city
offices to be filled who receive the highest number of votes cast in the
regular election for each city office shall be elected.






      (7)   All candidates shall be subject to all other applicable
election laws pursuant to KRS 83A.050 and 83A.045 (2) (B) and Chapters 116 to
121.






      (8)   If a vacancy occurs in a candidacy for city office after
the expiration of time for filing nomination papers due to death, incapacity,
or withdrawal of a candidate, the vacancy in candidacy shall be filled in the
following manner:






         (a)   If the vacancy in candidacy occurs less than 91
days but more than 30 days prior to the regular election, candidates shall
file petitions of nomination to fill the vacancy with the County Clerk not
less than 30 days prior to the regular election.






         (b)   If the vacancy in candidacy occurs less than 30
days prior to the regular election and there are no remaining candidates
running to fill the office for which a vacancy has occurred, the office shall
remain vacant until after the regular election, and if no person is elected
to the office by write-in ballots at the regular election, the vacancy and
office shall be filled temporarily by the office or body designated by law to
fill the appointment.






   (B)   The  city  has  elected to have nonpartisan  elections. 
This section shall be further governed by and construed in light of KRS
83A.040.





(Ord. 393-1988, passed 12-10-88)





Statutory reference:





   Election of city officers, see KRS 83A.050





   Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080(3), (4)




§ 31.21  MAYOR.




   (A)   Election; termofoffice.  The Mayor of this city shall be
elected by the voters of the city at a regular election.  A candidate for
Mayor shall be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to his
or her election.  His term of office shall begin on the first day of January
following his election and shall be for four years and until his successor
qualifies.  If a person is elected or appointed as Mayor in response to a
vacancy and serves less than four calendar years, then that period of service
shall not be considered for purposes of re-election a term of office.










   (B)   Qualifications.  The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age,
shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the city
throughout his term of office.






   (C)   Vacancy.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council
shall fill the vacancy within 30 days.  If for any reason, any vacancy in
the office of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the
Governor shall promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person
who shall serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.





(KRS 83A.040(1), (2), (6))






      (1)   When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a
member of the City Council shall not vote for himself.  (KRS 83A.040(2)(c))






      (2)   When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation
of the Mayor, the resigning Mayor shall not vote on his successor.  (KRS
83A.040(3))






      (3)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the
office of Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the
resignation date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation shall be
effective at the next regular or special meeting of the City Council
occurring after the date specified in the written letter of resignation. (KRS
83A.040(7))






      (4)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is
required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council
shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary
of State of the vacancy.  (KRS 83A.040(8))






      (5)   The City Council shall elect from among its members an
individual to preside over meetings of the City Council during any vacancy in
the office of the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of KRS 83A.130.
(KRS 83A.040(2) (d))






   (D)  Powers and duties.






      (1)     The executive authority of the city is hereby vested
in and  shall  be  exercised  by  the  Mayor.  The Mayor shall enforce
the Mayor-Council Plan, city ordinances and orders, and all applicable
statutes.  He shall supervise all departments of city government and the
conduct of all city officers and employees under his jurisdiction and require
each department to make reports to him as required by ordinance or as he
deems desirable.










      (2)     The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units
of local government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.






      (3)     The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the
public on the condition and needs of city government as he finds appropriate
or as required by ordinance, but not less than annually.  He shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council he finds in the public interest.





(KRS 83A.130(3))






      (4)     Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor
shall promulgate procedures to insure orderly administration of the functions
of city government and compliance with statutes or ordinances.  Upon
promulgation or upon revision or rescission of the procedures, copies shall
be filed with the person responsible for maintaining city records. (KRS
83A.130(4))






      (5)     Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties, or
responsibilities to subordinate officers and employees and any expression of
his official authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by
executive order.  Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years
and kept in a permanent file. (KRS 83A.130(7))






      (6)     All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations
of the city shall be made and executed by the Mayor or his agent designated
by executive order. (KRS 83A.130(8)






      (7)     The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with
power to appoint and remove all city employees, including police officers,
except as tenure and terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance,
or contract and except for employees of the Council. (KRS 83A.130(9))






      (8)     The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation
of the functions of city government at any time he is unable to attend to the
duties of his office by delegating responsibility for any function to be
performed, in accordance with division (D)(5) above.  However, the Mayor may
not delegate the responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council, and
the authority to approve ordinances or promulgate administrative procedures
may only be delegated to an elected officer. With approval of the Council,
the Mayor may rescind any action taken in his absence under this section
within 30 days of such action.  If for any reason the disability of the
Mayor to attend to his duties persists for 60 consecutive days, the office of
Mayor may be declared vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the
provisions of § 31.21(C) shall apply. (KRS 83A.130(10)




§ 31.22  COUNCILMEMBERS.




   For provisions concerning City Council, see Chapter 32.





NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS




§ 31.35  ESTABLISHMENT OF NONELECTED CITY OFFICES.




   (A)     All nonelected city offices shall be created by ordinance
which shall specify:






      (1)   Title of office;






      (2)   Powers and duties of office;






      (3)   Oath of office; and






      (4)   Bond, if required





   (B)   A city may create nonelected offices other than those referred
to in this division. For purposes of the requirements of this section, the
following shall be considered nonelected offices:



 



      (1)   City Clerk;



 



      (2)   City Manager;



 



      (3)   City Administrator;



 



      (4)   Chief of Police; and



 



      (5)   Fire Chief, other than a volunteer Fire Chief.



 



   (C)   All nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor
with approval of City Council.  The Police Chief and all city police
officers shall be appointed by the Mayor at will and such appointments need
not be approved by City Council.  Upon removal of a nonelected officer at
will, the executive authority shall give the officer a written statement
setting forth the reason or reasons for the removal. However, this
requirement shall not be construed as limiting in any way the at will
dismissal power of the executive authority.



 



   (D)   All nonelected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will
unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.



 



   (E)   The following are nonelected city offices:



 



      (1)   City Clerk.



 



      (2)   City Administrative Officer.



 



      (3)   City Treasurer.



 



      (4)   Fire/EMS Chief.




(KRS 83A.080)




§ 31.36  CITY CLERK.




   (A)     The city hereby establishes the office of the City Clerk.






   (B)     The duties and responsibilities of the Clerk shall include,
but are not limited to the following:






      (1)     Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records
of the city;






      (2)      Performance of the duties required of the
"official custodian" or "custodian" in accordance with KRS 61.870 through
61.882;










      (3)      Possession of the seal of the city if used; and










      (4)      Performance of any other duties and
responsibilities required of the City Clerk by statute or ordinance.





('77 Code, §2-7.1) (Ord. 271-l982, passed 9-1-82)









      (5)   No later than January 31 of each year, mail or
electronically submit to the Department for Local Government, a list
containing current city information including, but not limited to, the
following:




         (a)   The correct name, telephone number, and electronic
mail address of the Mayor, legislative body members, and the correct name,
telephone number, and electronic mail address for the city’s appointed
officials or employees who are serving in the following roles or
substantially similar roles as of January 1 of each year:



 



            1.   City Clerk;



 



            2.   City Treasurer or chief financial officer;



 



            3.   City Manager or administrator;



 



            4.   City Attorney;



 



            5.   Human Resources Director;



 



            6.   Police Chief;



 



            7.   Fire Chief;



 



            8.   Public Works Director;



 



            9.   Risk manager;



 



            10.   Information technology manager;



 



            11.   Public relations or communications officer;
and



 



            12.   Planning and zoning administrator.



 



         (b)   The correct name of the city, mailing address for
city hall, and telephone number of the city hall; and



 



         (c)   The name and telephone number of either an elected
or appointed official to serve as a contact person that may be reached during
normal business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.;



 



      (6)   Performance of any other duties and responsibilities
required of the City Clerk and City Treasurer by statute or ordinance.



 



      (7)   Once the information required to be reported under
division (B)(5)(a) is compiled by the Governor’s Office for Local
Development, the department shall forward one electronic copy of the compiled
information to the Legislative Research Commission.




(KRS 83A.085)










   (C)   Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City
Council from time to time as set forth in §31.02.










   (D)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City Clerk unless
such person has taken the oath required by section 228 of the Constitution of
the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond, if required, with
corporate surety authorized to transact business in Kentucky and conditioned
upon the performance of the duties specified herein.




§ 31.37  CITY ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.




   (A)     Establishment.  There is hereby established, pursuant to
KRS 83A.080 and 83A.090, the office of City Administrative Officer.






   (B)     Appointment and qualifications.  The Mayor, with approval
of City Council, shall appoint the City Administrative Officer.  The Mayor
may remove the City Administrative Officer at will except as otherwise
provided by statute or ordinance.  The City Administrative Officer shall
have graduated from an accredited college or university with a degree in
public administration or a closely related field supplemented by three years
of progressively responsible experience in management, or any combination of
education, training, and abilities to perform effectively the duties of the
position.  The City Administrative Officer shall have:  extensive knowledge
of the principles and practices of contemporary public administration with
emphasis on the planning, implementation, and evaluation of policies and
programs; working knowledge of executive and legislative policies and
procedures; ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with employees, public and private officials, and the general public; ability
to communicate effectively orally and in writing; ability to lead and manage;
resourcefulness and imagination; initiative; analytical ability; sound
judgment; integrity; patience; tact; and firmness.






   (C)     Duties and powers.  The duties and powers of the City
Administrative Officer shall be as herein provided:






      (1)     Advise the Mayor in policy formulation on overall
problems of the city;






      (2)     Have major responsibility for preparation and
administration of operating and capital improvement budgets under direction
of the Mayor;






      (3)     Advise the Mayor in the appointment of subordinate
administrative personnel if not delegated appointment authority by
appropriate order;






      (4)     Have continuing direct relationships with operating
department heads on implementation and administration of programs;






      (5)     Supervise all department heads on the implementation
and administration of programs;






      (6)     Attend regular and special meetings of City Council;






      (7)     Prepare and present reports to the Mayor and City
Council on the condition of the city and city business;






      (8)     Plan for, supervise, and evaluate all phases of
municipal operations including finance and budgeting, personnel, building and
zoning, parks and recreation, police protection, tax assessment and fees
collection, and maintenance;






      (9)     Handle citizens' complaints;






      (10)     Serve as a liaison with other governmental and
service bodies;






      (11)     Meet with citizens in regard to municipal services;






      (12)     Serve as purchasing agent;






      (13)     Represent the city at civic, church, school,
service, and similar organizations;






      (14)     Act as liaison for the city with news agencies; and






      (15)     Perform the duties of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator as prescribed under state law.  ('77 Code, § 3-3) (Ord.
123-1975, passed 8-8-75)






   (D)     Oath and bond.  No person shall be appointed or act as the
City Administrative Officer unless such person has taken the oath required by
Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and has
provided a bond in the sum established by City Council, with corporate surety
authorized to transact business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and
conditioned upon the performance of the duties specified herein.






   (E)     Compensation.  The compensation of the City Administrative
Officer shall be in an amount to be established by City Council by ordinance
in accordance with the pay classification plan.





('77 Code, § 2-7)  (Ord. 238-1981, passed 5-27-81)




§ 31.38  CITY TREASURER.




   (A)  Establishment.  There is hereby established the office of City
Treasurer.






   (B)  Powers and duties.  The powers and duties of the City Treasurer
are as follows:






      (1)  Prepares and administers department budget and prepares
financial reports as required.






      (2)  Prepares monthly and annual financial statements and
accounts payable; maintains ledger account.






      (3)  Reconciles bank statements.






      (4)  Directs and supervises the collection of all city taxes and
fees.






      (5)  Receives and gives receipts of all money due the city such
as property tax, franchise tax, gross receipts, occupational licenses,
vehicle licenses, and dog tag fees.






      (6)  Makes deposits and withdrawals of revenues for city
receipts and accounts.






      (7)  Invests funds and transfers funds.






      (8)  Processes purchase requisitions and supplies for the
department.






      (9)  Performs related duties as required.






   (C)  Oath and bond.  No person shall be appointed or act as the City
Treasurer unless such person has taken the oath required by Section 228 of
the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and has provided a bond in
the sum established by City Council, with corporate surety authorized to
transact business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and conditioned upon the
performance of the duties specified herein.






   (D)  Compensation.  The compensation of the City Treasurer shall be
in an amount to be established by City Council by ordinance in accordance
with the pay classification plan.




§ 31.39  FIRE/EMS CHIEF.









   (A)   Establishment.  There is hereby created the non-elective city
office of Fire/EMS Chief. 










   (B)   Appointment.  The Fire/EMS Chief will be appointed by the
Mayor with approval of the City Council.










   (C)   Powers and duties.  The Fire/EMS Chief shall have the
following powers and duties:










      (1)   Plans, organizes, directs, coordinates and evaluates the
activities and programs of the Fire and Emergency Medical Service Department;






      (2)   Protects lives and property through prevention and
suppression of fires, provision of rescue and emergency medical services;










      (3)   Responds to fires, rescue, and EMS scenes as necessary;










      (4)   Is responsible for development and implementation of an
effective recruitment and retention program for volunteers;










      (5)   Develops and maintains a high level of morale and
technical proficiency among the career, part-time and volunteer staff;










      (6)   Performs administrative duties and provides leadership
in the development of municipal disaster and emergency plans;










      (7)   Formulates departmental policies, procedures, rules and
regulations following consultation with the City Administrative Officer,
elected city officers, and subordinate officers, firefighters and EMS
personnel;










      (8)   Develops long-term plans to meet Fire/EMS needs of
citizens;










      (9)   Develops the organizational structure of the Department
in accordance with professional standards and City Council policy;










         (10)   Prepares and authorizes work schedules;










         (11)   Furnishes technical advice on fire safety and
protection;










         (12)   Maintains a complete fire protection effort,
including, but not limited to, Fire Prevention Code Enforcement, Public Fire
Safety Education Program in the community;










         (13)   Maintains readiness of fire suppression forces
and EMS capabilities;










         (14)   Investigates fires and explosions;










         (15)   Plans and prepares for community response to
hazardous conditions;










         (16)   Maintains a complete training program for
Fire/EMS staff;










         (17)   Supervises and evaluates the acquisitions,
maintenance and use of fire equipment;










         (18)   Appoints, instructs, disciplines and evaluates
departmental personnel, both volunteer and paid;










         (19)   Develops and maintains a written discipline and
evaluation policy for volunteers with the City Administrative Officer;










         (20)   Authorizes purchase requisitions of supplies and
equipment for the Department;










         (21)   Confers with representatives of federal, state
and local agencies, including the insurance industry on various Fire and EMS
safety issues;










         (22)   Prepares oral and written memoranda and reports
on activities of the Department;










         (23)   Supervises others in the preparation of reports;










         (24)   Attends all City Council meetings or sees to it
that a Fire/EMS Department representative is present;










         (25)   Attends Department, local and state fire and EMS
organization meetings to maintain knowledge and relationships;










         (26)   Reviews Fire/EMS Department related complaints
from the general public;










         (27)   Studies and reviews all laws, official opinions,
and guidelines and makes recommendations for changes in municipal ordinances
pertaining to fire and EMS issues;










         (28)   Maintains a proper record system compliant with
all government regulations pertaining to fire loss, personnel training and
departmental activity;










         (29)   Participates in approved fire safety and EMS
courses as necessary and ensures that all subordinates, both paid and
volunteer, are properly trained; and










         (30)   Represents the Department as needed.










   (D)   Compensation.  The compensation of the Fire/EMS Chief shall
be in an amount to be established by City Council, by ordinance, in
accordance with the pay classification plan.





(Ord. 5-00, passed 3-22-00; Am. Ord. 3-01, passed 4-11-01)




CHAPTER 32:  CITY COUNCIL




Section






   General Provisions










   32.01   Members; election, qualifications, compensation





   32.02   Vacancies





   32.03   Powers and duties






   Rules of Procedure






   32.20   Mayor as Presiding Officer





   32.21   Meetings





   32.22   Quorum






   Ordinances






   32.35   One subject; title





   32.36   Introduction; enacting clause





   32.37   Form of amendment





   32.38   Reading requirement; exception for emergency





   32.39   Approval, disapproval by Mayor





   32.40   Adoption of standard codes by reference





   32.41   Official city records





   32.42   Indexing and maintenance requirements





   32.43   Publication requirements





   32.44   Additional requirements for adoption may be established by
city





   32.45   Periodic review required





   32.46   Municipal orders





   32.47   Proved by Clerk; received in evidence





   32.48   Legislative immunity





GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 32.01  MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Election; term of office.  Each Councilmember shall be
elected at-large by the voters of the city at a regular election.  A
candidate for City Council shall be a resident of the city for not less than
one year prior to his or her election.  Terms of office shall begin on the
first day of January following the election and shall be for two years.









   (B)   Qualifications.  A member shall be at least 18 years of age,
shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the city
throughout his term of office.





(KRS 83A.040(4))






   (C)   Compensation.  For provisions concerning compensation, see §
31.02.




§ 32.02  VACANCIES.




   (A)   Vacancies.  If one  or more vacancies  on Council occur in
a way that one or more members remain seated, the remaining members shall
within 30 days fill the vacancies one at a time, giving each new appointee
reasonable notice of his selection as will enable him to meet and act with
the remaining members in making further appointments until all vacancies are
filled.  If vacancies occur in a way that all seats become vacant, the
Governor shall appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies sufficient to
constitute a quorum.  Remaining vacancies are filled as provided in this
section.  (KRS 83A.040(5))










      (1)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a
member of the City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which
specifies a resignation date is tendered to the City Council.  The
resignation shall be effective at the next regular or special meeting of the
city legislative body occurring after the date specified in the written
letter of resignation.  (KRS 83A.040(7))










      (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the City Council which is
required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council
shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary
of State of the vacancy.  (KRS 83A.040(8))










   (B)   Failure to fill vacancies.  If for any reason, any vacancy on
Council is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall
promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall
serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.





(KRS 83A.040(6))





Statutory reference:





   Filling of vacancies for nonpartisan city office, see KRS 83A.175




§ 32.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.




   (A)  The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and
shall be exercised by the elected Council of the city.  The Council may not
perform any executive functions except those functions assigned to it by
statute.  (KRS 83A.130 (11))






   (B)  The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the duties
and responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules, and regulations for
the public health, safety, and welfare.  (KRS 83A.130 (12))






   (C)  The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue
to operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a
budget which provides for the orderly management of city resources.  (KRS
83A.130 (12))






   (D)  The Council may investigate all activities of city government. 
The Council may require any city officer or employee to prepare and submit to
it sworn statements regarding the performance of his official duties.  Any
statement required by the Council to be submitted or any investigation
undertaken by the Council, if any office, department, or agency under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or undertaken
unless and until written notice of the Council's action is given to the
Mayor.  The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the Council
and to appear personally or through his designee on behalf of any department,
office, or agency in the course of any investigation.





(KRS 83A.130 (13))





RULES OF PROCEDURE




§ 32.20  MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.




   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council.  (KRS
83A.130(5))






   (B)  Pursuant to KRS 83A.130(5), the following procedure shall be used
in selecting a member of Council to preside at regular and special meetings
of Council in the absence of the Mayor:






      (1)  Any Councilmember may make a motion proposing either
himself or another Councilmember as presiding head of the meeting;






      (2)  The motion must be seconded by another member of Council;






      (3)  Upon a second, the motion will automatically be called for
a roll call vote;






      (4)  Upon the vote, the named individual shall either be
empowered to preside over the Council meeting, or the selecting procedure
will be initiated again.





(Ord. 289-1983, passed  -  -83)






   (C)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall
not have a vote, except that he may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.
(KRS 83A.130 (5))





Cross-reference:





   Council's responsibility to select one of its own members to preside
when there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor, see § 31.21




§ 32.21  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The City Council will conduct its regular monthly legislative
meeting on the on the first Wednesday of each month, at 6:00 p.m. at the Fort
Wright City Building at 409 Kyles Lane, Fort Wright, Kentucky.



 




   (B)   The committee meetings for the city will be conducted on the
first and third Wednesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. at the Fort Wright City
Building at 409 Kyles Lane, Fort Wright, Kentucky.










   (C)   The City Council will conduct a caucus meeting on the third
Wednesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at the Fort Wright City Building at 409
Kyles Lane, Fort Wright, Kentucky.





('77 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 93-1974, passed 1-11-74; Am. Ord. 317-1984, passed
2-1-84; Am. Ord. 436-1991, passed 1-2-91; Am. Ord. 441-1991, passed 2-6-91;
Am. Ord. 489-1994, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 579-99, passed 1-19-99; Am. Ord.
587-99, passed 8-25-99; Am. Ord. 5-03, passed 1-22-03; Am. Ord. 1-05, passed
3-9-05; Am. Ord. 4-08, passed 3-5-08)






   (C)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
upon written request of a majority of the Council.  In the call, the Mayor
or Council shall designate the purpose, time, and place of the special
meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for
compliance with KRS Chapter 61.  At a special meeting no business may be
considered other than that set forth in the designation of purpose.






   (D)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person
responsible for maintaining city records as provided under § 31.36 and by
the officer presiding at the meeting.





(KRS 83A.130 (11))




§ 32.22  QUORUM.




   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council
constitutes a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum is sufficient to
take action.





(KRS 83A.060 (6))





ORDINANCES




§ 32.35  ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.




   Each ordinance shall embrace only one subject and shall have a title
that clearly states the subject.





(KRS 83A.060 (1))




§ 32.36  INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.




   Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall have an
enacting clause styled "Be it ordained by the City of Ft. Wright."





(KRS 83A.060 (2))




§ 32.37  FORM OF AMENDMENT.




   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and
ordinances to amend shall set out in full the amended ordinance or section
indicating any text being added by a single solid line drawn underneath it. 
Text that is intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning with an
opening bracket and at the end with a closing bracket.  The text between
shall be stricken through with a single solid line.





(KRS 83A.060 (3))




§ 32.38  READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.




   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no
ordinance shall be enacted until it has been read on two separate days.  The
reading of an ordinance may  be satisfied  by stating the title and reading
a summary rather than the full text.






   (B)   In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of
the membership, the Council may suspend the requirements of second reading
and publication in order for an ordinance to become effective by naming and
describing the emergency in the ordinance.  Publication requirements of §
32.43 shall be complied with within ten days of the enactment of the
emergency ordinance.





(KRS 83A.060 (4),(7))




§ 32.39  APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL BY MAYOR.




   (A)   All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to
the Mayor who, within ten days after submission, shall either approve the
ordinance by affixing his signature or disapprove it by returning it to the
Council together with a statement of his objections.






   (B)   No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's approval
unless he fails to return it to the legislative body within ten days after
receiving it or unless the Council votes to override the Mayor's veto, upon
reconsideration of the ordinance not later than the second regular meeting
following its return, by the affirmative vote of one more than a majority of
the membership.





(KRS 83A.130 (6))




§ 32.40  ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.




   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or
nationally recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of
local legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by
title, source, and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference
without setting them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting
ordinance and is made a part of the permanent records of the city.





(KRS 83A.060 (5))




§ 32.41  OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.




   (A)   Every action of the Council shall be made a part of the
permanent records of the city and on passage of an ordinance the vote of each
member of the Council shall be entered on the official record of the meeting.










   (B)   The Council has provided, under the provisions of §§
31.36(C) and 32.42, for the maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent
records of the city.  The City Clerk and the presiding officer shall sign
the official record of each meeting.





(KRS 83A.060 (8))




§ 32.42  INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.




   At the end of each month, all ordinances adopted in the city shall be
indexed and maintained by the City Clerk in the following manner:






   (A)   The city budget, appropriations of money, and tax levies shall
be maintained and indexed so that each fiscal year is kept separate from
other years.






   (B)   All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or
an ordinance book in the order adopted and maintained in this code of
ordinances.





(KRS 83A.060 (8))




§ 32.43  PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   Except as provided in § 32.38(B), no ordinance shall be
effective until published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424.






   (B)   Ordinances may be published in full or in summary as
designated by the City Council.  If the City Council elects to publish an
ordinance in summary, the summary shall be prepared or certified by an
attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and shall
include the following:






      (1)   The title of ordinance;






      (2)   A brief narrative setting forth the main points of the
ordinance in a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a clear and
understandable manner of the meaning of the ordinance; and






      (3)   The full text of each section that imposes taxes or fees.






   (C)   Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may
include a sketch, drawing, or map, including common landmarks, such as
streets or roads in lieu of metes and bounds descriptions.





(KRS 83A.060 (9))




§ 32.44  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY CITY.




   The city may, by ordinance, specify additional requirements for
adoption of ordinances in greater detail than contained herein, but the city
may not lessen or reduce the substantial requirements of this chapter or any
statute relating to adoption of ordinances.





(KRS 83A.060 (10))




§ 32.45  PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.




   Not less than once every five years all ordinances in this code of
ordinances shall be examined for consistency with state law and with one
another and shall be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent,
and invalid provisions.





(KRS 83A.060 (11))




§ 32.46  MUNICIPAL ORDERS.




   (A)   Council may adopt municipal orders.  All municipal orders
shall be in writing and shall be adopted only at an official meeting. Orders
may be amended only by a subsequent municipal order or ordinance.  All
orders adopted shall be maintained in an official order book.






   (B)   In lieu of an ordinance, municipal orders may be used for
matters relating to the internal operation and functions of the city and to
appoint or remove or approve appointment or removal of members of boards,
commissions, and other agencies over which the Council has control.





(KRS 83A.060 (12), (13))




§ 32.47  PROVED BY CLERK; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.




   All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of
the City Clerk; and when the ordinances are placed in this code of ordinances
by authority of the city, the printed copy shall be received in evidence by
any state court without further proof of such ordinances.





(KRS 83A.060 (14))




§ 32.48  LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.




   For anything said in debate, Councilmembers shall be entitled to the
same immunities and protections allowed to members of the General Assembly.





(KRS 83A.060 (15))





Statutory reference:





   Privileges of members of General Assembly, see KRS 6.050 and Ky. Const.
§ 43




CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE




Section






   Financial Administration






   33.01   Definitions





   33.02   Accounting records and financial reports





   33.03   Annual budget ordinance





   33.04   Annual audit of city funds





   33.05   Official depositories; disbursement of city funds





   33.06   Fiscal year





   33.07   Acquisition of real and personal property; funding; public
properties corporation established






   Improvements






   33.10   Definitions





   33.11   Financing of improvements





   33.12   Apportionment of cost





   33.13   Comprehensive report required





   33.14   Public hearing required





   33.15   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners





   33.16   Affected owner may contest





   33.17   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien





   33.18   Effect of additional property or change in financing






   Fees for Equipment Use






   33.30   Fee charged





   33.31   Collection and use of fees





FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION




§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:






   "BUDGET."  A proposed plan for raising and spending money for
specified programs, functions, activities, or objectives during a fiscal year.






   "DEBT SERVICE."  The sum of money required to pay installments of
principal and interest on bonds, notes, and other evidences of debt accruing
within a fiscal year and to maintain sinking funds.






   "ENCUMBRANCES."  Obligations in the form of purchase orders or
contracts that are chargeable to an appropriation.  An obligation ceases to
be an encumbrance when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.






   "FISCAL YEAR."  The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.






   "GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS."  Those standards
for audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and functions
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.
(KRS 91A.010 (6))





   "GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING." Those
standards and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board.





(KRS 91A.010 (7))




§ 33.02  ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.




   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render
financial reports in such a way as to:






      (1)  Determine compliance with statutory provisions; and






      (2)  Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial
operations of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity
with generally accepted governmental accounting principles.






   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and
operated on a fund basis.





(KRS 9lA.020)




§ 33.03  ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.




   (A)   The city shall operate under an annual budget ordinance
adopted and administered in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
No moneys shall be expended from any governmental or proprietary fund except
in accordance with a budget ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.






   (B)   Moneys held by the city as a trustee or agent for individuals,
private organizations, or other governmental units need not be included in
the budget ordinance.






   (C)   If in any fiscal year subsequent to a fiscal year in which the
city has adopted a budget ordinance in accordance with this section, no
budget ordinance is adopted, the budget ordinance of the previous fiscal year
has full force and effect as if readopted.






   (D)   The budget ordinance of the city shall cover one fiscal year. 






   (E)   Preparation of the budget proposal shall be the responsibility
of the Mayor.






   (F)   The budget proposal shall be prepared in such form and detail
as prescribed by ordinance.






   (G)   The budget proposal together with a budget message shall be
submitted to Council not later than  30 days prior to the  beginning of the
fiscal year it covers.  The budget message shall contain an explanation of
the governmental goals fixed by the budget for the coming fiscal year;
explain important features of the activities anticipated in the budget; set
forth the reasons for stated changes from the previous year in program goals,
programs, and appropriation levels; and explain any major changes in fiscal
policy.






   (H)   (1)   Council may adopt the budget ordinance making
appropriations for the fiscal year in such sums as it finds sufficient and
proper, whether greater or less than the sums recommended in the budget
proposal.  The budget ordinance may take any form that Council finds most
efficient in enabling it to make the necessary fiscal policy decisions.






      (2)   No budget ordinance shall be adopted which provides for
appropriations to exceed revenues in any one fiscal year in violation of
Section 157 of the Kentucky Constitution.






   (I)   The full amount estimated to be required for debt service
during the budget year shall be appropriated for all governmental fund types.






   (J)   Council may amend the budget ordinance at any time after the
ordinance's adoption, so long as the amended ordinance continues to satisfy
the requirements of this section.






   (K)   Administration and implementation of an adopted budget
ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Mayor.  Such responsibility
includes the preparation and submission to Council of operating statements,
including budgetary comparisons of each governmental fund for which an annual
budget has been adopted.  Such reports shall be submitted not less than once
every three months in each fiscal year.






   (1)   To the extent practical, the system utilized in the
administration and implementation of the adopted budget ordinance shall be
consistent in form with the accounting system called for in § 33.02.






   (M)   No city agency, or member, director, officer, or employee of
any city agency, may bind the city in any way to any extent beyond the amount
of money at that time appropriated for the purpose of the agency.  All
contracts, agreements, and obligations, express or implied, beyond such
existing appropriations are void; nor shall any city officer issue any bond,
certificate, or warrant for the payment of money by the city in any way to
any extent, beyond the balance of any appropriation made for the purpose.





(KRS 9lA.030)




§ 33.04  ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.




   (A)   The city shall, after the close of each fiscal year, cause
each fund of the city to be audited by the Auditor of Public Accounts or a
certified public accountant.  The audit shall be completed by February 1
immediately following the fiscal year being audited.  The city shall forward
an electronic copy of the audit report to the Kentucky Department for Local
Government for information purposes by no later than March 1 immediately
following the fiscal year being audited.  The Department for Local
Government shall forward one electronic or paper copy of the audit report to
the Legislative Research Commission to be used for the purposes of KRS 6.955
to 6.975.






   (B)   The city shall enter into a written contract with the selected
auditor.  The contract shall set forth all terms and conditions of the
agreement which shall include, but not be limited to, requirements that:






      (1)   The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial
statements which shall include the government-wide and fund financial
statements;






      (2)   The auditor shall include in the annual city audit
report an examination of local government economic assistance funds granted
to the city under KRS 42.450 to 42.495.  The auditor shall include a
certification with the annual audit report that the funds were expended for
the purpose intended.






      (3)   All audit information be prepared in accordance with
generally accepted governmental auditing standards which includes such tests
of the accounting records and such auditing procedures as considered
necessary under the circumstances.  Where the audit is to cover the use of
state or federal funds, appropriate state or federal guidelines shall be
utilized;






      (4)   The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed
report embodying:





         (a)   The basic financial statements and accompanying
supplemental and required supplemental information;




         (b)   The auditor's opinion on the basic financial
statements or reasons why an opinion cannot be expressed; and




         (c)   Findings required to be reported as a result of
the audit.









      (5)   The completed audit and all accompanying documentation
shall be presented to Council at a regular or special meeting.






      (6)   Any contract with a certified public accountant for an
audit shall require the accountant to forward a copy of the audit report and
management letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon request of the city
or the Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall
have the right to review the certified public accountant's workpapers upon
request.






   (C)   A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this
section shall be considered satisfactory and final in meeting any official
request to the city for financial data, except for statutory or judicial
requirements, or requirements of the Legislative Research Commission
necessary to carry out the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.






   (D)   Each city shall, within 30 days after the presentation of an
audit to the city legislative body, publish an advertisement, in accordance
with KRS Chapter 424, containing:






      (1)   The auditor's opinion letter;






      (2)   The "Budgetary Comparison Schedules-Major Funds," which
shall include the general fund and all major funds;






      (3)   A statement that a copy of the complete audit report,
including financial statements and supplemental information, is on file at
city hall and is available for public inspection during normal business
hours; 






      (4)   A statement that any citizen may obtain from city hall a
copy of the complete audit report, including financial statements and
supplemental information, for his personal use;






      (5)   A statement which notifies citizens requesting a
personal copy of the city audit report that they will be charged for
duplication costs at a rate that shall not exceed twenty five cents ($0.25)
per page; and





      (6)   A statement that copies of the financial statement
prepared in accordance with KRS 424.220, when a financial statement is
required thereby, are available to the public at no cost at the business
address of the officer responsible for preparation of the statement.





   (E)   The city may utilize the alternative publication methods
authorized by KRS 424.190(2) to comply with the provisions of this section.






   (F)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.  In addition, any officer who
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall, for each
failure, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500,
in the discretion of the court, which may be recovered only once, in a civil
action brought by any resident of the city.  The costs of all proceedings,
including a reasonable fee for the attorney of the resident bringing the
action, shall be assessed against the unsuccessful party.





(KRS 91A.040)





Statutory reference:





   Department for Local Government to provide assistance, see KRS 91A.050.




§ 33.05  OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.




   (A)   The Mayor shall designate as the city's official depositories
one or more banks, federally insured savings and loan companies, or trust
companies within the Commonwealth.  The amount of funds on deposit in an
official depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or
collateralized in accordance with 12 U.S.C. sec. 1823, to the extent
uninsured, by any obligations, including surety bonds permitted by KRS
41.240(4).










   (B)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which
the city is responsible, which has not been otherwise invested or deposited
in a manner authorized by law, shall be deposited in official depositories. 
All city funds shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the
Mayor which states the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the
purpose of the payment, and the fund out of which the funds are payable. 
Each authorization shall be numbered and recorded.





(KRS 91A.060)




§ 33.06  FISCAL YEAR.




   The annual budget shall be for a fiscal year beginning July 1 to June
30 of the following year.





('77 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. 119-1975, passed 8-8-75)




§ 33.07  ACQUISITION OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY; FUNDING; PUBLIC
PROPERTIES CORPORATION ESTABLISHED.




   (A)   A non-profit corporation, to be known as the public properties
corporation, is hereby created pursuant to KRS 58.1801 et seq. and KRS
273.161 et seq.






   (B)   The corporation shall have a perpetual existence and be formed
for the purpose of acting as a governmental agency of holding company and
shall be authorized to acquire real and personal property and borrow
necessary funding, all in accordance with the direction of City Council and
statutory powers available under KRS 273.171 and 58.180.






   (C)   The corporation shall have and exercise all of the powers
available to non-profit corporations in the state pursuant to KRS Chapters 58
and 273.






   (D)   The use of the corporation assets and earnings shall be
limited to use for the benefit of the city, and there shall be no debt limit.






   (E)   The initial incorporators and members of the Board of
Directors shall be the Mayor and the current members of City Council.  The
members of the Board of Directors shall be the duly elected or appointed
Mayor and City Council.






   (F)   The Articles of Incorporation shall include any provision
necessary to protect the tax status of the corporation and any other
provisions deemed and advisably necessary by the incorporators and their
legal counsel to advance the purposes of the corporation as outlined in this
section.






   (G)   The incorporator shall hold the incorporators  and  directors





harmless from liability.





(Ord. 388-1988, passed 6-1-88)





IMPROVEMENTS




§ 33.10  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:






   "ASSESSED VALUE BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property
bears to the total assessed value of all such properties.






   "BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an
improvement according to equitable determination by Council of the special
benefit received by property from the improvement, including assessed value
basis, front foot basis, and square foot basis, or any combination thereof,
and may include consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for
different classes of property based on nature and extent of special benefits
received, and other factors affecting benefits received.






   "COST."  All costs related to an improvement, including planning,
design, property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and
legal fees, financing costs, and publication expenses.






   "FAIR BASIS."  Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot
basis, or benefits received basis.






   "FRONT FOOT BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual
parcels of property bears to such front footage of all such properties.






   "IMPROVEMENT."  Construction of any facility for public use or
services or any addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific
properties in the area served by such facility.






   "PROPERTY."  Any real property benefited by an improvement.






   "SPECIAL ASSESSMENT" or "ASSESSMENT."  A special charge fixed on
property to finance an improvement in whole or in part.






   "SQUARE FOOT BASIS."  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property
bears to the square footage of all such property.





(KRS 91A.210)




§ 33.11  FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.




   (A)   The city may not finance any improvement in whole or in part
through special assessments except as provided in this subchapter and in any
applicable statutes.  (KRS 91A.200)






   (B)   Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a
fair basis.






   (C)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing, and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing.





(KRS 91A.220)





Statutory reference:





   Improvements; alternate methods, see KRS Ch. 107




§ 33.12  APPORTIONMENT OF COST.




   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government, or any educational, religious, or charitable organization. 
Council may assess such property in the same manner as for privately owned
property or it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.





(KRS 91A.230)




§ 33.13  COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.




   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the
city shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:






   (A)   The nature of the improvement;






   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the
boundaries or other description of the area to be assessed;






   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;






   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;






   (E)   If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and






   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects
of the improvement, assessments, or financing.





(KRS 91A.240)




§ 33.14  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.




   After preparation of the report required by § 33.13, the city shall
hold at least one public hearing on the proposed improvement at which all
interested persons shall be heard.  Notice of the hearing shall be published
pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each affected property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall include:






   (A)   The nature of the improvement;






   (B)   Description of area of the improvement;






   (C)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in
whole or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;






   (D)   Time and place the report may be examined; and






   (E)   Time and place of the hearing.





(KRS 91A.250)




§ 33.15  ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.




   Within 90 days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall determine
whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and if it
determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and containing all
necessary terms, including the items referred to in § 33.13 and a
description of all properties.  Promptly upon passage the city shall publish
such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by certified mail
to each affected property owner a notice of determination to proceed with the
project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the estimated cost to
the property owner, and the ratio the cost to each property owner bears to
the total cost of the entire project.





(KRS 91A.260)




§ 33.16  AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.




   (A)   Within 30 days of the mailing of the notice provided for in §
33.15, any affected property owner may file an action in the circuit court of
the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by special assessment,
the inclusion of his property in the improvement, or the amount of his
assessment.  If the action contests the undertaking of the improvement by
the special assessment method of the inclusion of the property of that
property owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it relates to
any property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the final judgment
has been entered.






   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution are final and binding with respect to such
property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments.  After the
lapse of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties are
forever barred.





(KRS 91A.270)




§ 33.17  WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.




   (A)   After the passage of time for the action provided for in §
33.16, or after favorable final judgment in any such action, whichever comes
later, the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof stayed by
the action, including notice requiring payment of special assessment or
installment thereon and bonds or other method proposed to finance the
improvement.  The first installment may be apportioned so that other
payments will coincide with payment of ad valorem taxes.






   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments
thereof on any property, and accrued interest and other charges, constitutes
a lien on the property to secure payment to the bondholders or any other
source of financing of the improvement.  The lien takes precedence over all
other liens, whether created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the
ordinance, except a lien for state and county taxes, general municipal taxes,
and prior improvement taxes, and is not defeated or postponed by any private
or judicial sale, by any mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the
description of the property or in the names of the owners.  No error in the
proceedings of the Council shall exempt any benefited property from the lien
for the improvement assessment, or from payment thereof, or from the
penalties or interest thereon, as herein provided.





(KRS 91A.280)




§ 33.18  EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.




   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the
improvement or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§ 33.13
through 33.17 applies if additional property is included in the improvement
or if change is made in the method or period of financing; but additional
property may be included in the improvement with the consent of the owner
thereof without compliance with other sections if it does not increase the
cost apportioned to any other property, or any other change may be made
without such compliance if all property owners of the improvement consent.





(KRS 91A.290)





FEES FOR EQUIPMENT USE




§ 33.30  FEE CHARGED.




   It is hereby authorized that the city may charge a fee for the
extraordinary or repetitive use of city equipment and city personnel, which
will be determined by a fee schedule.  The schedule of fees shall be
determined by amendment to this subchapter.





(Ord. 548-97, passed 3-18-97)




§ 33.31  COLLECTION AND USE OF FEES.




   The executive authority of the city shall provide for the collection of
the fees and the fees established shall be used for the payment of the costs
and expenses of the collection thereof, with the balance thereof to be placed
in the general fund.





(Ord. 548-97, passed 3-18-97)




CHAPTER 34:  PUBLIC RECORDS




Section






   General






   34.01   Definitions






   Procedures for Requesting Public Records






   34.05   Initial request with immediate inspection





   34.06   Referral to proper custodian





   34.07   Public records not immediately available





   34.08   Refusal of unreasonable requests





   34.09   Time limitation; denial of inspection





   34.10   Concealing or destroying records prohibited





   34.11   Access to records relating to particular individual





   34.12   Format of copies





   34.13   Fees for copies





   34.14   Misstatement of purpose prohibited





   34.15   Online access to public records in electronic form





   34.16   Public records protected from disclosure





   34.17   Notification of the Attorney General





GENERAL




§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.






   "CITY."  The city government of this city.






   "COMMERCIAL PURPOSE."  The direct or indirect use of any public record
or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease of a
service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary, or fee.  "COMMERCIAL PURPOSE" shall not include
publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or periodical;
use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news or other
informational programs; or use of a public record in the preparation for
prosection or defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to
such action, or the attorneys representing the parties.






   "CUSTODIAN."  The official custodian or any authorized person having
personal custody andcontrol of public records.  The "CUSTODIAN" having
personal custody of most of the public records of this city is the City
Clerk/Treasurer.






   "MECHANICAL PROCESSING."  Any operation or other procedure which is
transacted on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a
copier, computer, recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.






   "MEDIA."  The physical material in or on which records may be stored
or represented, and which may include, but is not limited to paper,
microform, disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.






   "PERSON."  A human being who makes a request for inspection of public
records.






   "PUBLIC AGENCY."  Every city government board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city government agency, including the policy-making board
of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local officer, or any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a purpose of
evaluation the qualifications of public agency employees, established,
created, or controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an
interagency body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public
agency" is defined in this section.





(KRS 61.805(2))






   "PUBLIC RECORDS."  All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes,
discs, diskettes, recordings, or other documentation regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the possession
of, or retained by a public agency. "PUBLIC RECORDS" shall not include any
records owned or maintained by or for a body referred to in KRS 61.870(1)(h)
that are not related to functions, activities, programs, or operations funded
by state or local authority nor any records that have been excluded by §
34.12.






   "REASONABLE FEE" or "FEE."  The fair payment required by the city for
making copies of non exempt public records requested for noncommercial
purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including
the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the
public agency, but not including the cost of staff.  If a public agency is
asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the
format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency may
at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.






   "REQUEST."  An oral or written application by any person to inspect
public records of the city.





(KRS 61.870)






   "SOFTWARE."  The program code which makes a computer system function,
but does not include that portion of the program code which contains public
records exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific
addresses of files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any
other mechanism for controlling the security or restricting access to public
records in the public agency's computer system.  "SOFTWARE" consists of the
operating system, application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines
such as translators and utility programs, but does not include that materials
which is prohibited from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between
a public agency and an outside entity which supplied the material to the
agency.





(KRS 61.870)





PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS




§ 34.05  INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.




   (A)  As defined in § 34.01, and subject to the limitations set forth
in § 34.12, any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of
this city shall make a request or complete a written application for such
records at the office of the City Clerk during regular office hours, except
during legal holidays.  The written application shall be hand delivered,
mailed, or sent via facsimile to the City Clerk/Treasurer's office.  (KRS
61.872(2))






   (B)  If the custodian determines that a person's request is in
compliance with the open records law and the requested records are
immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection.  Suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of
the City Clerk for the inspection.  No person shall remove original copies
of public records from the offices of any public agency without the written
permission of the official custodian of the record.  (KRS 61.872(1))






   (C)   An applicant may inspect public records during the regular
business hours of the city, or by receiving copies of the public records from
the city through the mail if the applicant's residence or principal place of
business is outside of the county in which the city is located and he has
precisely described public records which are available within the city.  If
the person requesting the public records requests that the records be mailed,
the official custodian shall mail the copies upon receipt of all fees and the
cost of mailing. (KRS 61.872(3))






   (D)  The applicant shall have the right to make abstracts of the
public records and to obtain copies of all written public records. When
copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request and advance
payment of the prescribed fee as defined in § 34.01.  (KRS 61.874(1))






   (E)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format.






Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in
standard hard copy format where agencies currently maintain records in hard
copy format.  Agencies are not required to convert hard copy format records
to electronic formats.






   (F)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as
not less than 8½ inches by 11 inches in at least one (1) color on white
paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format.  If the public maintains
public records in a format other than ASCII, and this format conforms to the
requestor's requirements, the public records may be provided in this
alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified by the public
agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than the forms
described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized request.





(KRS 61.874(2)(b))






   (G)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.  The public
agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are requested for a
commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the requestor
stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may require
the requestor to enter into a contract with the state commercial purpose of a
specified fee.  The fee may be based on the cost to the public agency of
media, mechanical processing and staff required to produce a copy of the
public record or records or the cost to the public agency of the creation
purchase, or the acquisition of the public records.





(KRS 61.874(4))






   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part
of a public record for a:






      (1)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial
purpose, if a certified statement from the requestor was required by the
public agency pursuant to subsection (G) of this section; or






      (2)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly
allows the use of the public record for a different commercial purpose; or






      (3)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly
allows the use of the public record for a commercial purpose.  A newspaper,
periodical, radio or television station shall not be held to have used or
knowingly allowed the use of the public record for a commercial purpose
merely because of its publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its
express permission for that commercial use.  (KRS 61.874(5))






   (I)   Online access to public records in electronic form, as
provided under this section, may be provided and made available at the
discretion of the public agency.  If a party wishes to access public records
by electronic means and the public agency agrees to provide online access, a
public agency may require that the party enter into a contract, license, or
other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for these agreements. 
Fees shall not exceed:






      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and
reasonable cost of computer time access charges;






      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a
reasonable fee based on the factors set forth in subsection (G).





(KRS 61.874(6))




§ 34.06  REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.




   If the City Clerk/Treasurer does not have custody or control of the
public record or records requested, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall so notify
the applicant and shall furnish the name and location of the custodian of the
public record, if such facts are known to him.





(KRS 61.872(4))




§ 34.07  PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.




   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately so notify the applicant
and shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection of the public
records, not to exceed three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of
the cause is given for further delay and the place, time, and earliest date
on which the public record will be available for inspection or duplication.





(KRS 61.872(5))




§ 34.08  REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.




   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof.  However, refusal under this section must be sustained
by clear and convincing evidence.





(KRS 61.872(6))




§ 34.09  TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.




   (A)   The official custodian, upon any request for records made
under this chapter, shall determine within three (3) days, excepting
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after the receipt of any request
whether to comply with the request and shall notify in writing the person
making the request within the three-day period of its decision. Any agency
response denying, in whole or in part, inspection of any record  shall 
include  a statement  of the  specific  exception authorizing the
withholding of the record and a brief explanation of how the exception
applies to the record withheld.  The response shall be issued by the
official custodian or under his authority and shall constitute final agency
action.





(KRS 61.880)






   (B)   If the requesting party wants the Attorney General to review
the denial of a request for inspection of a public record, he shall proceed
under the provisions of KRS 61.880 and 61.882.  Upon the Attorney General's
request, the agency will provide additional documentation.






   (C)   If upon request by the person seeking inspection, the Attorney
General reviews the denial and issues a written opinion upholding, in whole
or in part, the request for inspection, the requesting party may institute
appeal proceedings within thirty (30) days for injunctive or declaratory
relief in the circuit court.  In addition, if the Attorney General disallows
the request, or if the city continues to withhold the record notwithstanding
the Attorney General's opinion, and the person seeking disclosure institutes
proceedings in circuit court, the city shall notify the Attorney General of
such action.  (KRS 61.880, 61.882)




§ 34.10  CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.




   No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any record
with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.




§ 34.11  ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.




   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or in
which he is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of this chapter.  (KRS 61.884)




§ 34.12  FORMAT OF COPIES.




   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make
abstracts of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies
of all public records not exempted by the terms of § 34.16. When copies are
requested, the custodian may require a written request and advance payment of
the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate. If the applicant
desires copies of public records other than written records, the custodian of
the records shall duplicate the records or permit the applicant to duplicate
the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that such duplication will
not damage or alter the original records.






   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial
purposes shall be available for copying in either standard electronic or
standard hard copy format, as designated by the party requesting the records,
where the agency currently maintains the records in electronic format. 
Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in
standard hard copy format where agencies currently maintain records in hard
copy format. Agencies are not required to convert hard copy format records to
electronic formats.






      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be
defined as not less than 8½ inches x 11 inches in at least one color on
white paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American
Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public
agency maintains electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and
the format conforms to the requestor's requirements, the public record may be
provided in this alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified
by the public agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than
the forms described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized
request.





(KRS 61.874(1) - (3))




§ 34.13  FEES FOR COPIES.




   (A)   The public agency may prescribe a reasonable fee for making
copies of nonexempt public records requested for use for noncommercial
purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including
the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the
public agency, but not including the cost of staff required. If a public
agency is asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor
the format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency
may at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.






   (B)   (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits
the disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for
commercial purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for
commercial purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.






      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public
records are requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified
statement from the requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they
shall be used, and may require the requestor to enter into a contract with
the agency. The contract shall permit use of the public records for the
stated commercial purpose for a specified fee.






      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section
may be based on one or both of the following:






         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical
processing, and staff required to produce a copy of the public record or
records;






         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation,
purchase, or other acquisition of the public records.





(KRS 61.874(3), (4))





Cross-reference:





   Fees for online access to public records, see § 34.15




§ 34.14  MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.




   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a
public record for a:






   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if
a certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to § 34.13;






   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the
use of the public record for a different commercial purpose; or






   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows
the use of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper,
periodical, radio or television station shall not be held to have used or
knowingly allowed the use of the public record for a commercial purpose
merely because of its publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its
express permission for that commercial use.





(KRS 61.874(5)) Penalty, see § 10.99




§ 34.15  ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.




   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be
provided and made available at the discretion of the public agency. If a
party wishes to access public records by electronic means and the public
agency agrees to provide online access, a public agency may require that the
party enter into a contract, license, or other agreement with the agency, and
may charge fees for these agreements.






   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:






      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and
reasonable cost of computer time access charges; and






      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a
reasonable fee based on the factors set forth in § 34.13.





(KRS 61.874(6))




§ 34.16  PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.




   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application
of this chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to
inspection only upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except as
provided in KRS 61.878(1) that no court shall authorize the inspection by any
party of any materials pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is
provided by the Rules of Civil Procedure governing pretrial discovery:






      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal
nature where the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.






      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and
compiled and maintained for scientific research.  This exemption shall not,
however, apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is directed
by other statute.






      (3)   (a)   Records confidentially disclosed to the agency,
or required by an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as
confidential or proprietary, which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair
commercial advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records.






         (b)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency or
required by an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as
confidential or proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:






            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the
administration of a loan or a grant;






            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the
administration of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax credits as
described in KRS Ch. 154;






            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of
commercial enterprise, including mineral exploration records, unpatented,
secret commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulae, or processes, which
are used for the making, preparing, compounding, treating, or processing of
articles or materials which are trade commodities obtained from a person; or






            4.   For the grant or review of a license to do
business.






         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a)
and (b) above, shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of
which is directed by statute.






      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a
business or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the
business' or industry's interest in locating in, relocating within, or
expanding within the Commonwealth.  This exemption shall not include those
records pertaining to applications to agencies for permits or licenses
necessary to do business or to expand business operations within the state,
except as provided in division (A) (2) above.






      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in
conjunction with the regulation or supervision of financial institutions,
including but not limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and
credit unions, which disclose the agency's internal examining or audit
criteria and related analytical methods.






      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to the acquisition of property,  until such time as all of the property has
been acquired.  The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this
provision.






      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data
used to administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or
academic examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again.






      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved
in administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting
and investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the disclosure of
the information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants
not otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication.  Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action.  The exemptions provided by this
subdivision shall not be used by the custodian of the records to delay or
impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.






      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with
private individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give
notice of final action of a public agency.






      (10)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda
in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended.






      (11)   All public records or information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by federal law or regulation.






      (12)   Public records or information the disclosure of which
is prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of
the General Assembly, including any information acquired by the Department of
Revenue in tax administration that is prohibited from divulgence or
disclosure under division (C) of this section.





      (13)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would
have a reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to
a terrorist act and limited to:



 



            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence
assessments;



 



            2.   Vulnerability assessments;



 



            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;



 



            4.   Security and response needs assessments;



 



            5.   Infrastructure records that expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division through the disclosure of the
location, configuration, or security of critical systems, including public
utility critical systems.  These critical systems shall include but not be
limited to information technology, communication, electrical, fire
suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater, sewage and gas systems.



 



            6.   The following records when their disclosure
will expose a vulnerability referred to in this division:  detailed
drawings, schematics, maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor
plans, and operating, utility or security systems of any building or facility
owned, occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency; and



 



            7.   Records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division and that describe the exact
physical location of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological
materials.



 



         (b)   As used in this division, “TERRORIST ACT”
means a criminal act intended to:



 



            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all
or part of the civilian population;



 



            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division
(a)5.; or



 



            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or
facility owned, occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.



 



         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a
request to inspect a public record for a reason identified in this division,
that public agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request,
referred to in KRS 61.880(1), to the executive director of the Kentucky
Office of Homeland Security and the Attorney General;



 



         (d)   Nothing in this division shall affect the
obligations of a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of
public records under state environmental, health, and safety programs;



 



         (e)   The exemption established in this division shall
not apply when a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a
public record identified in this division under the Open Records Law.



 



      (14)   Public or private records, including books, papers,
maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or
other documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having
historic, literary, artistic, or commemorative value accepted by the
archivist of a public university, museum, or government depository from a
donor or depositor other than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to
the extent that nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or
depositor of such records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or
publication of which is mandated by another statute or by federal law:



 



         (a)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Ch. 45A
or 56. This exemption shall not apply after:



 



            1.   A contract is awarded; or



 



            2.   The procurement process is canceled without
award of a contract and there is a determination that the contract will not
be resolicited; and









         (b)   Communications of a purely personal nature
unrelated to any governmental function.










   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.  In addition, if any public record contains material
which is not excepted under this section, the city shall separate the
excepted and make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject
to the possible applicability of § 34.08.










   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or
limit the exchange of public records or the sharing of information between
public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need
or is necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.










   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny,
abridge, or impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for
employment, or an eligible on a register to inspect and copy any record,
including preliminary and other supporting documentation, that relates to
him.  Such records shall include, but not be limited to work plans, job
performance, demotions, evaluations, promotions, compensation,
classification, reallocation, transfers, layoffs, disciplinary actions,
examination scores, and preliminary and other supporting documentation.  A
city employee, applicant, or eligible shall not have the right to inspect or
copy any examination or any documents relating to ongoing criminal or
administrative investigations by any agency.





(KRS 61.878)




§ 34.17  NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.




   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the city in circuit court regarding the enforcement of the open
records law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.




CHAPTER 35:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS




Section





   Board of Adjustment






   35.01   Establishment






   Police Department






   35.10   Creation; composition





   35.11   Appointment of Police Chief and police officers





   35.12   Oath and bond





   35.13   Compensation





   35.14   Duties and authority of Police Chief





   35.15   Duties and responsibilities of members






   Tree Board






   35.25   Establishment






   Board of Ethics






   35.35   Establishment










   Code Enforcement Board





   35.50   Creation of Code Enforcement Board



   35.51   Definitions



   35.52   Enforcement powers



   35.53   Appointment of members; terms of office; removal from
office; oath; compensation; organization of Board; meetings; quorum; conflict
of interest; minutes and records



   35.54   Powers of the Joint Code Enforcement Board



   35.55   Enforcement proceedings



   35.56   Hearing; notice; and final order



   35.57   Presentation of cases



   35.58   Appeals; final judgment



   35.59   Ordinance fine schedule



   35.60   Liens; fines; charges; and fines



   35.61   Lienholder notification system



   35.62   Liens



   35.63   Immediate action



   35.64   Purpose




   Economic Development Authority





   35.65   Findings of fact



   35.66   Establishment




   City Historian





   35.70   Establishment



   35.71   Appointment; qualifications



   35.72   Terms of office



   35.73   Duties and functions




BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT




§ 35.01  ESTABLISHMENT.




   For provisions concerning the Board of Adjustment, see § 153.02.





POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 35.10  CREATION; COMPOSITION.




   There is hereby created a Police Department for the city, which shall
consist of the Chief of Police and such other officers as may be provided for
by the City Council by ordinance.





('77 Code, § 10-16) (Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)




§ 35.11  APPOINTMENT OF POLICE CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Police Chief and all police officers shall be appointed by
the Mayor at will, and may be removed by the Mayor at will except as tenure
and terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance, or contract. The
Police Department shall have the following positions:




      (1)   Police Chief (Pay Level 2)




      (2)   Police Captain (Pay Level 3)




      (3)   Police Sergeant (Pay Level 4)




      (4)   Police Officer Specialist (Pay Level 5)




      (5)   Police Officer Detective (Pay Level 5)




      (6)   Police Officer (Pay Level 6)




   (B)   From time to time, the Mayor may promulgate job descriptions
for the various Police Department positions, subject to approval by Council
through municipal order.





(Ord. 06-2015, passed 5-6-15)




§ 35.12  OATH AND BOND.




   (A)  No person shall be appointed or act as the Police Chief or a
police officer of the city unless such person has taken the oath required by
Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.






   (B)  The Chief of  Police  and  each  other  member of  the
Police Department shall execute a bond with surety approved by Council to the
state in a penal amount of $2,500.  ('77 Code, § 10-18)




§ 35.13  COMPENSATION.




   The compensation of the Chief of Police and other police officers as
well as additional benefits, including, but not limited to, medical coverage,
pension retirement plans, and other insurance coverages, shall be as
established by the City Council in the pay classification ordinance.





('77 Code, § 10-19) (Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)




§ 35.14  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF.




   (A)  Subject to the executive authority of the Mayor, the Chief of
Police shall be the head of the Department and shall supervise all officers
and members thereof.  ('77 Code, § 10-20)






   (B)  With the approval of the Mayor the Chief of Police may establish
such divisions or special sections within the Police Department, assigning
such policemen to such divisions or special sections and designating such
duties as may be deemed necessary.





('77 Code, § 10-22)






   (C)  The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports
concerning the activities of his Department as may be required by statute or
by the City Council.  The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by
the Police Department of its functions, and all persons who are members of
the Police Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of
Police and otherwise as provided by state law.  ('77 Code, § 10-23)






   (D)  Subject to the executive authority of the Mayor, the Chief of the
Police Department shall make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he
deems advisable.  Such rules when approved by resolution by the City Council
shall be binding on the members.  The rules and regulations may cover,
besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or
carried, hours of service, vacations, and all other similar matters necessary
or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department.  This section in
no way restricts other matters which may be prescribed or regulated through
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police pursuant to this
chapter.  ('77 Code, § 10-24)





   (E)  The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, stolen,
or abandoned property recovered in the city.  ('77 Code, § 10-26)




(Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)




§ 35.15  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF MEMBERS.




   (A)  It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to
see to the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes
applicable therein,  to preserve order, to prevent infractions of the law,
and to make arrests for violations thereof.  ('77 Code, § 10-27)






   (B)  No member of the Police Department, except the Chief, shall serve
any process except on command of the Chief of the Police Department.  ('77
Code, § 10-28)






   (C)  It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and to avoid
the use of unnecessary force.  Each member of the Police Department shall
obey the orders and directions of his superior.  ('77 Code, § 10-29)






   (D)  Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in the prosecution for a violation of an ordinance
or of any state or federal law.  No such member shall retain any witness fee
for service as witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party;
any fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the Police Chief, who
shall deposit same to the City Treasurer.  ('77 Code, § 10-30)





(Ord. 143-1977, passed 10-14-77)





TREE BOARD




§ 35.25  ESTABLISHMENT.




   For provisions concerning the City Tree Board, see Chapter 95.





BOARD OF ETHICS




§ 35.35  ESTABLISHMENT.




   For provisions concerning the Board of Ethics, see §§ 38.40 - 38.49.









CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD



§ 35.50  CREATION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to create the Fort Wright Code
Enforcement Board, that shall have the power to issue remedial orders and
impose civil fines when a violation of an ordinance has been classified as a
civil offense.




   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8811(1)(b), the city participates in a
Joint Code Enforcement Board through an Interlocal Agreement executed with
other participating city and county members. This Joint Code Enforcement
Board shall operate in lieu of a City Code Enforcement Board, and have
jurisdiction and authority throughout the City of Fort Wright in the same
manner as a City Code Enforcement Board created under KRS 65.8811(1)(a).




   (B)   The city’s representation on the Joint Code Enforcement
Board is established through the Interlocal Agreement with the participating
cities and/or Kenton County, and any and all amendments to the Interlocal
Agreement. The city shall appoint one member, and two alternate members to
the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board. All appointments shall be
made by the Mayor, with approval of the City Council. Members of the Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall serve consistent with the
provisions of the interlocal agreement.




   (C)    All appointments to the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement
Board shall be for a term of three years. Upon expiration of a term, a member
or alternate member may be re-appointed by the Mayor, with approval by the
City Council.




   (D)   Each member and alternate member appointed by the city to the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall have resided within the
boundaries of the city for a period of at least one year prior to the date of
the member’s appointment, and shall reside there throughout the term in
office.




   (E)   In the event that the appointed member of the city +vacates
his/her membership on the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board, the
city shall, following the procedures in KRS 65.8811, fill the vacancy within
60 days. If the Mayor has not filled the vacancy within 60 days, then the
remaining member of the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall fill
the vacancy with another person who meets the qualifications in KRS 65.8811.
All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.




   (F)   Any member or alternate member appointed by the Mayor to the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board, pursuant to KRS 65.8811, may be
removed by the Mayor for misconduct, inefficiency, or willful neglect of
duty. In the event of removal, the Mayor shall submit a written statement to
the member subject to removal, and to the City Council, setting forth the
reasons for removal. The member so removed shall have the right to appeal the
removal to the Kenton County Circuit Court.




   (G)   Any member or alternate member shall, prior to entering their
duties, take the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky
Constitution.




   (H)   The members of the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board
may be compensated or reimbursed per the terms of the Interlocal Agreement,
and its amendments.




   (I)   No member or alternate member appointed by the city to the
Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall hold any elected or
appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with
the city.



 



   (J)   A copy of the governing Interlocal Agreement shall be
maintained in the Office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public.





(Ord. 1-07, passed 2-7-07; Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)




§ 35.51  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:




   "ABATEMENT COSTS." A city's necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing
all or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other action with
regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to
maintain and preserve the public health, safety and welfare in accordance
with any city ordinance.




   "JOINT CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD." An administrative body created and
acting under the authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board
Act, KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.




   “CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER." A city police officer, safety officer,
citation officer, or other public law enforcement officer with the authority
to issue a citation.




   "FINAL ORDER." Any order:




      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing
in  accordance with § 35.56;




      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested
the citation within seven days as provided in § 35.55; or




      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing
the violator requested to contest the citation as provided in § 35.56.




   "IMMINENT DANGER." A condition which is likely to cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



 



   "ORDINANCE." An official action of the local government body, which is
a regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law
and shall include any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the city
legislative body which embodies all or part of an ordinance.




   "OWNER." A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity having a legal or equitable title in real property.




   "PREMISES." A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures
upon it.





(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)




§ 35.52  ENFORCEMENT POWERS.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue
remedial orders and impose civil fines as a method of enforcing city
ordinances when a violation of this subchapter has been classified as a civil
offense.




   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to
enforce any ordinance regulating conduct which would also, under any
provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, constitute a criminal offense or
a moving motor vehicle offense. 





(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)




§ 35.53  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE;
OATH; COMPENSATION; ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM; CONFLICT OF
INTEREST; MINUTES AND RECORDS.



   Membership, oath and terms of office, quorum, vacancies, removal of
members, and other statutory requirements related to the Board’s activities
shall be as stated in the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act and as
set forth by the Interlocal Agreement for the Kenton County Joint Code
Enforcement Board (hereinafter “Interlocal Agreement”) filed of record
with the Kenton County Clerk in Book C5439, Page 321 as incorporated by
reference as set forth herein.





(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)




§ 35.54 POWERS OF THE JOINT CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.



   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall have the powers
and duties as set forth by the Interlocal Agreement for the Kenton County
Joint Code Enforcement Board filed of record with the Kenton County Clerk in
Book C5439, Page 321 as incorporated by reference as set forth herein.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.55  ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings
before the Code Enforcement Board:




   (A)   Enforcement proceedings shall only be initiated by the
issuance of a citation by a Code Enforcement Officer.




   (B)   Except when immediate action is necessary pursuant to §
35.63, if a Code Enforcement Officer believes, based on his personal
observation or investigation, that a person has violated a city ordinance, he
shall issue a notice of violation allowing the alleged violator a specified
period of time to remedy the violation without incurring a fine.  If the
alleged violator fails or refuses to remedy the violation within the time
specified, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a citation.




   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation by one of
the following methods:



 



      (1)   Personal service to the alleged violator;




      (2)   Leaving a copy of the citation with any person 18 years
of age or older who is on the premises, if the alleged violator is not on the
premises at the time the citation is issued; or



 



      (3)   Posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on
the premises and mailing a copy of the citation by regular, first-class mail
to the owner of record of the property, if no one is on the premises at the
time the citation is issued.




   (D)   The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall
contain the following information:




      (1)   The date and time of issuance;




      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;




      (3)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;




      (4)   The date and time the offense was committed;




      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;




      (6)   The section of the code or the number of the ordinance
violated;




      (7)   The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;




      (8)   The civil fine that may be imposed for the violation,
including, if applicable:




         (a)   The civil fine that will be imposed if the person
does not contest the citation; and




         (b)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the
person elects to contest the citation;




      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay
the civil fine or to contest the citation; and




      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil
fine set forth in the citation or contest the citation within the time
allowed: the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation; the determination
that the violation was committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall
be deemed a final order determining that the violation was committed and
imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.




   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering a
copy of the citation to board Chairman.




   (F)   (1)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall
respond to the citation within seven days of the date of issuance by either
paying the civil fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing to contest the
citation.  If the person fails to respond to the citation within seven days,
the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the
determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final.  In
this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order determining
that the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in
the citation, and the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to
appeal the final order to District Court.



         



      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual
place of residence with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.56 HEARING; NOTICE; AND FINAL ORDER.



   (A)   When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board
or its administrative staff shall schedule a hearing.




   (B)   Not less than seven days before the date of the hearing, the
Code Enforcement Board shall notify the requester of the date, time, and
place of the hearing.  The notice may be given by regular first-class mail;
certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving
the notice at the person’s usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and who is
informed of the contents of the notice.




   (C)   (1)   Any person requesting a hearing who fails to appear
at the time and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the
right to a hearing to contest the citation, and the determination that a
violation was committed shall be final.  In this event, the citation as
issued shall be deemed a final order determining the violation was committed
and imposing the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the alleged
violator shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order
to District Court. 




      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual
place of residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of
age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.




   (D)   All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath and
recorded.  Testimony shall be taken from the Code Enforcement Officer, the
alleged violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the Code
Enforcement Officer or alleged violator.  Formal rules of evidence shall not
apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the
proceedings.




   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence,
determine whether a violation was committed.  If it is determined that no
violation was committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be entered. 
If it is determined that a violation was committed, an order may be issued
upholding the citation.  The board may impose a fine up to the maximum
authorized by ordinance, or require the offender to remedy a continuing
violation to avoid a fine, or both.




   (F)   (1)   Every final order following a hearing shall be
reduced to writing, which shall include the findings and conclusions reached
and the date the order was issued.  A copy shall be furnished to the person
named in the citation. 




      (2)   If the person named in the citation is not present when
the final order is issued, the order shall be delivered to the person by
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence
with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or
older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.57  PRESENTATION OF CASES.



   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board may be presented by an
attorney selected by the city, a Code Enforcement Officer for the city, or by
a member of the city's administrative staff. 




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.58  APPEALS; FINAL JUDGMENT.



   (A)   An appeal from a final order of a Code Enforcement Board
following a hearing conducted pursuant to § 35.56 may be made to the Kenton
County District Court within 30 days of the date the order is issued.  The
appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the
final order in the same manner as any civil action under the Kentucky Rules
of Civil Procedure.




   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board
is filed within the time period set in division (A) of this section, the Code
Enforcement Board's order shall be deemed final for all purposes.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.59  ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.



   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by the Kenton County Joint
Code Enforcement Board shall be subject to the schedule of civil fines as set
forth by separate ordinance.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.60  LIENS; FINES; CHARGES; AND FEES.



   (A)   The city delegates the Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement
Board to prepare and record liens on its behalf.




   (B)   The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person
found by a non-appealable final order as defined by § 35.51, or by a final
judgment of the court, to have committed a violation of a city ordinance. The
lien shall be for all civil fines assessed for the violation and for all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of
this subchapter, including abatement costs, and reasonable attorney’s fees.
An affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the amount of the lien and regularity of the proceedings pursuant
to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.




   (C)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and
shall bear interest until paid.  The lien shall continue for ten years
following the date of the non-appealable final order or final court judgment.




   (D)   Subject to § 35.61, the lien shall take precedence over all
other liens, except state, county, school board, and city taxes, and may be
enforced by judicial proceedings, including a foreclosure action.




   (E)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) of this
section, the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of all civil fines assessed for the violation and
for all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in connection
with the enforcement of this subchapter, including reasonable attorney’s
fees. The city may bring a civil action against the person and shall have the
same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.61  LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.



   The Kenton County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall establish and
maintain a lienholder notification system on behalf of the city. The Kenton
County Joint Code Enforcement Board shall obtain and maintain priority over
previously filed liens, as provided in § 35.60, in accordance with the
provisions of KRS 65.8836.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.62  LIENS.



   (A)   A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to § 35.61
may, within 45 days from the date of issuance of notification under §
35.61: 




      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already been
abated; or



 



      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of this
subchapter, including abatement costs.




   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action if necessary under § 35.63.




   (C)   The lien provided by § 35.60 shall not take precedence over
previously recorded liens if: 




      (1)   The city failed to comply with the requirements of §
35.61 for notification of the final order; or




      (2)   A prior lienholder complied with division (A) of this
section.




   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded
liens under division (C) of this section shall, if the final order remains
partially unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent
liens except liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.




   (E)   The city may record a lien before the 45-day period
established in division (A) of this section expires.  If the lien is fully
satisfied prior to the expiration of the 45-day period, the city shall
release the lien in the County Clerk's office where the lien is recorded
within fifteen days of satisfaction.




   (F)   Failure of the city to comply with §§ 35.60 and 35.61, or
failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as provided
in division (C) of this section, shall not limit or restrict any other
remedies the city has against the property of the violator.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.63  IMMEDIATE ACTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason
to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of
the violation will be irreparable or irreversible.




(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)



§ 35.64 PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to conform to all provisions of KRS
65.8801 through 65.8839, commonly known as the “Local Government Code
Enforcement Boards Act” and any subsequent amendments thereto.





(Am. Ord. 12-2016, passed --)




ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 35.65  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The city is planning to create the Dixie Highway-Kyles Lane
Development Area (the “Development Area”) pursuant to the provisions of
KRS 65.7041 to 65.7083 (the “Act”).




   (B)   Under the Act, the city may designate an agency responsible
for the oversight, administration and implementation of the Development Area.




   (C)   The city has determined it is best to establish a separate
non-profit corporation to act as its agency for the oversight, administration
and implementation of the Development Area, and other development areas or
local development areas the city may establish under the Act; and for other
purposes designed by the city to promote economic development within the city.




   (D)   Pursuant to the provisions of KRS Chapters 58 and 273, the
city may create a non-profit corporation to act as the agency, 
instrumentality and constituted authority of the city for the financing of
public projects on behalf of the city, and for other purposes as may be
designated by the city.



(Ord. 18-13, passed 12-18-13)



§ 35.66  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A) The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute and to file same with the
Kentucky Secretary of State, the articles of incorporation, attached to
Ordinance 18-13 as Exhibit “A,” to establish the City of Fort Wright
Economic Development Authority, Inc., as a non-profit corporation to be the
agency, instrumentality and constituted authority of the city pursuant to the
provisions of KRS Chapters 58 and 273.




   (B)   The establishment of the Economic Development Authority is for
a public purpose of the city.




(Ord. 18-13, passed 12-18-13)




CITY HISTORIAN



§ 35.70  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created the position of City Historian for the City of
Fort Wright.




(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)



§ 35.71  APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.



   The City Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor and should have a
keen interest in the history of Ft. Wright.




(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)



§ 35.72  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The City Historian shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor
appointing him, and he shall serve as a volunteer without compensation.




(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)



§ 35.73  DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.



   Functions of the City Historian shall be to further the interest of the
people of the city in all matters relating to the history of the city, to
assemble data and information of historical interest to the city, and to
perform other duties as the Mayor or City Council shall prescribe that relate
to the recording of events of historical interest to the people of the city.





(Ord. 10-2015, passed 6-3-15)




CHAPTER 36:  PERSONNEL POLICIES




Section






   36.01   Personnel policies, pay classification adopted by reference;
public inspection





§ 36.01  PERSONNEL POLICIES, PAY CLASSIFICATION ADOPTED BY REFERENCE;
PUBLIC INSPECTION.





   (A)  The city personnel policies, pay classifications, and job
description plans dated September 4, 1985, and any subsequent amendments
thereto, are adopted by reference as the Official Personnel and Pay
Classification Plan of the city.






   (B)  The Official Personnel and Pay Classification Plan shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the city at 1661 Park Road.





(Ord. 348-1985, passed 10-2-85; Am. Ord. 380-1987, passed 9-5-87)




CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION




Section






   Ad Valorem Taxes






   37.01   Adoption of county assessment





   37.02   Establishment of tax; due date; delinquency and penalty










   Bank Franchise and Local Deposit Tax






   37.20   Establishment of tax; due date





Cross-reference:




   Waste collection assessment to be collected along with property taxes,
see § 51.09




AD VALOREM TAXES




§ 37.01  ADOPTION OF COUNTY ASSESSMENT.




   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 132.285, the city elects to use the annual
Kenton County assessment for property situated within the city as a basis of
ad valorem tax levies ordered or approved by the City Council.






   (B)   The city shall also abide by the provisions of KRS 132.285 in
its relationship with the Property Valuation Administrator of Kenton County.





(`77 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 286-1982, passed 12-1-82)




§ 37.02  ESTABLISHMENT; DUE DATE; DELINQUENCY AND PENALTY.



   (A)   An ad valorem tax in an amount as established by ordinance of
City Council from time to time on each $100 value of real estate, personal
and mixed property, subject to taxation for the fiscal year beginning July 1
and ending June 30 of each year, for ordinary municipal purposes to carry on
the government of this city, including police protection, fire protection,
repairs to streets, and furnishing street lighting, is hereby established.




   (B)   All real and personal property taxes, except motor vehicle
property taxes, levied by the City Council each year shall be due and payable
to the City Tax Collector.  All real and personal property taxes, except
motor vehicle property taxes, shall be due and payable on December 31 of each
year.  Anyone failing to pay the tax by December 31 shall be deemed
delinquent and the bill shall have added thereto a penalty of 20% of the
amount thereof and shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum from
January 1, until paid. The delinquent taxpayer shall also pay all costs and
expenses incidental to any action taken by the city for collection of the
delinquent tax bill, including court costs and attorney's fees.




   (C)   The city has a lien upon the property assessed under the terms
of this chapter for the taxes levied upon the property under the terms of
this chapter and for all penalties, interest, fees, commissions, charges, and
other expenses, including court costs and attorney's fees, incurred by reason
of delinquency in payment of the tax bill or in the process of collecting it.
Such a lien has priority over all other obligations or liabilities for which
the property is liable.




(Ord. 349-1985, passed 10-7-85; Am. Ord. 391-1988, passed 9-7-88; Am. Ord.
408-1989, passed 10-4-89; Am. Ord. 433-1990, passed 10-3-90; Am. Ord.
461-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 480-1993, passed 9-15-93; Am. Ord.
496-1994, passed 10-5-94; Am. Ord. 529-96, passed 9-18-96; Am. Ord. 553-97,
passed 9-3-97; Am. Ord. 575-98, passed 9-2-98; Am. Ord. 588-99, passed
9-8-99; Am. Ord. 12-00, passed 9-13- 00; Am. Ord. 15-06, passed 9-8-06; Am.
Ord. 6-07, passed 9-5-07; Am. Ord. 11-08, passed 9-9-08; Am. Ord. 14-09,
passed 9-2-09; Am. Ord. 04-10, passed 9-1-10; Am. Ord. 05-11, passed 9-7-11;
Am. Ord. 12-12, passed 9-5-12; Am. Ord. 2-13, passed 4-3-13; Am. Ord. 09-13,
passed 9-4-13; Am. Ord. 11-14, passed 9-3-14; Am. Ord. 4-2015, passed 5-6-
15; Am. Ord. 12-2015, passed 9-2-15; Am. Ord. 07-2016, passed 9-21- 16; Am.
Ord. 13-2017, passed 10-11-17; Am. Ord. 13-18, passed 10-17-18; Am. Ord.
09-19, passed 10-16-19)




   (D)   All personal property taxes on motor vehicles shall be
collected by the Kenton County Clerk as required by KRS 134.800. Property
taxes on motor vehicles shall become due or delinquent as set forth in KRS
134.810.





   (E)   Pursuant to the pertinent section of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, the general laws thereof, and KRS 136.270(3), there
shall be levied and assessed by the city an ad valorem tax in an amount to be
set annually on each $100 of taxable fair cash value of bank or trust company
stock of each bank or trust company located in the city as duly assessed by
the Kenton County Property Valuation Administrator for general fund and
municipal purposes.






(Ord. 495-1994, passed 10-5-94)





BANK FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX




§ 37.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX; DUE DATE.




   (A)   There is hereby imposed on all "financial institutions", as
defined in KRS Chapter 136, located within the corporate limits of the city,
for the 1996 tax year and all subsequent years, a franchise tax at the rate
of 0.025% on all deposits, as defined in KRS Chapter 136, maintained by such
financial institutions.






   (B)   (1)   For transition purposes, the 1996 tax year will be
treated differently in terms of collection of taxes than for all subsequent
years.  For the 1996 tax year, the following timetable is hereby established.






      (2)   The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions
no later than May 1, 1997.  Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2%
discount by May 31, 1997, or without the discount by June 30, 1997.






   (C)   For all tax years subsequent to the 1996 tax year, the
following timetable is hereby established: The city will issue tax bills to
financial institutions no later than December 1 of each year.  Payment of
the tax shall be due with a 2% discount by December 31 of each year, or
without the discount by January 31 of each year.






   (D)   The city shall have a lien for taxes upon any and all property
subject to the tax imposed by these sections, which lien shall be superior to
all encumbrances prior or subsequent.










   (E)   All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not
paid before June 30, 1997, for tax year 1996, or which are not paid before
January 31, for all subsequent tax years shall be subject to a penalty of 15%
and shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum.





(Ord. 531-1996, passed 9-4-96)




CHAPTER 38:  CODE OF ETHICS




Section






   General Provisions






   38.01   Purpose and authority





   38.02   Definitions






   Standards of Conduct






   38.10   Conflicts of interest in general





   38.11   Conflicts of interest in contracts





   38.12   Receipt of gifts





   38.13   Use of city property, equipment and personnel





   38.14   Representation of interest before city government





   38.15   Misuse of confidential information





   38.16   Post-employment restriction





   38.17   Honoraria






Financial Disclosure






   38.20   Who must file





   38.21   When to file statements; amended statements





   38.22   Form of the statement of financial interests





   38.23   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial
interest





   38.24   Contents of the financial interest statement





   38.25   Noncompliance with filing requirements






Nepotism






   38.30   Nepotism prohibited






Enforcement






   38.40   Board of Ethics created





   38.41   Alternate members





   38.42   Facilities and staff





   38.43   Power and duties of the Board of Ethics





   38.44   Filing and investigation of complaints





   38.45   Notice of hearings





   38.46   Hearing procedure





   38.47   Appeals





   38.48   Limitation of actions





   38.49   Advisory opinions





   38.50   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited






   38.99   Penalties





GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 38.01  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.




   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of
assuring that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure
requirements for officers and employees of the city shall be clearly
established, uniform in their application and enforceable, and to provide the
officers and employees of the city with advice and information concerning
potential conflicts of interest which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.






   (B)   It is the further purpose of this chapter to meet the
requirements of House Bill 238 as enacted by the 1994 Kentucky General
Assembly.






   (C)   This chapter is enacted under the power vested in the city by
KRS 82.082 and pursuant to requirements of House Bill 238.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.02  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning:






   "BUSINESS."  Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional
service corporation, or any legal entity through which business is conducted
for profit.






   "BOARD OF ETHICS."  The City of Fort Wright Board of Ethics which is
created and vested by this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing the
requirements of the city's code of ethics.






   "CANDIDATE."  Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a
city office. An individual is a candidate when the individual files a
notification and declaration for nomination for office with the county clerk
or secretary of state, or is nominated for office by a political party, or
files a declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the county
clerk or secretary of state.






   "CITY."  The City of Fort Wright, Kentucky.






   "CITY  AGENCY."  Any board, commission, authority, nonstock
corporation, or other entity created, either individually or jointly, by this
city.






   "EMPLOYEE." Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether
paid or unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the city. The term
"EMPLOYEE" shall not include any contractor or subcontractor or any of their
employees.






   "FAMILY MEMBER."  A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or
grandchild.






   "IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER."  A spouse,  an unemancipated child
residing in the officer's or employee's household, or a person claimed by the
officer or employee, or the officer's or employee's spouse, as a dependent
for tax purposes.






   "OFFICER." Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid
or unpaid, who is one of the following:






      (A)   The mayor.






      (B)   A legislative body member.






      (C)   The city clerk.






      (D)   The city administrator.






      (E)   Any person who occupies a non-elected office created
under KRS 83A.080.






      (F)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who
has been appointed to the governing body of the agency by the city.  Members
of a County Planning Commission covered under another entities ethics
ordinance, would not, for purposes of this section, be considered an officer.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)





STANDARDS OF CONDUCT




§ 38.10  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.




   Every officer and employee of the city and every city agency shall
comply with the following standards of conduct:






   (A)  No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any
officer or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any
business, transaction or activity which is in substantial conflict with the
proper discharge of the officer's or employee's public duties.






   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to
use his or her official position with the city to secure unwarranted
privileges or advantages for himself or herself or others.






   (C)  No officer or employee shall intentionally take or refrain from
taking any discretionary action or agree to take or refrain from taking any
discretionary action or induce or attempt to induce any other officer or
employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary action on any
matter before the city in order to obtain a financial benefit for any of the
following:






      (1)   The officer or employee.






      (2)   A family member.






      (3)   An outside employer.










      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or any
family member has a financial interest.






      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any
family member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other
business or professional relationship.






   (D)  No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any
provision in this section if, by reason of the officer's or employee's
participation, vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit
accrues to the officer or employee, a family member, an outside employer, or
a business as defined in subsection (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section, as a
member of any business, occupation, profession, or other group, to any
greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of the business, occupation, profession, or other group.






   (E)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial
interest which the officer or employee believes or has reason to believe may
be affected by his or her participation, vote, decision or other action taken
within the scope of his or her public duties shall disclose the precise
nature and value of the interest, in writing, to the governing body of the
city or city agency served by the officer or employee, and the disclosure
shall be entered on the official record of the proceedings of the governing
body.  The officer or employee shall refrain from taking any action with
respect to the matter that is the subject of the disclosure.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.11 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.




   (A) No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
directly or through others undertake, execute, hold, or enjoy, in whole or in
part, any contract made, entered into, awarded, or granted by the city or a
city agency, except as follows:






      (1)   The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply to contracts entered into before an elected officer filed as a
candidate for city office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a
city or city agency office, or before an employee was hired by the city or a
city agency.  However, if any contract entered into by a city or city agency
officer or employee before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to
office, or was hired as an employee, is renewable after he or she becomes a
candidate, assumes the appointed office, or is hired as an employee, the
prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall apply to the renewal of
the contract.






      (2)   The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply if the contract is awarded after public notice and competitive
bidding, unless the officer or employee is authorized to participate in
establishing the contract specifications,  awarding the contract, or
managing contract performance after the contract is awarded. If the officer
or employee has any of the authorities set forth in the preceding sentence,
then the officer or employee shall have no interest in the contract, unless
the requirements set forth in subpart (3) below are satisfied.






      (3)   The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply in any case where the following requirements are satisfied:





         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction
and the nature of the officer's or employee's interest in the contract are
publicly disclosed at a meeting of the governing body of the city or city
agency.






         (b)   The disclosure is made a part of the official
record of the governing body of the city or city agency before the contract
is executed.






         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the
city or city agency that the contract with the officer or employee is in the
best interests of the public and the city or city agency because of price,
limited supply, or other specific reason.






         (d)   The finding is made a part of the official record
of the governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is
executed.






         Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered
into in violation of this section. Additionally, a violation of this section
shall be grounds for removal from office or employment with the city in
accordance with any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules
or regulations of the city.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.12  RECEIPT OF GIFTS.




   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly or
indirectly through any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift
having a fair market value of more than one hundred dollars ($100), whether
in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
thing or promise, or any other form under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence or could
reasonably be expected to influence the officer or employee in the
performance of his or her public duties.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.13  USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.




   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any
city time,  funds, personnel, equipment, or other personal or real property
for the private use of any person, unless the use is specifically authorized
by a stated city policy.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.14  REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.




   (A)  No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
represent any person or business, other than the city, in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before the city or any
city agency.






   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from
representing another employee or employees where the representation is within
the context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities.






   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee
from representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own
interests.






   (D)  No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from
making any inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no
compensation, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or
accepted by the Officer, whether directly or indirectly, in return for the
inquiry.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.15  MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.




   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the course of his or
her official duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to
further his or her personal financial interest or that of another person or
business. Information shall be deemed confidential if it is not subject to
disclosure pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.872 to 61.884,
at the time of its use or disclosure.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.16  POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.




   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall appear or
practice before the city or any city agency with respect to any matter on
which the officer or employee personally worked while in the service of the
city or city agency for a period of one (1) year after the termination of the
officer's or employee's service with the city or city agency.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.17  HONORARIA.




   (A)  No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall accept
any compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market value greater than
$100 in consideration of an appearance, speech or article unless  the
appearance,  speech or article is both related to the officer's or
employee's activities outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the
officer's or employee's service with the city.






   (B)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer or employee of
the city or any city agency from receiving and retaining from the city or on
behalf of the city actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the officer or employee in connection with an appearance, speech or article,
provided that the officer or employee can show by clear and convincing
evidence that the expenses were incurred or received on behalf of the city or
city agency and primarily for the benefit of the city or city agency and not
primarily for the benefit of the officer or employee or any other person.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)





FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE




§ 38.20  WHO MUST FILE.




   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the Board
of Ethics:






   (A)   Elected city officials.






   (B)   Candidates for elected city office.






   (C)   Members of the city board of adjustment.






   (D)   Members of the Board of Ethics created by this chapter.










   (E)  Non-elected officers and employees of the city or any city agency
who are authorized to make purchases of materials or services or award
contracts, leases or agreements involving the expenditure of more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000).





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.21  WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS: AMENDED STATEMENTS.





   (A) The initial statement of financial interests required by this
section shall be filed with the Board of Ethics or the administrative
official designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics,
no later than 5:00 p.m., April 30,  1995.  All subsequent statements of
financial interest shall be filed no later than 5:00 p.m. on April 30th each
year, provided that:






      (1)   An officer or employee newly-appointed to fill an office
or position of employment with the city or a city agency file his or her
initial statement no later than sixty (60) days after the date of the
appointment.






      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his or her
initial statement no later than thirty (30) days after deadline for filing as
a candidate for elected city office.






   (C) In the event there is a material change in any information
contained in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board, the
officer or employee shall, no later than thirty (30) days after becoming
aware of the material change, file an amended statement with the Board.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 545-1997, passed 1-15-97)




§ 38.22  FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.





   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics or the administrative official designated
by the Board of Ethics.  The Board,  or the designated administrative
official, shall deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee
required to file the statement, by first class mail or hand delivery, no
later than March 1st of each year. The failure of the Board or the designated
administrative official to deliver a copy of the form to any officer or
employee shall not relieve the officer or employee of the obligation to file
the statement.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord. 545-1997, passed 1-15-97)




§ 38.23  CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.




   (A)  The Board of Ethics shall be the "official custodian" of the
statements of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance
of the statements of financial interests. The statements of financial
interests shall be maintained by the Board of Ethics and/or its designated
administrative official designated by the Board of Ethics as the "custodian"
as public documents, available for public inspection immediately upon filing.






   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the
Board or the designated administrative official for a period of five (5)
years after filing; provided that:






      (1)   Upon the expiration of three (3) years after a person
ceases to be an officer or employee of the city or city agency, the Board
shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies
of those statements filed by the person.






      (2)   Upon the expiration of three (3) years after any
election at which a candidate for elected city office was not elected or
nominated,  the Board of Ethics  shall cause to be destroyed any statements
of financial interests or copies of those statements filed by the person.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.24  CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.




   (A) The  statement  of  financial  interests  shall  include 
the following information for the preceding calendar year:






      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone
number, and home address of the filer.






      (2)   The title of the filer's office, office sought, or
position of employment.






      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the filer's spouse.






      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the
filer and the filer's immediate family members exceeding five thousand
dollars ($5,000) during the preceding calendar year and the nature of the
income (e.g., salary, commission, dividends, retirement fund distribution,
etc.)






      (5)   The name and address of any business that has engaged in
any business transactions with the city during the past three (3) years, or
which is anticipated to engage in any business transactions with the city, in
which the file or any member of the filer's immediate family had at any time
during the preceding calendar year an interest of ten thousand dollars
($10,000) at fair market value or five percent (5%) ownership interest or
more.






      (6)   A designation as commercial, residential, or rural and
the location of all real property within the city, other than the filer's
primary residence, in which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate
family had during the preceding calendar year an interest of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) or more.






      (7)   Each source by name and address of gifts or honoraria
having an aggregate fair market value of one hundred dollars ($100) or more
from any single source, excluding gifts received from family members,
received by the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family during
the preceding calendar year.






      (8)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000), except debts arising from the purchase of a
primary residence or the purchase of consumer goods which are bought or used
primarily for person, family or household purposes.






   (B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer
or employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of
individual clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.25  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENTS.




   (A) The Board of Ethics or the designated administrative official,
shall notify by certified mail each person required to file a statement of
financial interests who fails to file the statement by the due date, files an
incomplete statement, or files a statement in a form other than that
prescribed by the Board.  The notice shall specify the type of failure or
delinquency, shall establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall
be remedied, and shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.






   (B) Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who fails
or refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the notice
under subsection (A) within the time period established in the notice shall
be guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine imposed by
the Board in an amount not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25) per day, up to
a maximum total civil fine of five hundred dollars ($500). Any civil fine
imposed by the Board under this section may be recovered by the city in a
civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay
the penalty within a prescribed period of time.






   (C) Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial
interests which he or she knows to contain false information or intentionally
omits required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)





NEPOTISM




§ 38.30  NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.




   (A)  No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
advocate, recommend or cause the:






      (1)   employment;






      (2)   appointment;






      (3)   promotion;






      (4)   transfer; or






      (5)   advancement






of a family member to an office or position of employment with the city or a
city agency.






   (B)  No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
directly supervise or manage the work of a family member.






   (C)  No officer or employee shall participate in any action relating
to the employment or discipline of a family member, except that this
prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed official from voting on
or participating in the development of a budget which includes compensation
for a family member, provided that the family member is included only as a
member of a class of persons or a group and the family member benefits to no
greater extent than any other similarly situated member of the class or group.










   (D)  The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any
relationship or situation that would violate the prohibitions, but which
existed prior to January 1, 1994.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)





ENFORCEMENT




§ 38.40  BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.




   (A) There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.






   (B) The Board of Ethics shall consist of three (3) members who shall be
appointed by the executive authority of the city, subject to the approval of
the legislative body. The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be
appointed within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter. No
member of the Board of Ethics shall hold any elected-or appointed office,
whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city or any
city agency. The members shall serve for a term of three years; except that
with respect to the members initially appointed one (1) member shall be
appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) member shall be appointed for a
term of two (2) years, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of
three (3) years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of three
(3) years.  Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a resident of
the city for at least one (1) year prior to the date of the appointment and
shall reside in the city throughout the term in office. The members of the
Board of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent
reputation for integrity and their knowledge of  local government affairs.
The members may be re-appointed for any number of consecutive terms.






   (C)  A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the executive
authority subject to the approval of the legislative body for misconduct,
inability or willful neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of
Ethics is removed from office under this section, the member shall be
afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the executive authority and the
legislative body.






   (D) Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within sixty (60)
days by the executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative
body. If a vacancy is not filled by the executive authority within sixty (60)
days, the remaining members of the Board of Ethics shall fill the vacancy.
All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.






   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without
compensation unless otherwise approved by the legislative body, but shall be
reimbursed for all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.






   (F)  The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members and annually thereafter, elect a chairperson from among the
membership. The chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.






   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary,
upon the call of the chairperson or at the written request of a majority of
the members.






   (H)  The presence of two (2) or more members shall constitute a quorum
and the affirmative vote of two (2) or more members shall be necessary for
any official action to be taken. Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a
conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board
shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or
herself from voting on the matter and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.






   (I)  Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics
and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be
recorded in the minutes.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.41  ALTERNATE MEMBERS.




   The executive authority of the city, with the approval of the
legislative body (if different than the executive authority) may appoint two
(2) alternate members of the Board of Ethics who may be called upon to serve
when any regular member of the Board is unable to discharge his or her
duties. An alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year.
Alternate members shall meet all qualifications and be subject to all of the
requirements of this chapter that apply to regular members.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.42  FACILITIES AND STAFF.




   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the legislative body in
the annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics, either
directly or by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials,
supplies and staff needed for the conduct of its business.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.43  POWER AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.




   The  Board of  Ethics shall  have the following powers and duties:






   (A)  To  initiate on its own motion,  receive and investigate
complaints, hold hearings, and make findings of fact and determinations with
regard to alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter.






   (B)  To issue orders in connection with its investigations and
hearings requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and
answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order
testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual designated by the
Board who has the power to administer oaths.






   (C)  To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence
relating to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board.






   (D)  To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter to
the executive authority of the city, the city legislative body, the governing
body of any city agency, the county attorney, or other appropriate person or
body, as necessary.






   (E)   To render advisory opinions to city and city agency officers
and employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this chapter.






   (F)  To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all
officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to its
terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this
chapter.






   (G)  To control and maintain all statements of financial interests
that are required to be filed by this chapter and to insure that the
statements are available for public inspection in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Kentucky Open Records Act.






   (H)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or the legislative
body of the city.






   (I)  To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
rules, regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter or any state or federal law.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.44  FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.




   (A)  All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this 
chapter shall be  submitted to the Board of Ethics  or the administrative 
official  designated  by the  Board  of  Ethics.  All complaints shall
be in writing, signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other
requirements established by the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall
acknowledge receipt of a complaint to the complainant within ten (10) working
days from the date of receipt. The Board shall forward within ten (10)
working days to each officer or employee of the city or city agency who is
the subject of the complaint a copy of the complaint and a general statement
of the applicable provisions of this chapter.






   (B)   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a proper complaint,
allegations contained in the complaint. The Board shall afford a person who
is the subject of the complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations
in the complaint. The person shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, to appear and be heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response
to the allegations.






   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry
being conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board except:






      (1)   The Board may turn over to the Commonwealth's attorney
or county attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings.






      (2)   If the alleged violator and only the alleged violator
publicly discloses the existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board may
publicly confirm the existence of the inquiry.






   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary
inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether
it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this chapter.
If the Board concludes that the complaint is outside of its jurisdiction,
frivolous or without factual basis, the Board shall immediately terminate the
inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy of its
decision to the complainant and to all officers or employees against whom the
complaint was filed.






   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary
inquiry, that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains
allegations  sufficient  to  establish  a minimal  factual  basis  to
constitute a violation, the Board shall notify the officer or employee who is
the subject of the complaint and may:






      (1)   Due  to  mitigating  circumstances  such  as, 
lack  of significant economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee,
lack of economic loss to the city and its taxpayers, or lack of significant
impact on public confidence in city government issue, in writing, a
confidential reprimand to the officer or employee concerning the alleged
violation and provide a copy of the confidential reprimand to the executive
authority and governing body of the city or city agency.






      (2)   Initiate a formal hearing.






   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a  false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer
or employee of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.45  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.




   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order
setting the matter for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the date the
order is issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the Board
consents to a later date. The order setting the matter for hearing, along
with a copy of any pertinent regulations of the Board relating to the hearing
shall be sent to the alleged violator within twenty-four (24) hours of the
time the order setting a hearing is issued.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.46  HEARING PROCEDURE.





   (A)  The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules of
Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics;
however, the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and
in accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board
so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights required by
the nature of the proceedings.






   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing,  the alleged
violator, or his or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity
to examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board in
connection with the matter to be heard. The Board shall inform the alleged
violator, or his or her representative, of any exculpatory evidence in its
possession.






   (C)  All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to
call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine
witnesses, to submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All
witnesses shall have the right to be represented by counsel.






   (D)  Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who may
be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the Board, with or
without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention, or may
file a written statement regarding the adverse mention for incorporation into
the record of the proceeding.






   (E)  All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless the
members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.






   (F)  After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall,
as soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for the
purpose of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination
whether a violation  of this chapter has been proven. Within thirty (30)
days after completion of the hearing, the Board shall issue a written report
of its findings and conclusions.






   (G)  If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this
chapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint
and to the party who filed the complaint.






   (H)   If the Board concludes in its report that in consideration of
the evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of a
violation of this chapter, the Board may:






      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and
desist the violation.






      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the
violations and provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and
governing body of the city or city agency with which the violator serves.






      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the
governing body that the violator be sanctioned as recommended by the Board,
which may include a recommendation for discipline or dismissal or removal
from office.






      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000.






      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or
state laws to the county attorney or commonwealth's attorney of the
jurisdiction for prosecution.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.47  APPEALS.




   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court of
the county within thirty (30) days after the date of the final action of the
Board of Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board. The
Board shall transmit to the clerk of the court all evidence considered by the
Board at the public hearing. (Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.48  LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.




   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state
law, an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one (1)
year after the violation is discovered.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.49  ADVISORY OPINIONS.




   (A)  The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning
matters under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative and shall render an advisory opinion
when requested by any officer or employee of the city or a city agency who is
covered by this chapter.






   (B)  An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state
relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory
opinion shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in
writing, by the requestor.






   (C)  The Board may adopt regulations, consistent with the Kentucky
Open Records Law, to establish criteria under which it will issue
confidential advisory opinions. All other advisory opinions shall be public
documents, except that before an advisory opinion is made public, it shall be
modified so that the identity of any person associated with the opinion shall
not be revealed.






   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived
either:






      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion.






      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Board, if a
person makes or purports to make public the substance or any portion of an
advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of the person. The Board may vote
to make public the advisory opinion request and related materials.






   (E)  A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be binding
on the Board in any subsequent proceeding concerning the facts and
circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or circumstances
arise which would change the opinion of the Board if they had existed at the
time the opinion was rendered. However, if any fact determined by the Board
to be material was omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the
Board shall not be bound by the opinion.






   (F)  A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be
admissible  in the  defense  of  any criminal  prosecution or civil
proceeding for violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on
that opinion.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.50  REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.




   (A)  No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
subject to reprisal or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any
official authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to
discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate
against any person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges, or
otherwise brings to the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency
or official of the city or the Commonwealth any facts or information relative
to an actual or suspected violation of this chapter.










   (B)   This section shall not be construed as:






      (1)   Prohibiting disciplinary or punitive action if an
officer or employee of the city or any city agency discloses information
which he knows:






         (a)   To be false or which he or she discloses with
reckless disregard for its truth or falsity.






         (b)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the
provisions of the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.






         (c)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




§ 38.99  PENALTIES.





   (A)  Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found
by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine
imposed by the Board of Ethics not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000),
which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.






   (B)  In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is
found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter
shall forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the economic
benefit or gain which the officer or employee is determined by the Board to
have realized as a result of the violation.  The amount of any forfeiture
may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt,  if
the offender fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed
period of time.






   (C)  In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer or employee of
the city or any city agency is guilty of-a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion, or other disciplinary
action by the executive authority of the city or city agency or by any other
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline.  Any action to
remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of this chapter
shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations
of the city and all applicable laws of the Commonwealth.





(Ord. 498-94, passed 11-16-94)




TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS




   Chapter






      50.   SEWER REGULATIONS






      51.   GARBAGE




CHAPTER 50:  SEWER REGULATIONS




Section





   General Provisions






   50.01   Definitions





   50.02   Enforcement





   50.03   Damaging or interfering with sewer equipment





   50.04   Permit required for plumbing alterations or construction






Use Regulations






   50.15   Use of public sewers required





   50.16   Securing of permit and payment of charges required





   50.17   Grease traps or interceptors





   50.18   Certain discharges prohibited






Connections






   50.30   Application for connection with city sewer lines





   50.31   Owner responsible for building sewer; permit





   50.32   Prerequisites to issuance of connection permit





   50.33   Connections to be made by licensed plumber





   50.34   Tap-in fee; payment required





   50.35   Inspection





   50.36   Backfilling of excavations






Rates and Charges






   50.45   [Reserved]





   50.46   Billing and collection





   50.47   Disconnection for late payment





   50.48   Sanitation Maintenance and Replacement Fund






   50.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "IMPROVED PROPERTY."  All real estate upon which a residence,
building, or business establishment has been erected.






   "PLAN."  The general sanitary sewer plan adopted by City Council on
April 26, 1956.






   "UNIMPROVED PROPERTY."  All real estate other than improved property.






   "UNIT."  A residence building comprising not more than two
single-family apartments, or a business establishment containing commercial
kitchens, washrooms, bathrooms, or lavatories, the total of which does not
exceed four in number.





('77 Code, § 16-16) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)




§ 50.02  ENFORCEMENT.




   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the
provisions of the general sanitary sewer plan as adopted by the City Council,
and to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to investigate and
determine that all sewer connections have been properly made and maintained. 





('77 Code, § 16-17) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68; Am. Ord. 126-1975, passed
11-14-75; Am. Ord. 176-1978, passed 11-10-78)




§ 50.03  DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH SEWER EQUIPMENT.




   (A)   The act of covering, concealing, or interfering with manholes,
sanitary lines, storm lines, and the like and the act of throwing refuse in
catch basins and sewers in the city is absolutely prohibited and the failure
of any person to comply herewith shall constitute a misdemeanor as same may
be presented before the county district court.






   (B)   The Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator and the persons
acting by his authority shall each hereafter be deemed to have the full and
complete authority to go upon the premises of any person who has violated any
of the provisions of this chapter or who the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator and persons acting by his authority have reason to believe may
have violated this chapter in any respect. Interference by any person with
the Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator, or one acting by his authority,
in the performance of his duties as herein defined, shall be construed as a
violation of this section, subject to the penalty as specified herein.





Penalty, see § 50.99




§ 50.04  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PLUMBING ALTERATIONS OR CONSTRUCTION.




   (A)   No person shall construct, install, or alter any plumbing,
sewage, or drainage system within the city without first having procured a
building permit from the City Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator.






   (B)   All applications for building and plumbing permits pursuant to
this chapter, the official zoning ordinance of this city, or any other
ordinance of this city, shall be accompanied by a plan for the proposed
plumbing installation.  No building or plumbing permit shall be issued under
this chapter until the plans of the plumbing to be performed have been
submitted and approved by the City Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator.





Penalty, see § 50.99





Cross-reference:





   Building permit fee schedule, see § 150.16





USE REGULATIONS




§ 50.15  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.




   All buildings in the city used or occupied for residential or business
purposes shall be connected to and served by the sanitary sewer system.  It
shall be unlawful to maintain outside facilities, cesspools, or open drainage
of raw sewage.




('77 Code, § 16-18) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.16  SECURING OF PERMIT AND PAYMENT OF CHARGES REQUIRED.




   It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or other person or
corporation to cause or permit the discharge of any sanitary sewage into the
sanitary sewer system of the city, without the securing of permits and the
payment of all service charges provided for in this chapter.




('77 Code, § 16-19) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  GREASE TRAPS OR INTERCEPTORS.




   (A)  All businesses and school buildings within the corporate limits
of the city in which there are in use any dishwashing machines, scullery and
pot sinks, steam cookers, or other fixtures discharging grease-laden waste
shall be provided with approved grease traps or interceptor to prevent grease
from entering any soil, waste, pipe, or any other line of the city sewer
system.






   (B)  Grease traps or interceptors must be approved for design and
application by the State Plumbing Inspector, and shall have a certified
minimum grease-retention efficiency of 90% and be sized in accordance with
the established standards to correspond with the type and flow rate of the
fixture.






   (C)  Grease traps shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be cleaned at designated intervals necessary to insure
the exclusion of grease from the drainage system.






   (D)  All existing businesses and school buildings within the corporate
limits of the city in which a grease trap or interceptor is not present at
the time of the enactment of this chapter, shall have 60 days from the date
of the enactment to provide for the installation of the approved grease trap
or interceptor as provided for within the provisions of this chapter.





Penalty, see § 50.99




§ 50.18  CERTAIN DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.




   (A)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cellar
drainage of ground water origin, cooling water, or unpolluted water or
drainage to or into any sanitary sewer, without the express written consent
of the City Council and the County Health Department and the County
Sanitation District.






   (B)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
storm sewers, any sanitary sewage, combination of storm water and sanitary
sewage, garbage, solid food waste, leaves, trash, debris, water, or other
liquid containing solids or suspended solids.





Penalty, see § 50.99




CONNECTIONS



§ 50.30  APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION WITH CITY SEWER LINES.




   All service pipes and connections for sewer service in the city shall
be made at the expense of the owner of the abutting property, who shall make
application, in writing, to the City Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator,
for connection with the sewer lines of the city.  The application shall be
considered and granted upon payment of the fee as specified by the Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator to cover the cost of the inspection and
supervision of such installation and the maintenance thereof.  The
applicable provisions of the official city zoning ordinance shall apply
hereto.




§ 50.31  OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR BUILDING SEWER; PERMIT.




   The owner of the premises served by a sewer shall be responsible for
the operation, maintenance, cleaning, repair, and reconstruction of the
building sewer from the building to the point of connection with the public
sewer.  The owner or his agent shall obtain a permit from the City Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator prior to the commencing of any repair or
reconstruction work between the property line and the point of connection to
the public sewer.  The permit shall be granted upon the payment of required
fee to cover the cost of the inspection and supervision of such installation.




§ 50.32  PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE OF CONNECTION PERMIT.




   (A)  All applications for permits under this subchapter shall bear the
signature of a master plumber and shall state the location of the premises,
the name of the owner thereof, and whether or not the building to be
connected is a new home in process of construction.






   (B)  All permits under this subchapter shall be issued only on the
express condition that the property to be served by the sanitary sewer system
shall be available for inspection by the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator upon reasonable notice at all reasonable times.






   (C)  Permits shall be issued only upon the express condition that the
master plumber responsible for the work shall in consideration of the
privileges thereby granted and enjoyed, indemnify the city against any loss
or damage that may result form the connections.





('77 Code, § 16-29) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)




§ 50.33  CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY LICENSED PLUMBER.




   All connections with the sanitary sewer system shall be made only by
licensed plumbers under the general supervision of the Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator.




('77 Code, § 16-30)  (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.34  TAP-IN FEE; PAYMENT REQUIRED.




   (A)  The owners of involved property in this city shall pay a sewer
tap-in fee of $100 for each unit or fraction thereof located within the
boundaries of the city.  ('77 Code, § 16-32)






   (B)  No connection with the general sanitary sewer system of the city
shall be made until after the payment of the tap-in fee prescribed by
division (A) above.  ('77 Code, § 16-31)





(Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 50.99




§ 50.35  INSPECTION.




   Subsequent to the issuance of a permit under this subchapter, but at
least 48 hours prior to the time any connection will be made, the master
plumber responsible for the work shall furnish a notice in writing to the
Building Inspector-Zoning Administrator stating the time when such connection
will be ready for inspection.  All sewer conduits, trenches, and connections
shall remain open for inspection by the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator, and coloring matter shall be used by the Building
Inspector-Zoning Administrator in testing the connection.




('77 Code, § 16-33) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.36  BACKFILLING OF EXCAVATIONS.




   All excavations at the place of a sanitary sewer connection shall be
backfilled with sand or gravel.




('77 Code, § 16-34) (Ord. 22-1968, passed 8-5-68)  Penalty, see § 50.99




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 50.45  [RESERVED].



§ 50.46  BILLING AND COLLECTION.




   The above scheduled charges shall be billed and collected by Sanitation
District No. 1 of Campbell and Kenton Counties by agreement with the city,
and in accordance with the policies and procedures of Sanitation District No.
1 of Campbell and Kenton Counties.





(Ord. 270-1982, passed 9-1-82)




§ 50.47  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.




   The city shall notify the Sanitation District to disconnect water
service in accord with the following policies:






   (A) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue water service
to a customer for nonpayment of the sewer use charge, request for water
service reinstated will be made only after all bills for the charge then due
have been paid and any deposit required has been made.






   It is the policy of the city to discontinue water service to customers
by reason of nonpayment of the sewer use charge only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed charges:






      (1)  That all charges are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the water bill; and










      (2)  That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill for the water charge will be mailed containing a cutoff notice
that if the charge is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second
bill, the city's request to discontinue service for nonpayment will be sent
to the Sanitation District; and






      (3)  That any customer disputing the correctness of his charge
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or
in writing his complaint and contentions to the City Administrator.  The
City Administrator shall be authorized to request that the customer's service
not be discontinued for nonpayment of the charge and shall have the authority
to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.






   (B)  Requests for delays or waiver of charge payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct charge will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the charge rendered or resort to
the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the
time specified.




§ 50.48  SANITATION MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT FUND.




   A Sanitation Maintenance and Replacement Fund for the city is hereby
established.  The Fund shall be used for operating, maintaining, and
improving the sanitary and storm sewer systems, and sanitation and water
disposal systems of the city.  The Fund shall also be used to accumulate a
reserve fund to pay for large unanticipated repairs or replacements, and to
provide funds for a long-range program of improvements for the city's
sanitary sewer system.





(Ord. 270-1982, passed 9-1-82; Am. Ord. 501-95, passed 6-7-95; Am. Ord.
515-95, passed 10-4-95)




§ 50.99  PENALTY.




   Any person deemed to be violating the terms of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not
less than $10 nor more than $500 for each and every day of each offense.




CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE




Section






   51.01   Definitions





   51.02   Preparation for collection





   51.03   Container requirements





   51.04   Storage regulations





   51.05   Place of collection





   51.06   Frequency of collection





   51.07   Licensing of collectors





   51.08   Collection vehicles





   51.09   Waste collection assessment






   51.99   Penalty





Cross-reference:





   Open burning of trash, see § 93.22




§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "ASHES."  The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke,
or other combustible material.






   "DISPOSAL."  The storage, collection, disposal, or handling of refuse.






   "GARBAGE."  All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of foods.






   "REFUSE."  All solid wastes, except body wastes, and includes garbage,
ashes, and rubbish.






   "RUBBISH."  Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood, or
nonputrescible solid wastes.




('77 Code, § 8-2) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.




   (A)  All refuse shall be drained free of liquids before disposal.






   (B)  Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or similar material.






   (C)  All cans, bottles, or other food containers shall be rinsed free
of food particles and drained before disposal.






   (D)  Rubbish shall be  placed  in  approved  containers or cut and
baled, tied, bundled, stacked, or packaged so as not to exceed 60 inches in
length and 50 pounds in weight.




('77 Code, § 8-3) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)  Refuse containers shall be made of durable, watertight,
rust-resistant material having a close-fitting lid and handles to facilitate
collection.






   (B)  Refuse containers for residences shall be of not less than ten
gallons, nor more than 32 gallons in capacity.  Containers for commercial
establishments shall not exceed 40 gallons in capacity.






   (C)  It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation or residue of
liquids, solids, or a combination of such material on the bottom or sides of
refuse containers, it being the intention of this provision that the interior
of containers shall be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining as often
as necessary.






   (D)  Paper or wooden boxes may be used as containers for rubbish,
provided such boxes when filled do not exceed 32 pounds in weight. Large
stones and hot ashes will not be collected.










   (E)  Large refuse containers to be handled by special equipment may be
used if the contract collector has equipment to handle such containers. 
Such containers must have tight lids, and be placed on the premises where the
collector has ready access.




('77 Code, § 8-4) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  STORAGE REGULATIONS.




   (A)  Each householder, commercial establishment, or person having
refuse shall provide himself with approved refuse containers and shall place
and keep all refuse therein.






   (B)  Refuse containers shall not be placed on the street right-of-way
prior to 6:00 p.m., local time, on the day before schedule collections.






   (C)  It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any street, alley,
stream, body of water, or any other public place, or upon private property,
whether owned or not, unless such refuse is placed in an approved container.




('77 Code, § 8-5) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.05  PLACE OF COLLECTION.




   (A)  Refuse containers shall, for the purpose of collection, be
placed  at  ground  level,  and  be  made  readily  accessible  to 
the collector.  They shall be placed on the side of the street from which
collection is to be made at the curbline of the property.






   (B)  Notwithstanding provisions of division (A) above, householders,
commercial establishments, or other persons may by contract with collectors
be permitted to place containers at agreed places upon their premises.




('77 Code, § 8-6) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.06  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.




   (A)  Refuse shall be collected twice weekly.






   (B)  Hotels, restaurants, institutions, and commercial establishments
may be required to have more frequent collection, if determined by the City
Council to be essential to protect the public health.





('77 Code, § 8-7) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)




§ 51.07  LICENSING OF COLLECTORS.




   (A)  No person shall collect, remove, haul, or convey any refuse
through or upon any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of the
same in any manner or place without obtaining a license from the city.






   (B)  Every person who shall apply for a license under this section
shall state the type of refuse to be collected, the manner of collection, and
the place and method of disposal.




('77 Code, § 8-8) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.08  COLLECTION VEHICLES.




   All vehicles used for collection of garbage shall be equipped with
compacting devices or equivalent types of closed bodies and shall have an
enclosed cargo space.




('77 Code, § 8-9) (Ord. 83-1973, passed 4-13-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.09  WASTE COLLECTION ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   A waste collection assessment of $183 per dwelling unit is
hereby levied for the assessment year beginning July 1, 2019 and ending June
30, 2020 for the purpose of defraying the cost of waste collection in the
city.



   (B)   A "DWELLING UNIT" is hereby defined as a one-family residence,
the premises in which a family of one or more resides and, in the case of
apartment buildings, each apartment shall be considered a separate dwelling
unit unless the apartment building is served by a dumpster.



   (C)   The waste collection assessment levied by the City Council for
the assessment year beginning July 1, 2019, and ending June 30, 2020, shall
be due and payable to the City Tax Collector from and after passage of this
Ordinance.  Said amount shall be stated on the tax bill.  Anyone failing to
pay the said assessment by December 30, 2019, shall be deemed delinquent, and
said bill shall have added thereto a penalty of 20% of the amount thereof,
and shall bear interest rate of 12% per annum from January 1, 2020, until
paid.  Said assessment shall constitute a lien upon the property and be
collectable in the same manner as tax levied against real estate.



(Ord. 350-1985, passed 10-7-85; Am. Ord. 392-1988, passed 9-7-88; Am. Ord.
407-1989, passed 10-4-89; Am. Ord. 434-1990, passed 10-3-90; Am. Ord.
453-1991, passed 10-17-91; Am. Ord. 462-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord.
512-95, passed 9-14-95; Am. Ord. 557-97, passed 10-1-97; Am. Ord. 573-98,
passed 9-2-98; Am. Ord. 589-99, passed 9-8-99; Am. Ord. 13-00, passed
9-13-00; Am. Ord. 16-06, passed 9-8-06; Am. Ord. 5-07, passed 9-5-07; Am.
Ord. 12-08, passed 9-9-08; Am. Ord. 15-09, passed 9-2-09; Am. Ord. 5-10,
passed 9-1-10; Am. Ord. 6-11, passed 9-7-11; Am. Ord. 13-12, passed 9-5-12;
Am. Ord. 3-13, passed 9-5-13; Am. Ord. 10-13, passed 9-4-13; Am. Ord. 12-14,
passed 9-3-14; Am. Ord. 13- 2015, passed 9-2-15; Am. Ord. 08-2016, passed --;
Am. Ord. 12-2017, passed 10-11-17; Am. Ord. 12-2018, passed 10-17-18; Am.
Ord. 05-19, passed 6-19-19)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.




TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE




   Chapter






      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS






      71.   TRAFFIC RULES






      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS






      73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES






      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES






      75.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS




Section






   70.01   Definitions





   70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions





   70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department





   70.04   Authority for enforcement





   70.05   Temporary regulations






   Traffic-Control Devices






   70.15   Signal legends





   70.16   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices





   70.17   Obedience to signals





   70.18   Interference with signals





   70.19   Unauthorized signals or markings





   70.20   Device to be legible and in proper position





   70.21   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers






   Motor Vehicle License Stickers






   70.30   Definitions





   70.31   License required





   70.32   Application





   70.33   Fees





   70.34   Term and due date





   70.35   Display of sticker required





   70.36   Replacement stickers





   70.37   Impounding of vehicles





   70.38   Imposition of civil and criminal penalties






   70.99   General penalty




§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES."  Vehicles of the Fire Department or
Police Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney's office when on
official business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.






   "BOULEVARD."  Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is
required to stop before entering or crossing such boulevard.






   "BUSINESS DISTRICT."  Any portion of any street between two
consecutive intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side
of the street is used for business purposes.






   "CROSSWALK."  That portion of the roadway included within the
extension of the sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of
the roadway between two intersections, as may be legally designated as
crossing places and marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.






   "CURB."  The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles
whether marked by curbstones or not.






   "INTERSECTION."  That part of the public way embraced within the
extensions of the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle
whether or not one such street crosses the other.






   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES."  All signs, signals, warnings,
directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by
authority of the Chief of Police.






   "ONE-WAY STREET."  A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in
one direction only.






   "OPERATOR."  Every person who is in actual physical control of the
guidance, starting, and stopping of a vehicle.






   "PARK."  When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing,
whether occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to
receive or discharge passengers or property.






   "PEDESTRIAN."  Any person afoot.






   "PLAY STREET."  Any street or portion thereof so designated by the
Chief of Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all
traffic is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.






   "POLICE DEPARTMENT."  The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of § 70.03 or any other acts necessary to
implement and enforce this traffic code.






   "PUBLIC WAY."  The entire width between property lines of every way,
dedicated passway, or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths
and foot paths.






   "REVERSE TURN."  To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as
to proceed in the opposite direction.






   "RIGHT-OF-WAY."  The privilege of the immediate and preferential use
of the street.






   "ROADWAY."  That portion of any street, improved, designated, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.






   "SIDEWALK."  That portion of the street between the curb and the
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.






   "STOPPING."  As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is
actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers.






   "STREET."  Every public way, including alleys.






   "TRAFFIC."  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses,
and other conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street
for the purpose of travel.






   "VEHICLE."  Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn on any street except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks




§ 70.02  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order, signal, or direction given by a uniformed police
officer, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations
of this traffic code.






   (B)  The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of
any vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government,
this state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.






   (C)  Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an
animal on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can
have no application.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.




   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in
the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions.




§ 70.04  AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.




   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.05  TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.




   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to
alleviate unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized
city official shall, at his discretion, have authority to impose such traffic
regulations as he may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed two
weeks.  If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended
order.





TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES




§ 70.15  SIGNAL LEGENDS.




   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a
traffic-control sign or signs exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or
"Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights for purposes of traffic
control, the following colors only shall be used, and these terms and lights
shall indicate and be obeyed as follows:






   (A)  Green alone or "Go": Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn.  However, vehicular traffic shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.





   (B)  Steady yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green
or "Go" signal:  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow
signal may enter and clear the intersection.






   (C)  Red alone or double red or "Stop":  Vehicular traffic facing the
signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or
at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall
remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone.






   (D)  Flashing red alone:  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such
other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not
again proceed until it can do so without danger.






   (E)  Flashing amber alone:  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
reduce its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection controlled by
such signal.






   (F)  "Yield Right-of-Way":  Vehicular traffic facing the "Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering
the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  All traffic facing the
sign shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such
primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  No vehicle facing a "Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a
speed in excess of 15 miles per hour, except that this speed limit shall not
apply to vehicles entering an expressway.






   (G)  Lane lights:  When lane lights are installed over any street for
the purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular
traffic shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. 
However, when flashing amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall
be made from that lane.  Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles
shall not move against them.  If flashing amber lights show above a lane,
that lane shall be used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at
such place prohibits such turn.





Penalty, see § 70.99





Statutory reference:





   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338




§ 70.16  ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.




   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control
devices necessary within the city.  All traffic-control devices, including
signs, shall be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation,
shall be uniform, and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly.  All
traffic-control devices and signs shall conform to required state
specifications.





________________





Cross-reference:





   Traffic schedules, stop signs, see Ch. 74, Sch. I




§ 70.17  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
signal of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by
any of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any
electric signal, gate, or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity
for such barrier or sign must be approved by the city.






   (B)  Such sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same
authority as the personal direction of a police officer.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.18  INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.




   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down, or remove any official control device or any railroad
sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.





Penalty see § 70.99




§ 70.19  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or
display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking,
or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to
direct the movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any
railroad sign or signal.  No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal bearing any
commercial advertising. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
restricting any public department or public utility of the city in any
emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign
whose placing has been approved by the city.






   (B)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be
a public nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause
it to be removed.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.20  DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.




   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other
traffic-control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation the required
device was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person.




§ 70.21  TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.




   In an emergency any police officer may at his discretion disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.




MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE STICKERS



§ 70.30  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "MOTOR VEHICLE."  All motor vehicles designed for transportation of
persons, passengers, freight, tools, equipment, or merchandise and includes,
but shall not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, and
motorcycles, whether same shall be used for pleasure, hire, or business.






   "VEHICLE."  A motor vehicle.





('77 Code, § 15-35) (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75)




§ 70.31  LICENSE REQUIRED.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, firm, company,
or corporation to use or operate any automobile, motorcycle, truck or other
such motor vehicle upon the streets, alleys and ways within the limits of the
city without first having obtained a license therefor as provided herein,
paid the required license fee and penalty, if any, and properly affixed the
required license sticker to the vehicle.






   (B)  If a vehicle is required to be licensed as herein provided, the
legal ownership of the vehicle or its state of registration shall not be
contributing factors in determining whether the vehicle is required to be
licensed hereunder.






   (C)  Vehicles which are registered or licensed in another municipality
which has imposed a similar registration or taxing requirement or fee as
imposed herein and which vehicle's owner has paid the tax or registration fee
and has affixed to the vehicle evidence of payment clearly displayed on the
vehicle, shall not be required to pay the fees or license the vehicle as
herein required, provided that such other municipality shall have enacted a
similar reciprocity provision exempting vehicles registered in this city from
like license fee or tax in such other municipality under the same
circumstances.






   (D)  All vehicles meeting the terms of division (A) above shall be
presumed to be required to be licensed as required in this subchapter and the
burden of proving exemption from the requirements pursuant to division (C)
shall be upon the person claiming such exemption.





('77 Code, § 15-36)






   (E)  Any person purchasing or acquiring a vehicle subject to this
subchapter and any person who becomes a new resident of the city shall have
30 days after purchasing or acquiring the vehicle or after becoming a new
resident of the city, within which to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter without any payment or any penalty hereunder.  ('77 Code, §
15-43(d))





(Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75; Am. Ord. 490-1994, passed 6-1-94)





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.32  APPLICATION.




   (A)  Each and every person, individual, firm, company or corporation
owning a motor vehicle registered or required to be registered, pursuant to
KRS 186.020, et seq., and all rules ad regulations promulgated by the Cabinet
of Transportation, in the Commonwealth of Kentucky registered or housed at an
address in the city who is required to obtain a license for a vehicle under
this subchapter shall make application to the City Clerk.  As to
applications for all vehicles, the applicant shall furnish the name and
address of the owner of the vehicle and the year, make, and model of the
vehicle and the license plate number issued by the state for the vehicle, if
any.  In applications for trucks,  the applicant shall also furnish the
capacity or tonnage rating of the vehicle.  In applications for mobile home
vehicles, the applicant shall also furnish the dimensions of the vehicle.






   (B)  The issuance of a license hereunder shall not be construed to
exempt the licensee from the obligation of compliance with any and all other
ordinances of the city or the laws of any state or of the United States.





('77 Code, § 15-37) (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75; Am. Ord. 490-1994,
passed 6-1-94)




§ 70.33  FEES.




   (A)  The license fee to be paid under this subchapter shall be as
follows:






      (1)  For each motor vehicle, including automobiles, motorcycles,
and for each truck with a factory rated capacity in excess of one-half ton,
$8, $.50 to be placed in a tree maintenance fund.






      (2)  For each truck motor vehicle with a factory rated capacity
in excess of one-half ton, $10, $.50 to be placed in a tree maintenance fund.






      (3)   Vehicles which, due to their status as governmental
vehicles, are used and operated exclusively in the service of the
governmental agency shall be exempt from the license fee upon presentation of
the registration (or a copy of the registration signed by the agency's
officer) to City Clerk.  A copy of said registration shall be maintained by
the city.  It is the responsibility of the user of the vehicle in the city
to notify the city of any changes in the exempt status of the vehicle.






   (4)   For those citizens wishing, a "Tree" sticker may be purchased
for a fee of $2; the additional fee may be placed to maintain the trees of
the city.






   (B)  All license fees imposed, levied, and collected under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be paid into and become a part of the
city General Fund, the same to be used for the purpose of paying the expenses
of operating and maintaining the city government.





('77 Code, § 15-38)






   (C)  The license fee imposed by this subchapter shall bear a penalty
of the cost of a sticker ($8 or $10) for each calendar month or fraction
thereof for which it remains unpaid, such penalty to become due and payable
on and after the first day of July.  ('77 Code, § 15-43(a))





(Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75; Am. Ord. 428-1990, passed 5-10-90; Am. Ord.
490-1994, passed 6-1-94; Am. Ord. 500-95, passed 4-19-95) Penalty, see §
70.99




§ 70.34  TERM AND DUE DATE.




   (A)  The licenses issued under this subchapter shall be valid for a
period of one year from July 1 and ending June 30 next following.






   (B)  The license fees set forth in § 70.33 shall be due and payable
in full regardless of when, during a license period, the license is
purchased, except as set forth in division (C) below.






   (C)  For any vehicle purchased on or after November 1 of any year, the
license fee for the remainder of that particular license period shall be
one-half of the regular amount due.  This provision shall also apply to
owners of vehicles subject  to a license fee under this subchapter who are
new to the city by virtue of their having changed residence or business
locations initially after November 1.





('77 Code, § 15-39) (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75; Am. Ord. 490-1994,
passed 6-1-94)  Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.35  DISPLAY OF STICKER REQUIRED.




   The license sticker issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be
displayed upon the vehicle for which it was issued, by the owners thereof, in
the following manner:






   (A)  Upon motorcycles, upon the rear fender so as to be visible to the
rear;






   (B)  Upon automobiles and all other vehicles not provided for in
division (A), upon the rear bumper thereof on the driver's side so as to be
visible to the rear.




('77 Code, § 15-41)  (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.36  REPLACEMENT STICKERS.




   (A)  If any person shall sell or otherwise dispose of a vehicle for
which a license has been issued under this subchapter, prior to the
expiration date of the license, and shall remove the license sticker from the
vehicle and return it or portions thereof (as proof of the destruction of the
license) to the City Clerk, the person may be issued another license for
another vehicle of the same type for the unexpired portion of the license
period without payment of an additional fee.






   (B)  If any license sticker issued under this subchapter shall be
stolen, or shall be lost, misplaced, mutilated, or destroyed, a replacement
license must be obtained from the City Clerk who shall issue such replacement
license upon payment of a fee of $.50.





('77 Code, § 15-40) (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75)  Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 70.37  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES.




   Any vehicle parked, housed, garaged, or maintained in the city, whether
located upon public property or upon private property that is regularly open
to traffic or parking by members of the general public, that does not have a
license sticker displayed thereon as required by this subchapter, may be
impounded by direction of a member of the Police Department.




('77 Code, § 15-42)  (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75)  Penalty, see § 70.99




Cross-reference:





   Required notice to owner, see § 72.21





   Sale of vehicle; procedure, see § 72.22




§ 70.38  IMPOSITION OF CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.




   The civil and criminal penalties provided in § 70.33 and 70.99 shall
be separate and distinct penalties and the imposition of one shall not
prevent the imposition of the other.





('77 Code, § 15-43(c))  (Ord. 117-1975, passed 6-13-75)




§ 70.99  GENERAL PENALTY.




   (A)   The following are established as the penalties for non-moving
violations of motor vehicles (prepayment of parking citations forth in §
72.98 is permissible):





 




(1)

 

Handicapped Parking Violation

 

$100.00




(2)

 

Failure to display handicapped placard.  Parking in designated handicapped
parking area or space

 

$25.00




(3)

 

Fire lane violation

 

$50.00




(4)

 

Expired registration plate

 

$35.00




(5)

 

Snow emergency violation

 

$30.00




(6)

 

Improper parking

 

$25.00




(7)

 

Parking in or within 30 feet of an intersection

 

$25.00




(8)

 

For sale vehicle parked on a city street

 

$25.00




(9)

 

Blocking driveway, street, or parking in circle/cul-de- sac

 

$25.00




(10)

 

Parking violation of unpaved surface

 

$25.00




(11)

 

Parking recreational vehicle/trailer on street

 

$25.00




(12)

 

Parking with 15 feet of fire hydrant

 

$25.00




(13)

 

Large truck parked in residential area

 

$25.00




(14)

 

Parking on sidewalk

 

$25.00




(15)

 

Any other city ordinance violation not listed above

 

$25.00





 




(Ord. 406-1989, passed 9-6-89; Am. Ord. 490-1994, passed 6-1-94; Am. Ord.
13-2009, passed 8-5-09)






   (B)   Violation of any provisions of §§ 70.30 - 70.38 shall first
be given a citation advising of the violation and of the opportunity to pay
the penalty by U.S. mail.  If the penalty is not paid within five (5) days
from the date the citation was issued, the fine established shall double and
a written notice shall be forwarded to the violator advising of the
additional penalty, and advising that if payment is not received within five
(5) days from receipt of the notice the offender will be prosecuted in Kenton
District Court where he/she will be subject to the penalty provision of §
70.99(C).





(Ord. 490-1994, passed 6-1-94)






   (C)   Any person who violates any provisions of this traffic code
where no other penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $250.





(KRS 189.990(1))




CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES




Section





   Operation Generally






   71.01   Obstructing traffic





   71.02   Reverse or U turns





   71.03   Backing vehicles





   71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks





   71.05   Speed limit






   Accidents






   71.15   Duty of operator





   71.16   Accident report






   Prohibitions






   71.25   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully





   71.26   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency
vehicles; driving over fire hose





   71.27   Smoke emission or other nuisance






   Parades






   71.40   Definitions





   71.41   Permit required





   71.42   Application for permit





   71.43   Standards for issuance of permit





   71.44   Notice of rejection of permit





   71.45   Appeal procedure when permit denied





   71.46   Alternative permit





   71.47   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued





   71.48   Contents of permit





   71.49   Duties of permittee





   71.50   Public conduct during parades





   71.51   Revocation of permit





OPERATION GENERALLY




§ 71.01  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to
remain standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction
thereof.






   (B)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side
of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the
indication of any traffic-control signal which may be located at the
intersection or crosswalk.






   (C)  Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or
critical  importance  to  the  movement  of traffic  shall be marked in
a distinctive manner in order to indicate its importantance.  Should the
operator of any vehicle enter any intersection so marked when there is
insufficient room on the other side of the intersection to accommodate the
vehicle, the indication of any traffic-control signal notwithstanding, he
shall be deemed to have violated this division rather than division (B) above.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.02  REVERSE OR U TURNS.




   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
without interfering with other traffic.





(KRS 189.330(8))  Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.03  BACKING VEHICLES.




   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the
vehicle at any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning
movement.  A vehicle from any parking position shall be backed by the
operator in such manner as to proceed on the same side of the roadway in the
lawful direction of travel.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.04  VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
within any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by
special permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.






   (B)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the
vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building, or lot and across a sidewalk,
or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. 
On entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or building the operator
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
The operator of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an
alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.  Penalty,
see § 70.99




§ 71.05  SPEED LIMIT.




   (A)  No operator of a vehicle upon a public street or alley shall
drive at a greater speed than is reasonable and prudent, having regard for
the traffic and for the condition and use of the street or alley and in no
event exceed a speed of 25 miles per hour except where otherwise posted.






   (B)  Whoever violates the speed limit set forth in this section, shall
be subject to the fine schedule set forth in KRS 189.394.





(Ord. 4-01, passed 5-23-01)





ACCIDENTS




§ 71.15  DUTY OF OPERATOR.




   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of, or passenger in any
motor vehicle which is involved in an accident in which any person is injured
or property damaged to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the
injury or damage and render such assistance as may be needed.





Penalty, see § 70.99





Statutory reference:





   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580




§ 71.16  ACCIDENT REPORT.




   The operator, owner, or passenger involved in an accident resulting in
the injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is
damaged, shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the
Police Department.





Penalty, see § 70.99





PROHIBITIONS




§ 71.25  OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.




   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the
vehicle in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of
pedestrians and other vehicles upon the highway.






   (B)   No such person shall willfully operate any vehicle on any
highway in such a manner as to injure the highway.





(KRS 189.290)  Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.




   (A)  Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and
operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights
visible under normal conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
such vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
stop and remain in such position until the emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer or firefighter.






   (B)  Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in conformity
with the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every vehicle
shall immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall keep such position
until the emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by a police
officer or firefighter.






   (C)  No operator of any vehicle, unless he is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than 500 feet, nor shall he drive
into, park the vehicle into, or park the vehicle within the block where the
vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm, unless he is
directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.






   (D)  No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any
street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire or fire alarm unless
the fire department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.






   (D)   No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any
street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire or fire alarm unless
the fire department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.










   (E)   Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle, when the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving
a signal by displaying alternately flashing yellow, red, red and white, red
and blue, or blue lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall,
while proceeding with due caution:










      (1)   Yield the right-of-way by moving to a land not adjacent
to that of the authorized emergency vehicle, if:










         (a)   The person is driving on a highway having at least
four lanes with not fewer than two lanes proceeding in the same direction as
the approaching vehicle; and










         (b)   If it is possible to make the lane change with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions; or










      (2)   Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe
speed to road conditions, if changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe.










   (F)   This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives
an emergency vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the highway.





(KRS 189.930)










   (G)   Whoever violates this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of KRS 189.993(8).





Cross-reference:





   Emergency medical and transportation services, Ch. 96




§ 71.27  SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.




   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a
minimum of noise, smoke, or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other
traffic, and to promote the public safety.





(KRS 189.020)  Penalty, see § 70.99





PARADES




§ 71.40  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "CRUISING."  The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a
continuous or nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.






   "PARADE."  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city, or "CRUISING" as defined herein.






   "PARADE PERMIT."  A permit required by this subchapter.






   "PARKING LOT."  Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business
or shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall
not include those operated for hire as defined in KRS 189.700.




§ 71.41  PERMIT REQUIRED.




   (A)  No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form,
or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief
of Police or other authorized city official.






   (B)  This subchapter shall not apply to:






      (1)  Funeral processions;






      (2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating
in educational activities, providing the conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;






      (3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.42  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.




   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms provided
by such officer.






   (A)  Filing period.  The application for a parade permit shall be
filed not less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.






   (B)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:






      (1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;






      (2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;






      (3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;






      (4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted;






      (5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;






      (6)  The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;






      (7)  The hours when the parade will start and terminate;










      (8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public
place proposed to be traversed;






      (9)  The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;






      (10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;






      (11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;






      (12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of
or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;






      (13)  Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.






   (C)  There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee in an amount as established by the City Council.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.43  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.




   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a
permit when, from a consideration of the application and from other
information obtained, he finds that:






   (A)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;






   (B)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;






   (C)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;






   (D)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly
areas;






   (E)  The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
fire fighting equipment enroute to a fire;






   (F)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute;






   (G)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held purely for
private profit;






   (H)  The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in
writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade. Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.44  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.




   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof.  If he disapproves the application,
he shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a
notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.




§ 71.45  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.




   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the City Council.  The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
after notice of denial.  The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt.




§ 71.46  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.




   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named
by the applicant.  An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his acceptance.  An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit
under this subchapter.




§ 71.47  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.




   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the following persons:






   (A)  The Mayor;






   (B)  The City Attorney;






   (C)  The Fire Chief;






   (D)  The general manager or responsible head of each public utility,
the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the
proposed parade.




§ 71.48  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.




   Each parade permit shall state the following information:






   (A)  Starting time;






   (B)  Minimum speed;






   (C)  Maximum speed;






   (D)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of
the parade;






   (E)  The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public place
to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;





   (F)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;






   (G)  Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.49  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.




   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.  The parade chairman
or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit
on his person during the conduct of the parade.





Penalty, see § 70.99




§ 71.50  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.




   (A)  Interference.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.






   (B)  Driving through parades.  No driver of a vehicle except a police
car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.





Penalty, see § 70.99





Cross-reference:





   Parking on parade route, see § 72.07




§ 71.51  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.




   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.




CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS




Section






   Parking Generally






   72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking





   72.02   Manner of parking





   72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking





   72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets





   72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning





   72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited;
towing authorized





   72.07   Parking on parade route





   72.08   Parking on off-street facility





   72.09   Owner responsibility





   72.10   Parking in parks





   72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale





   72.12   Parking with handicapped permits





   72.13   Parking trucks in residential section





   72.14   Parking recreational vehicles










   Impounding






   72.20   Impoundment of vehicles for parking violations





   72.21   Required notice to owner





   72.22   Sale of vehicle






   Snow Emergency






   72.35   Snow emergency










   72.98   Prepayment of parking citations





   72.99   Penalty





Statutory reference:





   Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS
65.120





PARKING GENERALLY




§ 72.01  OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any 
other  thing  that may be a nuisance, obstruction, or hindrance in or on
any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.






   (B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle
on the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.02  MANNER OF PARKING.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or
park the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward and
parallel with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the left
side of a one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and except
for commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.






   (B)  No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless
its two right wheels are within six inches of and parallel with the curb,
except that on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side
the two left wheels are to be within six inches of and parallel with the curb.






   (C)  No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street, except that
wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading provided that such
loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not consume
more than 30 minutes.  Such backing of trucks or wagons is prohibited at all
times and on all streets in the city where any truck or wagon so backed
interferes with the use of the roadway of moving vehicles or occupies road
space within ten feet of the center line of the street.






   (D)  The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places,
requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a
certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto.  However, diagonal parking
shall not be established where the roadway space required therefor would be
within ten feet of the center line of any street.  Such diagonal parking
places shall be designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings
on the pavement the required angle and the width of the roadway space within
which such vehicle shall park.






   (E)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park
such vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the
side or the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.03  LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.




   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
such vehicle except in a case of real emergency or in compliance with the
provisions of this traffic code or when directed by a police officer or
traffic sign or signal at any time in the following places:






   (A)     On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any
other place in the roadway where vehicles stand in any manner other than as
specified in § 72.02.






   (B)     On a sidewalk.






   (C)     In front of sidewalk ramps provided for handicapped persons.






   (D)     In front of a public or private driveway.






   (E)     Within an intersection or crosswalk.






   (F)     At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking.  This does not apply to police officers when operating properly
identified vehicles during the performance of their official duties.






   (G)     Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, traffic sign, or
traffic-control device.






   (H)   On any controlled access highway.






   (I)   Within a highway tunnel.






   (J)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.






   (K)   In an area between the roadways of a divided highway.






   (L)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any such prohibited area.
(KRS 189.450(5), (6)) 






   (M)   In a bus stop. 






   (N)   In a loading zone. 
('77 Code, § 15-11)  (Ord. 162-1978, passed 5-5-78)






   (O)   On any unpaved surface in any zone within the city.
(Ord. 2-00, passed 1-26-00)  Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.




   (A)  The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices.






   (B)  The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking
shall not relieve any person from his duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.






   (C)  When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time on any street so marked by official signs.






   (D)  When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent
to any curb so marked.






   (E)  When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, in  each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified by official signs on any day
except Sundays on any street so marked.






   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions
thereof stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever under
authority of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any parking limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas
are restricted to handicapped parking, appropriate signs shall be erected
giving notice thereof. However, in lieu of erecting such signs or in
conjunction therewith, the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to
which parking is prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.






      (2)  No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective
unless the signs have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted
yellow at the time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those
parking restrictions which by their very nature would not require such signs
and markings.






   (G)  When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in
each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time
longer than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any
street so marked.





Penalty, see § 72.99





________________





Cross-reference:





   Parking schedules, restricted parking areas, see Ch. 75, Sch. I




§ 72.05  PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.




   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall
provide suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting
parking on that particular day.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle to stop on any street so designated.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.06  PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.




   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle on
any of the public ways or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or
longer.  Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of the public ways
or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed
abandoned, and shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city
pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles.





Penalty, see § 72.99





Cross-reference:





   Removal of abandoned vehicles, see § 72.21 et seq.




§ 72.07  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.




   (A)  The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall have
the authority, whenever in his judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof 
constituting  a part of the route of  a parade or  procession, to erect
temporary traffic signs to that effect, and to prohibit and prevent such
parking.






   (B)  It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of such signs or directions.





Penalty, see § 72.99





Cross-reference:





   Parades, see §§ 71.40 through 71.51




§ 72.08  PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.




   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park
or abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another's
property, or on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without
the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of any such property or
facility.






   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise
trespasses in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee,
or person in charge of the property or facilitymay have the unauthorized
vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 72.20 through 72.22.






   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking
facility shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or
facility is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at
the owner's expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).





Penalty, see § 72.99





Statutory reference:





   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725




§ 72.09  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.




   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions
of this subchapter regulating stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and
the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.10  PARKING IN PARKS.




   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on
any section of any public park, playground, play lot, or tot lot within the
city not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a
roadway.  However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and
regularly maintained roadway in any such park or playground where at least
two wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on such roadway.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.11  DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.




   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a
motor vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.12  PARKING WITH HANDICAPPED PERMITS.




   (A)  Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor
vehicle bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk
pursuant to appropriate county ordinances for handicapped persons, when
operated by a handicapped person or when transporting a handicapped person,
may be parked in a designated handicapped parking place, or when parked in a
metered parking space may be parked for two hours for no fee, or when parked
where any parking limit is imposed may be parked for two hours in excess of
the parking limit.  The motor vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for
that period of time necessary to permit entrance or exit of the handicapped
person to or from the parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than 30
minutes.






   (B)  This section shall not permit parking in a "no stopping" or "no
parking" zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a
fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon, or
evening hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.





Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.13  PARKING TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL SECTION.




   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck over one ton in
capacity in any residential section for longer than one hour, except when
loading or unloading.





('77 Code, § 15-21)  Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.14  PARKING RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.




   (A)  "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE," for purposes of this section, shall be
defined to include campers, trailers, boats, house trailers, mobile homes, or
any other such device designed to be mounted upon any other motor vehicle,
towed behind any motor vehicle, or in any way integrated into a movable,
temporary housing facility.






   (B)  No person shall allow a recreational vehicle, not in daily use,
to be parked or otherwise located on a public street or between the front
property line and the setback line as established by city ordinance, on any
property located in the city.






   (C)  All recreationel vehicles must be stored in an inconspicuous
manner so as not to detract from the residential atmosphere of the community,
nor may such vehicles be parked or stored so as to create a nuisance
condition as defined by the ordinances of the city.




('77 Code, § 15-22) (Ord. 104-1974, passed 6-14-74)  Penalty, see § 72.99




IMPOUNDING




§ 72.20  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.




   (A)  Any vehicle parked upon the streets of the city at a place, in a
manner or for a length of time prohibited by this chapter, is, if unoccupied,
declared to be an obstruction in such streets and a public nuisance, and any
police officer of the city is authorized to cause the same to be removed to
and impounded in the depository provided by the city for such purpose.






   (B)  All charges shall be paid to the city for any fine, storage
charges, or hauling charges before the release of an impounded vehicle is
authorized.





('77 Code, § 15-23)





Cross-reference:





   Impoundment for failure to obtain vehicle license sticker, see § 70.37





   Impoundment during snow emergency, see § 72.42




§ 72.21  REQUIRED NOTICE TO OWNER.




   (A)  When a motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or transported
pursuant to order of police, other public authority, or private person or
business for any reason or when the vehicle has been stolen or
misappropriated and its removal from the public ways has been ordered by
police, other public authority, or by private person or business, or in any
other situation where a motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or
transported by order of police, other authority, or by private person or
business, the police, other authority, or private person or business shall
attempt to ascertain from the State Transportation Cabinet the identity of
the registered owner of the motor vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as
defined in KRS Chapter 281 and within ten business days of the removal shall,
by certified mail, attempt to notify the registered owner at the address of
record of the make, model, license number, and vehicle identification number
of the vehicle, of the location of the vehicle, and of the requirements for
securing the release of the motor vehicle.






   (B)  If a vehicle described in division (A) is placed in a garage or
other storage facility, the owner of the facility shall attempt to provide
the notice provided in division(A) by certified mail to the registered owner
at the address of record of the motor vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as
defined in KRS Chapter 281 within ten business days of recovery of, or taking
possession of the motor vehicle.  This notice shall contain the information
as to the make, model, license number, and vehicle identification number of
the vehicle, the location of the vehicle, and the amount of reasonable
charges due on the vehicle.  When the owner of the facility fails to provide
notice as provided herein, the motor vehicle storage facility shall forfeit
all storage fees accrued after ten business days from the date of tow.  This
division (B) shall not apply to a tow lot or storage facility owned or
operated by the city.





(KRS 376.275(1), (2))




§ 72.22  SALE OF VEHICLE.




   Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor vehicles,
who has substantially complied with the aforementioned requirements of §
72.21, shall have a lien on the motor vehicle, for the reasonable or agreed
charges for storing or towing the motor vehicle, as long as it remains in his
possession.  If after a period of forty-five (45) days the reasonable or
agreed charges for storing or towing a motor vehicle have not been paid the
motor vehicle may be sold to pay the charged after the owner has been
notified by certified mail ten (10) days prior to the time and place of the
sale.  If the proceeds of the sale of any vehicle pursuant to this section
are insufficient to satisfy accrued charges for towing, transporting, and
storage, the sale and collection of proceeds shall not constitute a waiver or
release of responsibility for payment of unpaid towing, transporting, and
storage charges by the owner or responsible casualty insurer of the
vehicle.  This lien shall subject to prior recorded liens.





SNOW EMERGENCY




§ 72.35  SNOW EMERGENCY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.




      “MOTOR VEHICLE.” Any vehicle that is operated by means other
than muscular power.




      “PERSON.” Any natural person, company, corporation,
partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, or any combination
thereof.




   (B)   The provisions of this section are applicable to all streets
in the city.




   (C)   No person shall cause or permit any motor vehicle to be
located upon the pavement or right-of-way of any portion of any street in the
city at any time during which a snow emergency has been declared by the Mayor
or the city's Chief Administrative Officer.




   (D)   A snow emergency shall be declared by the Mayor or the Chief
Administrative Officer, at such time as he or she determines that falling
snow, sleet, or freezing rain requires restrictions of vehicular traffic for
the purpose of plowing, cleaning of snow or ice, or at such time as three
inches or more of new snow has fallen.




   (E)   Upon the declaration of any snow emergency, the Mayor or the
Chief Administrative Officer shall, as soon as possible, notify local radio
stations, television stations, newspapers, and other members of the news
media as will, in the judgment of the Mayor or the Chief Administrative
Officer, afford the earliest and best information to persons using the public
ways of the city of the existence of the snow emergency. The Mayor or the
Chief Administrative Officer should also attempt, to the extent possible, to
get the notification placed on the city's website. In notifying the members
of the news media, the Mayor or the Chief Administrative Officer shall
request that the notice of the snow emergency and its requirements be
broadcast or published as soon as possible. No other notices of the existence
of the snow emergency shall be required. Owners and operators of motor
vehicles shall be deemed to have notice of the snow emergency two hours after
the broadcast or publishing of the announcement and are subject to the
prohibitions of this section. Posting on the city's website constitutes
official notice.




   (F)   The Head of Public Works of the city is hereby authorized to
install at all entrance points to the city signs containing the following
information:




   NO PARKING ON CITY STREETS DURING A DECLARED SNOW EMERGENCY




   (G)   A vehicle parked on the pavement or right-of-way of any
dedicated street at the time a snow emergency is declared shall be removed
from the street within three hours if a snow emergency is declared between
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. If declared between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the
vehicle shall be removed prior to 9:00 a.m. of that morning. The owner or
operator of a motor vehicle found in violation of this section shall be
responsible for all towing and storage costs for such vehicle during the snow
emergency.




   (H)   All peace officers of the Commonwealth are hereby authorized
and directed to cause all motor vehicles located upon any portion of the
streets of the city in violation of the terms of this section to be removed
from said streets. Additionally, all peace officers of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky are hereby authorized and directed to cite all motor vehicles
located upon any portion of the streets of the city in violation of the terms
of this section in the following manner:




      (1)   A citation shall be issued and served by regular U.S.
mail service upon the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation
of this section.




      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be fined $30 which shall become due and payable to the City Clerk of
the city within five business days of the date of the issuance of the
citation.




      (3)   The amount of the fine shall double if not paid within
five business days of the date of issuance of the citation.




   (I)   In any prosecution for a violation of the terms and provisions
of this section, it shall be presumed in the absence of conclusive evidence
to the contrary that the person to whom the motor vehicle is registered
caused or permitted the vehicle to be in violation of this section.




(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-1-17) Penalty, see § 72.99




§ 72.98  PREPAYMENT OF PARKING CITATIONS.




   Violators of any provision of this chapter relating to parking, shall
first be given a citation advising of the violation and of the opportunity to
pay the penalty by use of the U.S. mail.  If the penalty is not paid within
five days from the date the citation was issued, a written notice shall be
forwarded to the violator advising that an additional penalty of $10 has been
added to the original penalty of $20, and advising that if payment is not
received within five days from receipt of the notice, the offender will then
be prosecuted in Kenton District Court where he will be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 72.99.





('77 Code, § 15-ll) (Ord. 162-1978, passed 5-5-78)




§ 72.99  PENALTY.




   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city
shall be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in § 70.99. 




CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES




Section






   73.01   Operation of bicycles





   73.02   Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters





   73.03   Skating and coasting





   73.04   Clinging to vehicles






   73.99   Penalty





Cross-reference:





   Required obedience to traffic directions, see § 70.02(C)




§ 73.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES.




   (A)  No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.






   (B)  No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public





park, playground, play lot, or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking
area.






   (C)  No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such
bicycle.





Penalty, see § 73.99





Statutory reference:





   Bicycles; safety regulations and standards, see KRS 189.287




§ 73.02  OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.




   (A)  No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven





bicycle shall carry another person except on a seat attached thereto or in a
side car attached to the vehicle.






   (B)  No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or
in a parking area.






   (C)  No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.





Penalty, see § 73.99





Statutory reference:





   Regulations for operating and riding on motorcycles, see KRS 189.285




§ 73.03  SKATING AND COASTING.




   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as "play
streets" by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be
unlawful for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle
of any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.





Penalty, see § 73.99




§ 73.04  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.




   (A)  No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates,
or any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten
or attach the vehicle on which he is riding thereto.






   (B)  No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or fenders
of any vehicle.





Penalty, see § 73.99




§ 73.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.




CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




Schedule






   I.   Stop signs




SCHEDULE I.  STOP SIGNS.




   (A)   Stop signs shall be erected at the following locations:










STREET         INTERSECTION      ORD. NO.      DATE
PASSED










Amsterdam Road   General Drive   2-2017   3-1-17










East Henry Clay Avenue   Ridgemont Avenue   12-01   11-14-01










East Henry Clay Avenue   Fayette Circle   12-01   11-14-01










Longmeadow Lane   Stonewell Trail   10-01   8-22-01






Orphanage Road   Valley Drive   1-00   1-12-00






Orphanage Road   Access road to Wendy's   1-00   1-12-00










Stonewell Trail   Parkside Place   10-01   8-22-01










   (B) Any violation of the provisions of division (A) of this schedule
shall be a violation and a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 shall
be imposed for each offense.





(Ord. 1-00, passed 1-12-00; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 8-22-01; Am. Ord. 12-01,
passed 11-14-01; Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed 3-1-17)




CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES




Schedule










   I.   Restricted parking areas




SCHEDULE I.  RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS.









   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or truck at the
following locations:









 


LOCATION

 

SIDE

 

HOURS

 

ORD. NO.

 

DATE PASSED






Amsterdam Road for entire length

 

Both

 

all

 

3-03

 

1-22-03




Barbara Circle for 85 Feet from the intersection of Augusta Avenue

 

North

 

all

 

3-09

 

3-4-09




Beaumont Court from intersection of Highland Pike

 

East

 

all

 

1-09

 

2-4-09




City parking lot on Highland Pike

 


 

Between dawn and dusk

 

9-00

 

8-9-00




East Henry Clay Avenue from Kyles Lane to Basswood Avenue

 

Both

 

all

 

14-13

 

10-2-13




Rivard Drive from Kennedy Road to Highview Drive

 

Both

 

all

 

13-13

 

10-2-13





 


 


 


 












   (B)   The penalty for violation of division (A) of this schedule
shall be as set forth in § 72.99.





(Ord. 9-00, passed 8-9-00)




TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS




   Chapter






      90.   ANIMALS






      91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS






      92.   NUISANCES






      93.   FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION






      94.   LITTERING






      95.   TREES






      96.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES






      97.   PARKS AND RECREATION




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS




Section






General Provisions






   90.01   Definitions





   90.02   Animals running at large





   90.03   Cruelty to animals in the second degree





   90.04   Dyeing or selling dyed chicks or rabbits





   90.05   Abandoning domestic animals prohibited





   90.06   Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal





   90.07   Keeping of livestock prohibited






Dogs and Cats






   90.15   Definitions





   90.16   License and registration provisions; regulations and
anit-rabic provisions





   90.17   Dogs and cats running at large prohibited





   90.18   Noise disturbance; public nuisance prohibited





   90.19   Police to take possession; entry on private property





   90.20   Impoundment





   90.21   Interference with police officers and other empowered
officials





   90.22   Powers or authority granted by state law






Wild or Vicious Animals






   90.30   Definitions





   90.31   Agreements, Enforcement





   90.32   Applicability of state laws





   90.33   Keeping and maintaining animals; vicious animals, large wild
animals prohibited






   90.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITION.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   “ABANDON.”  Any animal left more than 48 hours without a person
checking on the condition of the animal(s) and/or providing food and water. 
Any animal left on private property without the owner's consent or deserted
or dumped on public property or roadways.



 



   “ANIMAL.”  Any live vertebrate creature.



 



   “ANIMAL CONTROL.”  The Kenton County Dog Authority which is an
authority made up of cities in Kenton County to control animals within city
boundaries.



 



   “ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY CHAIRMAN.”  The person elected by the
Kenton County Dog Authority to oversee its daily operation.



 



   “ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.”  Any person designated by the Kenton
County Dog Authority who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws
and Ordinances of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the designated city. An
Animal Control Officer shall be a law enforcement officer for the purposes of
this chapter only.



 



   “ANIMAL SHELTER.”  Any premises operated or approved for operation
by the Kenton County Fiscal Court for the purpose of impounding and caring
for animals held under the authority of this chapter.



 



   “CAT.”  Any member of the feline family, six months of age or
over, male or female.



 



   “COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.”  Any pet shop, boarding or
breeding kennel, grooming facility, auction, petting zoo, zoological park,
circus, performing animal exhibit, or any person engaged in the business of
breeding, buying, or selling at retail or wholesale, any species of animal
for profit.



 



   “DAY.”  For the purpose of this chapter, a 24-hour period shall
constitute a day.



 



   “DOG.”  Any member of the canine family, six months of age or
over, male or female.



 



   “DOMESTIC ANIMAL.”  Such animals as are habituated to live in or
about the habitations of human beings, and which are kept, cared for,
sheltered, fed, or harbored for use as a pet or as a source of food, raw
materials or income.



 



   “EXOTIC ANIMAL.”  Any animal not indigenous to the United States.



 



   “HUMANE SOCIETY.”  Any person or organization operating from a
fixed site and taking in or accepting stray or unwanted animals.



 



   “IMPOUNDED.”  Having been received into the custody of the Kenton
County Dog Authority or any authorized representative thereof.



 



   “LIVESTOCK.”  Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses or any other
animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, or equine species.



 



   “OWNER.”  Any person(s), corporation or other entity owning,
keeping, harboring or sheltering one or more animals.



 



   “PERSON.”  Includes all natural persons, corporations,
partnerships, firms, associations, governmental bodies, agencies, and other
entities.



 



   “PET.”  Domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



 



   “PUBLIC NUISANCE.”  Any animal(s) which:



 



      (1)   Molests passers-by or passing vehicles;



 



      (2)   Attacks people or other animals;



 



      (3)   Damages public or private property;



 



      (4)   Is repeatedly at large;



 



      (5)   Makes noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely
fashion;



 



      (6)   Repeatedly urinates or defecates on property not
belonging to the animal's owner or creates unsanitary conditions;



 



      (7)   Disturbs, the peace, comfort or health of persons in any
other manner.



 



   “RESTRAINED.”   Enclosed is an area by a form of fencing
(including invisible fencing) designed to control the movement of the animal
or secured by a leash or chain.  An animal shall be deemed to be restrained
if it remains on the premises of its owner or if it is accompanied by a
responsible person and is under that person's control.



 



   “RUNNING AT LARGE.”  Any animal that is off the property of the
owner, custodian, possessor or harborer and is not restrained. Except that a
hound or other hunting dog which has been released from restraint for hunting
purposes shall be deemed to be under reasonable control of its owner or
handler while engaged in or returning from hunting, and, if such hunting dog
becomes temporarily lost from a pack or wanders from actual control or sight
of its owner or handler it shall not be deemed to be a violation.



 



   “STRAY.”  Any animal running at large.



 



   “VETERINARIAN.”  One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and
injuries of animals.



 



   “VETERINARY HOSPITAL.”  Any establishment maintained and operated
by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals.



(Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)



§ 90.02  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.




   (A)   No person who is the owner of any animal shall permit it to
run at large in any public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon
unenclosed land, or permit it to go on any private yard, lot, or enclosure
without the consent of the owner of the yard, lot, or enclosure.






   (B)   The owner of an animal who permits it to run at large in
violation of this section is liable for all damages caused by such animal
upon the premises of another.





Penalty, see § 90.99




§ 90.03  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.




   (A)   A person is guilty of cruelty to animals in the second degree
when except as authorized by law he intentionally or wantonly:






      (1)   Subjects any animal to or causes cruel or injurious
mistreatment through abandonment, participates other than as provided in §
90.03 in causing it to fight for pleasure or profit, (including, but not
limited to being a spectator or vendor at an event where a four legged animal
is caused to fight for pleasure or profit) mutilation, beating, torturing any
animal other than a dog or cat, tormenting, failing to provide adequate food,
drink, space, or health care, or by any other means;






      (2)     Subjects any animal in his custody to cruel neglect; or






      (3)    Kills any animal other than a domestic animal killed by
poisoning. This section shall not apply to intentional poisoning of a dog or
cat. Intentional poisoning of a dog or cat shall constitute a violation of
this section.






   (B)     Nothing in this section shall apply to the killing of
animals:










      (1)     Pursuant to a license to hunt, fish, or trap;






      (2)     Incident to the processing as food or for other
commercial purposes;






      (3)     For humane purposes;





      (4)   For veterinary, agricultural, spaying or neutering, or
cosmetic purposes;



 



      (5)   For purposes relating to sporting activities, including
but not limited to horse racing at organized races and training for organized
races, organized horse shows, or other animal shows;



 



      (6)   For bona fide animal research activities of institutions
of higher education; or a business entity registered with U.S. Department of
Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act or subject to other federal laws
governing animal research;



 



      (7)   In defense of self or another person against an
aggressive or diseased animal;



 



      (8)   In defense of a domestic animal against an aggressive or
diseased animal;



 



      (9)   For animal or pest control; or



 




      (10)     For any other purpose authorized by law.





(KRS 525.130)  Penalty, see § 90.99





Statutory reference:





   Cruelty to animals in the first degree, a class D felony, see KRS
525.125




§ 90.04  DYEING OR SELLING DYED CHICKS OR RABBITS.




   No person shall sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange, display or
possess living baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl or rabbits which have
been dyed or colored; nor dye or color any baby chicks, ducklings or other
fowl or rabbits; nor sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange or to give
away baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits, under two months of age
in any quantity less than six, except that any rabbit weighing three pounds
or more may be sold at an age of six weeks.





(KRS 436.600)  Penalty, see § 90.99




§ 90.05  ABANDONING DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.




   No owner of a domestic animal shall abandon the animal.





Penalty, see § 90.99




§ 90.06  DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED AND SUFFERING ANIMAL.




   (A)  Any peace officer, animal control officer, or any officer of the
accredited Human Society or Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
may destroy or kill or cause to be destroyed or killed, any animal found
abandoned and suffering and not properly cared for, or appearing to be
injured, diseased, or suffering past recovery for any useful purpose.






   (B)  Before destroying the animal the officer shall obtain the
judgment to that effect of a veterinarian, or of two reputable citizens
called by him to view the animal in his presence, or shall obtain consent to
the destruction from the owner of the animal.






   (C)  (1)  Any animal placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian
for treatment, boarding, or other care, which shall be unclaimed by its owner
or his agent for a period of more than ten days after written notice by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, is given the owner or
his agent at his last known address, shall be deemed to be abandoned and may
be turned over to the nearest humane society, or animal shelter or disposed
of as the custodian may deem proper.






      (2)  The giving of notice to the owner, or the agent of the
owner of the animal by the licensed veterinarian shall relieve the licensed
veterinarian and any custodian to whom the animal may be given of any further
liability for disposal.





(KRS 257.100)




§ 90.07  KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.



   The keeping of livestock is prohibited.  No person shall keep any
livestock whether owned by him, or not, on his property within the city,
except grandfathered farms.



(Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty, see § 90.99




DOGS AND CATS




§ 90.15  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   “ANIMAL CONTROL.”  The Kenton County Dog Authority which is an
authority made up of cities in Kenton County to control animals within city
boundaries.



 



   “ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY CHAIRMAN.”  The person elected by the
Kenton County Dog Authority to oversee its daily operation.



 



   “ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.”  Any person designated by the Kenton
County Dog Authority who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws
and Ordinances of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the designated city. An
Animal Control Officer shall be a law enforcement officer for the purposes of
this chapter only.



 



   "AT LARGE."On or off the premises of the owner and not under the
immediate effective control of the owner or custodian either by leash, cord,
or chain, or effectively confined within a fenced area on the owner's
premises.



 



   “CAT.”  Any member of the feline family, six months of age or
over, male or female.



 



   "CITY LICENSE."The license issued by the city or its designated agent
by appropriate municipal order, and required to be worn as hereinafter stated.



 



   "COLLAR." Any band, chain, harness, or suitable device worn around the
neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed.



 



   "DOG."Any member of the canine family, six months of age or over, male
or female.  "DOG" shall be construed to mean also any cat or other pet,
except for the licensing provisions and any other provision which by its very
nature can have no application.  Owners of all cats or other pets shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this subchapter as specified in this
division.  ('77 Code, §5-2)



 



   "DOG OWNER."Includes every person having a right of property in the dog
and  every  person  who  keeps  or  harbors  the  dog or has it  in
his care or permits it to remain on or about premises owned or occupied by
him.  If a dog is owned by a family, all adult members of the family,
individually and jointly, shall be deemed owners of the dog for the purposes
of this subchapter.



 



   "STATE LICENSE."The license or tag required by KRS Chapter 258.



('77 Code, §5-16) (Ord. 280-l982, passed ll-22-82; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed
4-14-99)



§ 90.16  LICENSE AND REGISTRATION PROVISIONS; REGULATIONS AND ANTI-RABIC
PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Required; fee.  All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained in the
city shall be licensed and registered with the Kenton County Animal Shelter. 



 



   (B)   Collar.  Every owner shall be required to provide each dog
with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the
collar and tag are constantly worn on the dog.



 



   (C)   Application of state and county requirements.  The licensing
and registration herein required shall be in addition to all licenses,
registrations, and vaccination requirements of the State of Kentucky, or
County of Kenton by law or regulation.



 



   (D)   Burden of proof.  Any dog not bearing a license tag as herein
required shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed and unregistered and,
in any proceeding under this subchapter, the burden of proof of the fact that
a dog has been licensed and registered shall be on the owner of the dog.



 



   (E)   Anti-rabic vaccine. 



 



      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person who owns or harbors
a dog or cat in the city to have such dog or cat inoculated with an
anti-rabic vaccine by a veterinarian during the months of January through
August of each year.  Failure to have such dog or cat so inoculated during
the period shall subject each person to the penalty hereinafter provided.



 



      (2)   Every owner or harborer of a dog or cat, upon obtaining
the tag from a veterinarian, shall immediately attach the same to the collar
or harness of said dog or cat to be worn by said dog or cat at all times. 
The certificate obtained from the veterinarian shall be retained by the owner
or harborer of said dog or cat for inspection by officials of the Police
Department or other empowered officials of the city.



 



      (3)   The anti-rabic provisions shall not apply to dogs or
cats kept by regularly chartered medical colleges or other educational or
scientific institutions to be used for scientific purposes.



 



   (F)   Limitation on number of dogs and cats. 



 



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to keep at any one residence within
the city limits more than five dogs or cats, or any combination thereof with
the exception that the owner or person who has custody of a dog or cat may
retain the puppies or kittens, born of said dog or cat which exceed the
permissible numbers set forth in this division for a period of 12 weeks after
the birth of the animals. Any retention of dogs or cats in excess of the
number specified in this division after this 12-week period will constitute a
violation of this division.



 



      (2)   Any person having custody of dogs or cats in excess of
the number permitted by this division shall have 30 days from the effective
date of this chapter in which to reduce the number of dogs and cats in their
custody to comply with this division.




('77 Code, §5-17) (Ord. 280-l982, passed ll-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed
6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty, see § 90.99




§ 90.17  DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Every owner, harborer, or person having the custody, control,
or possession of any dog or cat, shall keep such dog or cat confined to the
premises and property of said owner, harborer, or custodian, except as
hereinafter provided.



 



   (B)   No owner, harborer, or person having the custody, control, or
possession of any dog or cat shall permit, allow, or suffer the dog or cat to:



 



      (l)   Run or be at large as defined in §90.15;



 



      (2)   Go about or on the premises or property of any other
person within the city without the permission of the other person.




('77 Code, §5-18) (Ord. 280-l982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed
6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty, see § 90.99




§ 90.18  NOISE DISTURBANCE; PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No owner, harborer or person having the custody, control or possession
of any dog or cat shall permit such dog or cat to disturb the peace and quiet
of the neighborhood by reason of their howling, barking and whining, the
stench they cause, unsanitary conditions in which they are kept, or their
disturbing of people in the reasonable use and enjoyment of property where
any of these factors cause annoyance, discomfort or injury to the health and
welfare of persons in the neighborhood.



(Ord. 431-1990, passed 6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty,
see § 90.99



§ 90.19  POLICE TO TAKE POSSESSION; ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any and all dogs or cats found at large within the city in
violation of this chapter, and all unlicensed dogs or cats shall be taken
into custody by the Police Department and/or Police Officers, Animal Control
Officers or other empowered officials of the city.



 



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, police officers of the city,
Animal Control Officers or other empowered officials, shall have specific
authority to enter upon private property for the purpose of inspecting or
checking dogs or cats to determine if they are properly licensed or abandoned
and for the purpose of taking into custody any unlicensed dog or cat, any dog
or cat found at large within the city, abandoned dog or cat or any dog or cat
found upon the property of anyone other than the owner of said dog or cat.



 



   (C)   Police officers, Animal Control Officers or other empowered
officials may use any reasonable means and force necessary to take control
and possession of dogs or cats found in violation of this chapter, including
but not limited to, using tranquilizer guns or devices.  Police, Animal
Control Officers or other empowered officials shall not be liable, civilly or
criminally, for dogs or cats that unintentionally are injured or killed in
the process of taking control or possession of said animals as provided
herein.




('77 Code, §5-l9) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed
6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty, see  § 90.99




§ 90.20  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   All dogs or cats taken into custody by police, Animal Control
Officers or other empowered officials as provided in § 90.19, shall be
impounded at the Kenton County Animal Shelter, except as provided in
division(B).



 



   (B)   If the dog or cat or other animal is found on or off the
premises of its owner, but is unlicensed or at large, the police officers,
Animal Control Officers or other empowered officials may, in their
discretion, not impound the dog or cat, but in lieu thereof, issue a citation
to the owner for owning an unlicensed dog or cat or permitting the dog or cat
to run at large.  Citations can be city or state.



 



   (C)   All dogs or cats impounded shall be handled and/or disposed of
by the Kenton County Animal Shelter as provided by the regulations of that
agency, by state law or by county regulations, except that no dog or cat
impounded by the Police, Animal Control Officers or other empowered officials
of the city, shall be released to its owner without written authority from
the Police Department or other empowered officials or agents of the city.



 



   (D)   On written complaint of any person that a dog or cat is rabid,
or that a dog or cat has bitten or attacked a person, the dog or cat shall be
seized and impounded forthwith.  The District Court shall hold a hearing on
said written complaint and if the court shall determine in its sound
discretion that the aforementioned dog or cat is mad or has in fact attacked
a person, then and in that event, the Judge may order said dog or cat to be
destroyed and examined by a competent scientist or veterinarian or impounded
for observation for a designated period of time, or make any other reasonable
order concerning said dog or cat.



 



   (E)   Any and all expenses incurred by the city in keeping and
housing of any animal after being so seized and impounded shall be chargeable
to the owner or keeper of said animal.




('77 Code, §5-20) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed
6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)




§ 90.21  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS AND OTHER EMPOWERED OFFICIALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder
or prevent police officers or other empowered officials of this city
discharging their duties as herein prescribed.



('77 Code, §5-21) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990, passed
6-28-90; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  POWERS OR AUTHORITY GRANTED BY STATE LAW.




   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to conflict with any of
the powers or authority of police officers or dog wardens conferred by the
provisions of Kentucky Revised Statutes.





('77 Code, § 5-22) (Ord. 280-1982, passed 11-22-82; Am. Ord. 431-1990,
passed 6-28-90)





WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS




§ 90.30  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:





   “ANIMAL.”  Any live vertebrate creature.



 



   "AT LARGE." Off the premises of the owner and not under control of a
human being either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise.



 



 



 



 



2001 S-11



§ 90.30   ANIMALS   10B



 



 



   "ENFORCEMENT AGENT." Any person designated by the city to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



 



   "KEEP." Possessing, controlling, exercising, or allowing to run at
large.



 



   “LARGE WILD ANIMAL.”  Any normally undomesticated animal in excess
of 50 pounds, not ordinarily tame and which is, by nature, an animal that
lives apart from human beings.



 



   "OWNER."  Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or other
animal.



 



   "POUND." Any establishment authorized by the enforcement agent for
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping, and control of dogs that come into
custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his official duties.



 



   "VACCINATION." An anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccine
approved by the state veterinarian.



 



   “VETERINARIAN.”  One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and
injuries of animals.



 



   “VICIOUS ANIMAL.”



 



   (A)   The term includes:



 



      (1)   Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or domestic animals due to a known propensity to endanger life by an
unprovoked assault or bite which result in serious bodily harm;



 



      (2)   Any animal which when unprovoked, approaches in a
terrorizing manner, any person in an attitude of attack upon streets,
sidewalks or any public grounds or places, or private property;



 



      (3)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to unprovoked attacks which cause injury or endanger the safety
of human beings or domestic animals; or



 



      (4)   Any animal which bites multiple times or to the extent
of causing severe injury, and assaults or otherwise attacks human beings or
domestic animals; or



 



      (5)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for
the purpose of fighting with animals.



 



   (B)   (1)   It shall be prima facie evidence that an animal is
vicious if the animal bites a human being or domestic animal more than once
in the same attack. 



 



      (2)   Any animal which has bitten human beings twice is prima
facie deemed vicious.



 



 



 



 



 



2001 S-11




10C       ANIMALS       § 90.33



 



 



   (C)   Exceptions.  An animal shall not be deemed vicious solely
because:



 



      (1)   It bites, attacks or menaces:



 



         (a)   Any person assaulting its owner;



 



         (b)   Any person or animal who has tormented or abused
it; or



 



      (2)   It is otherwise acting in defense of any attack from a
person or other animal upon itself, its owner or another person.



 



      (3)   Any police canine unit in the performance of their
duties.



 



   "WILD."  See "Vicious".



(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)



§ 90.31  AGREEMENTS: ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Council is empowered to authorize the entering into an
approved contract with other cities in the enforcement of this chapter or, in
the alternative, may enter into an employment contract with either an
organization or an individual to enforce the provisions of this chapter



(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)



§ 90.32  APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.




   No person owning or having in his custody any animal shall violate any
laws, rules, or regulations of the state applicable thereto.  These state
laws, rules, and regulations are included herein by reference. Where the
provisions of the state regulations are less restrictive than the provisions
of this chapter, the latter shall govern.





(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94)  Penalty, see § 90.99




§ 90.33  KEEPING AND MAINTAINING ANIMALS; VICIOUS ANIMALS, LARGE WILD
ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Manner of keeping animals.  No person shall keep or maintain
any animal in the city in such a manner as to become a public nuisance or to
disturb the peace, comfort, or health of any person residing in the city. 
The keeping of all animals within the city shall be subject to all pertinent
regulations of the State Health Department.



 



   (B)   The keeping of vicious animals and/or large wild animals is
prohibited.  No person shall keep any vicious animal and/or large wild
animal, whether owned by him, or not, on his property within the city.



 



   (C)   Keeping of reptiles and wild animals. No person shall keep or
maintain any poisonous reptile or wild animals.



 



   (D)   The foregoing divisions are a necessary control on the
unrestrained activities of vicious animals and/or large wild animals which
threaten the safety and pleasantness of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards and
all areas of the city.  Lack of knowledge or lack of intent is not a defense
to a violation thereof.



(Ord. 491-94, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)  Penalty, see
§ 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $10 and not more than $500.  Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues shall be a separate and distinct offense and
punishable as such.



(Ord. 581-99, passed 4-14-99)



 



   (B)   Any person who violates §90.03 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500, imprisoned for not more
than 12 months, or both for each offense.  (KRS 525.130)



 



   (C)   Any person who violates §90.04 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.  (KRS
436.600)



CHAPTER 91:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS




Section






   General Provisions






   91.01   Sidewalk Policy and Construction Maintenance Plan





   91.02   Regulation of tree-lawn area





   91.03   Definitions






   Road and Bridge Projects






   91.15   Public hearing required





   91.16   Notice requirements





   91.17   Public may testify; effect of testimony





   91.18   Hearing to be held prior to construction





   91.19   Separate hearing for each project not required





   91.20   Exemptions from hearing requirement






   Obstructions






   91.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk





   91.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction





   91.32   Materials on street or sidewalk





   91.33   [Reserved]





   91.34   Peddlers not to obstruct streets





   91.35  Pedestrians’ duties in traffic






   Excavations and Construction






   91.45   Application for permit to cut, excavate, or bore in the city
right-of-way from the city required





   91.46   Reconstruction of street segment in certain cases; waivers,
and restoration to be completed promptly and expeditiously





   91.47   Specifications for filling of cuts





   91.48   Cash deposit or bond to cover cost of repair work





   91.49   Emergency repairs





   91.50   Liability insurance





   91.51   Agreement in lieu of liability insurance






Installation on New and Extension Streets




 



   91.60   Installation



   91.61   Utility review



   91.62   City review



   91.63   Fees



   91.64   Minimum standards




   91.65   Completion






   91.99   Penalty





GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.01  SIDEWALK POLICY AND CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE PLAN.



   (A)   Introduction.




      (1)   This Sidewalk Policy and Construction and Maintenance
Plan ("Policy") shall cover the construction of new sidewalks and the repair
of existing sidewalks that are located in the public right-of-way and that
have been dedicated and accepted by the city for public use.




      (2)   It is the goal of the policy to address the following
sidewalk issues, listed in descending order of importance.




         First:      Repairing severely damaged (hazardous)
sidewalks.




         Second:   Filling in missing short sections between
sidewalks.




         Third:      Filling in large areas without sidewalks.




         Fourth:      Aesthetic considerations.




   (B)   Sidewalk fund. The City Council has approved a capital
projects program fund, which includes an annual budgeted line item earmarked
for the maintenance and construction of sidewalks located in the public
right-of-way. This fund ("the Sidewalk Fund") will be used to purchase
materials, equipment, labor, and professional services necessary to implement
the policy.




   (C)   Sidewalk Committee. A Sidewalk Committee is established under
this policy to oversee the policy. The Sidewalk Committee is comprised of the
Council members appointed to the Community Preservation Committee, the City
Administrative Officer, and the Public Works Director. The Committee will
meet periodically, but at least annually, to review the work schedule and
make recommendations for changes and adjustments whenever necessary.




   (D)   Implementation plan. In order to provide for the efficient and
orderly implementation of the policy, the city is divided into six  sidewalk
districts (see map attached to Ord. 3-2017).




   (E)   Sidewalk inventory and condition assessment.




      (1)   The Public Works Department shall periodically inventory
as many sidewalks as allowed by time and budget, for the purpose of creating
a sidewalk condition index (the "Index").




      (2)   When inventorying sidewalks, the Public Works Department
shall use the following rating system to compile data to form the Index:




         (a)   "Slight Cracking" denotes a crack that is
superficial up to 1/8" in width and/or vertical displacement less than 1/8".
(1 point)




         (b)   "Moderate Cracking" denotes a crack that is
between 1/8" and 1/4" in width and/or slight vertical displacement up to
1/2". (2 points)




         (c)   "Severe Cracking" denotes a crack that is over
1/4" in width and/or has a vertical displacement of 1/2" to 1". (3 points)




         (d)   "Vertical Separation" denotes a section of
sidewalk in which the vertical separation is greater than 1". (5 points)




   (F)   Prioritization Plan.




      (1)   Each district shall be ranked based upon the results of
the sidewalk inventory. Priority will be determined by the highest point
total in the most recent index.




      (2)   Once the Public Works Department has begun work in a
district, it will continue in that district until all sidewalks have been
inspected and the required repairs and replacements have been made.




      (3)   Notwithstanding the above sentence, the Sidewalk
Committee may consider other factors in determining whether an exception to
the general policy is warranted, on a case-by-case basis. These factors
include, but are not limited to: natural disasters, emergencies, or other
extraordinary circumstances, the volume of pedestrian traffic, proximity to
public transportation boarding and drop off points, and proximity to schools.




   (G)   Criteria for sidewalk repair and replacement. Upon inspection,
sidewalks in the prioritized district shall be repaired and/or replaced if
the following conditions exist:




      (1)   Vertical offset at joints larger than one inch.




      (2)   Intersecting cracks in one panel subject to displacement.




      (3)   Settlement in sidewalk larger than four inches in an
eight-foot span.




      (4)   Rough surface due to deterioration of concrete that is
determined hazardous.




   (H)   Sidewalk specifications.




      (1)   All sidewalk repairs, replacement, and construction
shall comply with the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations. This provision
shall apply to any developer who builds sidewalks in residential and
commercial subdivisions.




      (2)   Any sidewalk construction or repair shall be subject to
inspection by the City Public Works Department for compliance with the
abovementioned standards or quality of material and workmanship.




   (I)   Trees and tree roots in the vicinity of sidewalks. In certain
locations trees have been planted in close proximity to sidewalks. Roots of
such trees may have caused severe damage to sidewalks, the repair of which
may require the cutting of these roots. In the event a sidewalk cannot be
repaired or rendered compliant without the removal of the tree, the tree
shall be removed. If such a tree is in the right-of-way, the sidewalk fund
shall pay for the removal. If the tree is on private property, the property
owner shall be responsible for the removal.




   (J)   Damage to sidewalks due to private construction activity or
individual acts. If a private construction activity or individual act causes
damage to a public sidewalk, the party causing the damage shall be
responsible for repairing and/or replacing the damaged sidewalk.




   (K)   Repair or replacement of sidewalks by others. If a resident or
group of residents choose to repair or replace a damaged sidewalk that meets
the replacement criteria of division (G) above, before the scheduled repair
or replacement, the sidewalk program may pay for the concrete used to
complete such work, provided yearly budgeted funds are available. A resident
making such a request shall employ a bonded contractor or provide surety to
the city in the amount of $1,000. The resident or contractor performing such
work must obtain all proper permits. Such work will be subject to inspection
by the Public Works Department.




   (L)   Utilities. Utility companies shall comply with the provisions
of their franchise agreement with the city.




   (M)   Construction of sidewalk by others. If a resident or a group
of residents or a private or public entity chooses to construct a sidewalk in
the right-of-way where none exists, the sidewalk program may pay for the
concrete used to complete such work provided yearly budgeted funds are
available. A resident making such a request shall employ a bonded contractor
or provide surety to the city in the amount of $1,000. The resident or
contractor performing such work must obtain all proper permits. Such work
will be subject to inspection by the Public Works Department.




   (N)   Sidewalk program management and construction.




      (1)   The policy shall be managed by the city Public Works
Department. The City Council, City Administrator, and Community Preservation
Committee shall provide guidance in the implementation of the policy.




      (2)   In order to obtain the most efficient use of the
sidewalk fund, the Public Works Department may perform the sidewalk repairs,
replacement and construction of sidewalks. If, due to heavy workload, the
Public Works Department cannot perform the work in a timely manner, then this
work may be bid and awarded to a private contractor.




   (O)   Repair or replacement of sidewalks as part of city road
construction projects. The City Council has approved a capital projects
program fund, which includes an annual budgeted line item earmarked for the
maintenance, repair, and replacement of city streets (the "Street Repair
Program"). If a sidewalk is repaired or replaced in conjunction with a
project under the street repair program, the sidewalk fund shall cover the
costs associated with the repair or replacement of sidewalk.




   (P)   Requests for exceptions and appeals. A Fort Wright resident
may request an exception to the policy. The resident's request must identify
an exception listed in division (F)(1) above. The Sidewalk Committee's
decision with respect to the resident's request shall be final.




(Ord. 3-2017, passed 3-1-17)  Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.02  REGULATION OF TREE-LAWN AREA.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to blacktop, concrete,
macadamize, cover up, or in any form obliterate that strip of land between
the street and the sidewalk commonly known as "tree lawn" within the confines
of the city, excepting the planting of grass or trees or as otherwise
provided in this section.






   (B)  The City Council may in its discretion and in conformity with the
general intent of this section, grant approval by written permission for
blacktopping, concreting, macadamizing, or other use of the strip of land
commonly referred to as the "tree lawn."  This approval is to be granted by
the City Council after first consideration is given to maintaining the
uniformity, beauty, contour, and general appearance throughout the city as
originally planned.





('77 Code, § 12-4)  Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.03  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:




   “PARTICIPATE.” A utility company which assesses and repairs or
replaces underground lines, pipes, conduit, wires, cables or other objects,
as part of the city's Street Replacement and Repair Program, at the time when
the street, curb, or sidewalk, is excavated or opened by the city as part of
the city's Street Replacement and Repair Program.




   “PERSON IN CONTROL.” When referring to a utility company, shall
include (i) any persons who perform the work involving the disruption,
excavation, boring or cutting into the surface, sub-grade, or other portion
of any city street, curb or sidewalk; (ii), any person who has the right or
ability to supervise, control or direct any person described in paragraph
(i), and (iii) shall include any officers of the utility company involved in
contracting for such work to occur.




   “RECONSTRUCTION.” The full and complete construction, including
complete excavation and replacement of sub-grade, base, under-drains,
drainage blankets, surface, curbs, and other street components, consistent
with the specifications set forth in City of Fort Wright Typical Detail No 1,
2, 5 and 6 as applicable, which details are attached hereto and incorporated
herein by reference.




   “RESTORATION.” Returning a portion of street or street segment, to
its condition, as that condition existed prior to any work being performed
consistent with the specifications set forth in City of Fort Wright Typical
Detail No. 2, 3A, 3B, 4A, and 4B, as applicable, which details are attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference.




   “STREET SEGMENT.” In the case of any reconstruction, means the area
of the street required to be reconstructed as depicted in City of Fort Wright
Typical Detail No. 5 and 6, as applicable, which details are attached hereto
and incorporated herein by reference.




   “STREET SEGMENT.” In the case of any restoration, means the area of
the street required to be restored as depicted in City of Fort Wright Typical
Detail No. 7 and 8, as applicable, which details are attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.




   “UTILITY COMPANY.” An entity which provides an essential commodity
or service, including, without limitation, water, sewage, electricity, gas or
natural gas, transportation, cable, data or communication, to the public, as
well as any contractor performing work on behalf of, or under contract with,
such company. The term utility company shall include, but not be limited to,
Cincinnati Bell, Time Warner Cable, Duke Energy, Sanitation District #1 of
Northern Kentucky, and the Northern Kentucky Water District.





(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)





ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS




§ 91.15  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.




   Before the city expends state derived tax revenues on a municipal
highway, road, street, or bridge it shall hold a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter to take the sense of the public with regard
to the project and to priorities for use of tax moneys for road and bridge
purposes.





(KRS 174.100)




§ 91.16  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.




   Prior to the contemplated date of  expenditure of  state derived
tax  revenues on a  road or bridge by  the city, the  city shall hold a 
public hearing for the purpose of taking the sense of the public with regard
to road and bridge matters within the city.  Notice of the hearing shall be
given not less than seven days nor more than 21 days before the scheduled
date of the public hearing.





(KRS 174.100 (1))




§ 91.17  PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.




   (A)  At the hearing any person may speak with regard to any proposed
project, any project which he feels should be built or done which has not
been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any other matter
related to road or bridge projects.






   (B)  The city shall not be bound by the testimony heard at the hearing
but shall give due consideration to it.





(KRS 174.100 (2),(3))




§ 91.18  HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.




   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project





wherein state derived tax revenues are involved until the hearing as provided
herein has been held.





(KRS 174.100 (4))




§ 91.19  SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.




   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate hearing
for each project.  A single hearing encompassing the entire road and bridge
program, provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified
at the hearing, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.





(KRS 174.100 (5))




§ 91.20  EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.




   (A)  The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency
repair or replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or
man-caused disasters nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.






   (B)  The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to projects
which are under construction as of the effective date of this subchapter
unless construction is suspended after the effective date of this subchapter
and the city desires to reactivate the project.





(KRS 174.100 (6),(7))





OBSTRUCTIONS




§ 91.30  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.




   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.





Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.31  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.




   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building,





or permitting any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any
fence or building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute
a separate offense.





Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.32  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.




   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered





with barrels, boxes, cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as





to interfere with the free and unobstructed use thereof.





Penalty, see § 91.99





Cross-reference:





   Littering on streets or sidewalks, see Ch. 94




§ 91.33  [RESERVED].



§ 91.34  PEDDLERS NOT TO OBSTRUCT STREETS.




   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed as a peddler or
not, to demonstrate, sell, or offer for sale any items from any vehicle upon
any street or alley of this city in such a manner as to obstruct the streets
and endanger the life and limb of persons and property.





('77 Code, § 12-2)  Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.35  PEDESTRIANS’ DUTIES IN TRAFFIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to block any road or street in
the city, or to do any act designated to stop, slow or impede the movement of
traffic, or to approach stopped motorists in a line of traffic.




(Ord. 4-2017, passed 3-1-17)





EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION




§ 91.45  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO CUT, EXCAVATE OR BORE IN THE CITY
RIGHT-OF-WAY FROM THE CITY REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person or utility company desiring to open or otherwise
disrupt the surface of any public street, sidewalk, or any area within
publicly dedicated right-of-way under the ownership and/or maintenance of the
city shall obtain an application for permit to cut, excavate, or bore in the
city right-of-way from the city ("permit") prior to commencing work. The
permit application, on a form provided by the city, shall be completed and
submitted to the Public Works Director prior to the commencement of any work.
The Public Works Director, or a designee, shall promptly review the submitted
application for permit and upon determination that all requisite information
has been submitted, approve and issue the permit without undue delay. The
provisions set forth in §§ 91.45 through 91.49 shall apply to the permit
holder and his or her employees, agents, and subcontractors.




   (B)   The issuance of a permit by the city shall obligate the permit
holder to perform all work in accordance with the submitted permit
application. The permit holder, during the course of street opening
operations, shall be responsible for properly securing, maintaining, and
marking the work area sufficiently to warn the public and avoid any safety
hazard to vehicles and pedestrians. The permit holder shall be responsible
for the defense of any claim from any individual regarding personal injury
and/or damage to public or private property resulting from the work area
covered by the permit.




   (C)    All reconstruction and restoration work shall be inspected
and approved by the Public Works Director. Reconstruction and restoration
work must be completed in a manner consistent with good engineering practice
to be determined in the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works, who
may rely on an opinion issued by a licensed Kentucky engineer.





(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)




§ 91.46  RECONSTRUCTION OF STREET SEGMENT IN CERTAIN CASES; WAIVERS, AND
RESTORATION TO BE COMPLETED PROMPTLY AND EXPEDITIOUSLY.



   (A)   Any utility company, or their contractor, which disrupts,
excavates, bores or cuts into the surface, sub-grade, or other portion of any
city street or curb which has been replaced or repaired under the Street
Replacement and Repair Program within the 15 years immediately preceding the
date the utility company applies for its permit under § 91.45, shall conduct
a complete Reconstruction, as that term is defined in § 91.03(C), of the
street segment, as that term is defined in § 91.03(E), and any permit
granted under this section shall require such Reconstruction of the Street
Segment, unless a waiver is granted as provided in division (C) of this
section. Such Reconstruction shall occur and be completed within 365 days of
the disruption, excavation, boring or cutting into the surface. Not
withstanding the foregoing, this paragraph shall not apply if (i) the utility
company participated, as that term is defined in § 91.03(A), in the repair
or replacement of the portion of the street which is proposed to be
disrupted, excavated, bored or cut by the utility company, or their
contractor, when the city reconstructed or repaired that portion of the
street, and (ii) the disruption, excavation, boring or cutting into the
surface, sub-grade, or other portion of any city street or curb is
necessitated by good engineering practice, as determined in sole discretion
of the Director of Public Works, who may rely on an opinion issued by a
licensed Kentucky engineer.




   (B)   Waivers to division (A) or any of its requirements, or waivers
with conditions, may be granted by the City Administration officer, or, in
the absence of the City Administrative Officer, the Public Works Director,
upon the recommendation and advice of a city engineer, who shall consider the
following in determining whether to grant such waiver; (i) the amount of time
that will lapse prior to the next repair or replacement of the Street Segment
in question by the city under the Street Replacement and Repair Program; (ii)
whether the city engineer believes or has issued an opinion regarding whether
the waiver will not the shortening of the lifespan of the street segment in
question or otherwise cause harm to the city; (iii) whether unique topography
or engineering factors justify the granting of the waiver; (iv) the
furtherance of the goals of this chapter are met through the granting of a
waiver, including whether the repair or replacement of the street was
foreseeable by the utility company during the last road reconstruction or
repair by the city under the street replacement and Repair Program; and (v)
the hardship to the applicant in light of the goals of this chapter. No
waivers may be granted until the city engineer is consulted and renders an
opinion. Requests for waivers shall be in writing and delivered to the City
Clerk and shall be submitted, except in cases of emergency, prior to the
disruption, excavation, or cutting into the surface, sub-grade, or other
portion of any city street, curb or sidewalk. Any appeals to waiver
determinations shall be made to the calendar days of the original
determination; the Mayor shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty
days of the city's receipt of the appeal and issue a decision thereon with
seven days of the hearing. Further appeal may be had to the Circuit Court, by
filing a notice of appeal and complaint within fourteen days after the
Mayor's determination, which shall be limited to a review of the record
before the Mayor and a determination as to whether the Mayor abused his
discretion and acted arbitrary and capricious.




   (C)   If the Director of Public Works, after consulting with the
city engineer, determines that any sidewalk or driveway located in a street
Segment being Reconstructed or Restored by a utility company requires repair
as part of the utility company's project, then the utility company shall
perform such work consistent with the specifications set forth in City of
Fort Wright Typical Detail No. 10, Typical Detail No. 11,12,13,14 and 15, as
applicable, which Details are attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference.




   (D)   All restoration work related to the permit shall be completed
in a prompt and expeditious manner to minimize the amount of time any portion
of the public right-of-way area is disturbed. If permanent restoration, in
accordance with specifications as defined herein, does not occur immediately
upon completion of work, the permit holder shall be required to complete
temporary restoration of all disturbed area in accordance with city
specifications. All permanent restoration work shall be completed within 30
days from the date of the permit's issuance, or promptly upon completion of
the work, whichever is later, during the time period of April 1 through
November 30. During the time period of December 1 through March 31, permanent
restoration shall be completed in a timely manner, subject to appropriate
weather conditions. A final inspection of all [TEXT MISSING]




   (E)   Upon the completion of permanent of permanent restoration or
reconstruction of a street opening, the Public Works Director or a designee
shall inspect all finished work to ensure conformance with applicable city
specifications. If restoration or reconstruction work is accepted by the
city, the performance guaranty shall be promptly released and returned to the
permit holder. If the restoration or reconstruction work is determined to be
noncompliant with city specifications, the Public Works Director or a
designee shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific
deficiency in restoration work. A second inspection shall be performed in 30
days by a city representative to determine if the reported deficiency has
been corrected. If a deficiency still exists, the Public Works Director or a
designee shall issue a final written notice to the permit holder advising
that if restoration or reconstruction work is not completed within ten days,
the city shall order the work completed at the cost of the permit holder
through application of the performance guaranty, and the permit holder shall
forfeit any and all rights to the performance guaranty or portion of the
performance guaranty if an annual guaranty has been posted. Any dispute or
disagreement regarding compliance with the terms and provisions of §§ 91.45
through 91.49 may be submitted to the City Administrator, in writing, for
review and consideration.





(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)




§ 91.47  SPECIFICATIONS FOR FILLING OF CUTS.




   Any person desiring to break pavement in any street, sidewalk, or
public way for the purpose of installing gas, sewer, water, or for any other
purpose shall backfill under new concrete with gravel bankrun only. 
Suitable earth fill is permissible if compacted with power-driven hand
tampers to a 90% density as determined by the "Proctor test."




('77 Code, § 12-19) (Ord. 210(LH), passed 6-18-65)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.48  CASH DEPOSIT OR BOND TO COVER COST OF REPAIR WORK.




   Before a permit shall be issued to any person to make openings or
excavations under this subchapter, there shall be delivered to the City
Treasurer a cash deposit to cover the cost of replacing, backfilling, or
reconstructing the openings so made.  The applicant may, at his option,
execute and deliver to the city a bond, with corporate surety to be approved
by the City Treasurer and filed with the City Council, such bond to be in an
amount fixed by the Building Inspector to cover the cost of replacing,
backfilling, or reconstructing the openings made in streets, sidewalks,
grassplots, alleys, or other public ways and restore the same to their former
condition or in a manner to be approved by the Public Works Department. 
Under such bond, the person securing the permit and his surety shall bind
themselves that they will, after they have notified the Building Inspector
that such reconstruction work has been completed, pay to the city, on demand,
such amount in damages as will be necessary to restore such streets,
sidewalks, grassplots, or other public ways either to their former condition
and in a manner satisfactory to the Building Inspector, the amount of such
damage to be determined by the Building Inspector.






('77 Code, § 12-21)  Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.49  EMERGENCY REPAIRS.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 91.45 through 91.49, emergency
street openings by utility companies and other persons shall be permitted
when emergency repair of a utility system is warranted due to breakages,
service disruption, and/or safety considerations. Any person performing an
emergency street opening shall notify the city and complete and submit a
permit application along with the required fee and performance guaranty no
later than the next business day that the city offices are open for business.
All other provisions of §§ 91.45 through 91.49 shall apply to emergency
street opening work and restoration or reconstruction requirements.





(Ord. 08-14, passed 7-16-14)




§ 91.50  LIABILITY INSURANCE.




   Any person obtaining a permit to open or excavate in any street,
sidewalk, grassplot, alley, or other public way, whether the work is to be
done by that person or the city, shall obtain and file with the City Council,
and continue to keep in force until the excavation and reconstruction work
has been completed, a liability insurance policy conditioned for the benefit
of persons suffering injury, loss, or damage to their person or property
resulting from any negligence in connection with the excavation and
reconstruction work, or as a result of the negligence of the person or of the
city, their agents, servants, or employees, and which policy shall also
protect the city against any liability which may be imposed by law upon it by
reason of such excavation and reconstruction work.  The liability policy
shall be in a sum of not less than $10,000 for the injury or death of any
person, and not less than $20,000 for the death or injury of all persons
affected by any one accident, and not less than $1,000 for the benefit of
persons who may suffer property damage in any one accident resulting from the
negligent excavation and reconstruction work.  Such policy shall, as to the
form thereof and the solvency of the insurance company, be subject to the
approval of the City Treasurer.





('77 Code, § 12-23)  Penalty, see § 91.99




§ 91.51  AGREEMENT IN LIEU OF LIABILITY INSURANCE.




   Any person doing his own excavation and reconstruction work pursuant to
this subchapter and having property within the city assessed for taxes at a
sum in excess of $100,000 may, at his option, in lieu of obtaining liability
insurance pursuant to § 91.50 covering accidental injuries and damages
arising out of his own excavation and reconstruction work, enter into an
agreement with the City Council, satisfactory in form to Council, agreeing to
indemnify and save harmless  the city  from any loss,  damage, or 
expense to  the  person or  property of  anyone, including  the city, 
its agents,  servants, or  employees, occasioned  by  or  growing 
out  of  any  excavation  or reconstruction  work performed by  and as
a  result of the  negligence of  such person, under  the terms of 
this  subchapter; to  defend  any and  all actions instituted  against
the city  on account  of accidental injuries to persons or damage to
their  property  arising out of  such excavation and  reconstruction
work; and  to pay  all court  costs, attorney fees,  and other 
litigation expense  which  the city  may be  required  to  incur in 
such  suit  or  suits.  Whenever the city undertakes the performance of
the replacement or reconstruction work for any person who has entered into
such an agreement, the city shall obtain and keep in force, until such
reconstruction work has been completed, a liability policy in the amount
specified in § 91.50, indemnifying it against any loss or liability arising
from or which may be imposed by law upon it by reason of the excavation and
reconstruction work, and the premium for such policy shall be deemed to be a
part of the costs of the work and paid to the city by such person.





('77 Code, § 12-24)




   INSTALLATION ON NEW AND EXTENSION STREETS



§ 91.60  INSTALLATION.



   Where any new subdivision, or other new development, includes the
construction, extension, or improvement of a street to be dedicated and
accepted by the city, such developer shall construct and install street
lighting and street signs and sign poles within said street or streets as a
part of the construction, extension, or improvement thereof.



(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)



§ 91.61  UTILITY REVIEW.



   (A)   Plans for the construction, extension, or improvement of a
street shall be submitted to the utility company, or other entity, which will
install, maintain or otherwise operate the lights.



 



   (B)   That utility, or other entity, shall either:



 



      (1)   Prepare plans and details for the lighting system based
upon the minimum standards contained herein; or



 



      (2)   Shall approve any such plans as already prepared in
detail.



(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)



§ 91.62  CITY REVIEW.



   (A)   No less than five sets of said plans for streetlights and
street signs and sign poles shall then be submitted to the city for review
and approval. Plans submitted to the city shall contain and depict, at a
minimum, the location of each lighting fixture and sign and sign pole;
details of the lighting pole and fixtures which shall include the
manufacturer’s name, pole and fixture style, pole and fixture model, type
of light produced, and output of the fixture; and the location of each power
source including any power supply crossings. Plans submitted to the city for
review and approval of street signs and sign poles shall include location of
each sign and sign pole; and details of the sign and sign pole designed to
the specifications attached hereto.



 



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Building Inspector,
and /or the City Engineer, to review the submitted plans for compliance with
this subchapter.



(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)



§ 91.63  FEES.



   There shall be a fee of $50, payable to the city, to cover the cost of
the review.



(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)



§ 91.64  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   The minimum standards for street lighting shall be as follows:



 



      (1)   Spacing between lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of
300 feet as measured along the centerline of the street.



 



      (2)   Lighting fixtures shall be no less than 14 feet nor more
than 20 feet in height, measured from the ground line at the fixture base to
the top of any fixture.



 



      (3)   Lighting shall be located so as to illuminate each and
every intersection proposed or created. If any two intersections are less
than 600 feet apart, but more than 300 feet apart, there shall be a lighting
fixture placed midway between the intersections.



 



      (4)   Each lighting fixture proposed in a residential area
shall be capable of producing light measurable in lumens, with an average
output of at least 7,000 lumens.



 



      (5)   In residential areas, the lighting fixtures shall
produce a white light. No high-pressure sodium or other yellow type light
shall be permitted in a residential area.



 



      (6)   Each lighting fixture shall be shielded, be equipped
with diffuser devices, or some other method, to prevent direct light from
entering the living quarters of adjacent houses.



 



      (7)   Where street constructions is an extension of an
existing street or subdivision, the proposed lighting system shall match, as
closely as possible, the lighting components of the existing system.



 



      (8)   The power source of a lighting system herein shall be
extended to the end of any proposed development so as to be readily available
for future development without significant disruption to city right-of-ways.



 



      (9)   Lighting fixtures shall be constructed on both sides of
the right-of-way alternating from side to side. Lighting fixtures shall be
constructed in the island area of any divided street or boulevard.



 



      (10)   Lighting fixtures shall be constructed within the
right- of-ways, the preferred location between the sidewalk and curb.



 



      (11)   Lighting fixtures located at intersections with
arterial streets shall have break-away bases.



 



   (B)   The minimum standards for street signs and sign poles shall be
as follows:



 



      (1)   The street signs and sign poles shall be designed to the
specifications attached hereto.



 



      (2)   That street signs and sign poles shall be constructed
within the right-of-ways at locations approved by the City Building Inspector
and/or City Engineer, the preferred location between the sidewalk and curb.



 



      (3)   There shall be a minimum of one street sign and sign
pole per street or street extension.



(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)



§ 91.65  COMPLETION.



   Lighting systems and street signs and sign poles shall be constructed,
in place, and operational upon completion of the construction of the street
or streets or street extension. Building permits will not be issued until the
lighting system and street signs and sign poles are completed as herein
provided.




(Ord. 1-03, passed 1-8-03)




§ 91.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.




CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES




Section






   General Provisions





   92.01   Statutory authority




   92.02   Definitions





   92.03   Nuisances described and prohibited





   92.04   Hearing Board and Hearing Officers





   92.05   Responsibility for enforcement





   92.06   Standards and procedures for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter





   92.07   Board hearings





   92.08   Elimination of violations by the city





   92.09   Violations




   92.10   Owners liability and lien of the city
   92.11    Abatement procedure for imminently dangerous conditions





   Chronic Nuisance Properties




   92.20   Definitions



   92.21   Prohibition



   92.22   Abatement procedure for chronic nuisance properties



   92.23   Enforcement



   92.24   Summary closure



   92.25   Penalty upon failure to comply



   92.26   Relief from order



   92.27   Lien



 




   92.99   Penalty





State reference:





   Private nuisances, see KRS 411.500 - 411.570




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a nuisance ordinance under
KRS 65.8840(1).





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.




   "ABATEMENT COSTS." Has the meaning provided in KRS 65.8840(1).




   "ANYBODY." Any human being, or any organization or combination thereof,
in the form of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint
venture, unincorporated association or otherwise.




   "BANNER SIGN." Any commercial sign composed of any pliable plastic or
cloth, without a rigid supporting frame.




   "BUILDING." Any relatively permanent enclosure consisting of no less
than three connected walls covered by a roof.




   "CITY." The City of Fort Wright.




   "CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER." Has the same meaning provided in KRS 
65.8840(1). Code Enforcement Officer shall also include the Public Works
Director.




   "COMMERCIAL SIGN." Any sign which includes any information, message
identification which is, in any way, related to the promotion of any business
or commerce.




   "CONTROL." To exercise restraint or direction over.




   "DELIVER." Includes any manner of delivery that conforms to the federal
and state constitutional requirements for procedural due process.




   “EVERYBODY." Every human being, and every organization or combination
thereof, in the form of a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, joint venture, unincorporated association or otherwise.




   "FRONT YARD." That portion of a lot or parcel of real estate that
extends from the street upon which the principle building on that lot or
parcel fronts, for the full width of that lot or parcel, back to every part
of the front (as distinguished from the sides and back) of that principle
building.




   "GRAFFITI." Any display of words, letters, numbers, design or symbols
scrawled, by hand or otherwise, in any ink, paint, chalk, dye or any other
medium on any building or structure, without the consent or authority of the
owner thereof, and which is within view from any public property or right of
way.




   "IMMINENTLY DANGEROUS." A condition which could cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death.




   "INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE." A motor vehicle that is:




      (1)   Wrecked or otherwise in a state of disrepair or
disassembly;




      (2)   Mechanically inoperable; or




      (3)   Legally inoperable on public streets and highways.




   "LIVESTOCK." Animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine,
camelide and cervid species, including, without limitation, horses, cattle,
sheep, swine and goats.




   "MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE." Has the same meaning provided in KRS
224.01-010(31)(a)(4).




   "MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER." A clean, covered, rigid metal or
plastic container with a capacity of no less than 30 gallons and no more than
96 gallons.




   “NOBODY." No human being, or any organization or combination thereof,
in the form of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated
association or otherwise.




   "OUTSIDE." An area of a lot or parcel of real estate that is not
enclosed within a building.




   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE." Has the same meaning provided in KRS
227.550(12).




   "RUBBISH." Worthless, discarded material.




   "UNLEASHED ANIMAL." Any animal that is not secured and controlled by
the owner or custodian of that animal by means of a leash.




   "UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIAL." Any written material that is
distributed to any lot or parcel of real estate in the city without the
affirmative express invitation or permission of an owner or occupant of that
lot or parcel of real estate.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.03  NUISANCES DESCRIBED AND PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The following actions, omissions, behavior, conditions and
occurrences upon any lot or parcel of real estate within the city are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and violations of this chapter; and nobody,
including, without limitation, landlords and tenants, shall, by either act or
omission, conspire, cause, permit, encourage, aid, assist, allow or engage in
any of them, or fail to exercise any authority to prevent the occurrence
thereof, including, without limitation, the eviction of tenants who cause,
permit, encourage, aid assist, allow or engage in any of them.




   (B)   Public nuisances include, but are not limited to:




      (1)   Any condition or use of any lot or parcel of real estate
in the city or any structure thereon that is detrimental to the value, use or
enjoyment of the property of others in the vicinity of that lot or parcel of
real estate, including, without limitation;




         (a)   Those in violation of the provisions of the
International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc. as amended from time to time and enacted by city ordinance;




         (b)   Those structures that are designed and intended
for human habitation occupancy or use that become unfit and unsafe for human
habitation, occupancy or use or have conditions in them that are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of the structure, the
occupants of neighboring structures or other residents of the city;




         (c)   Those in violation of the standards of safety
promulgated pursuant to KRS 227.300. which are hereby adopted by the city
pursuant to the requirements of KRS 227.320; and




         (d)   Those in violation of the provisions of the NFPA1
Uniform Fire Code published by the National Fire Protection Association, as
amended from time to time and enacted by city ordinance.




   (C)   The accumulation of any rubbish on any portion of any lot or
parcel of real estate outside of any building.




   (D)   Use of any portion of a residential lot or parcel of real
estate outside of a building for the location of any broken, inoperable or
otherwise non-functional vehicles, equipment, machinery or furniture or any
parts thereof, or the location of any scrap or salvage material, or the
location of any other tangible personal property.




   (E)   The location of one or more mobile or manufactured homes as
defined in KRS 227.550 that are junked, wrecked, or non-operative and which
are not inhabited.




   (F)   The growth of weeds or grass in excess of ten inches above the
surface of the ground on any lot or parcel of real estate that is less than
four acres in area and developed with the public utilities of water,
electricity and sewers.




   (G)   The parking of any recreational vehicle, boat or trailer
anywhere in any residential area except for only one of any such vehicles:




      (1)   In the rear yard of any lot or parcel of real estate;




      (2)   In any area of a side yard that is continuously paved
with blacktop or concrete, provided that no part of such vehicle is within
one foot of any point in the nearest boundary line; or




      (3)   In any driveway during the period after May 1 and before
October 15 in any calendar year, provided that:




         (a)   The area thereof occupied by any such vehicle is
in addition to all off street parking areas required by this chapter;




         (b)   There is no more than one of any such vehicles
parked, stored or otherwise located in any portion of any driveway on any one
lot or parcel of real estate at any one time; and




         (c)   No part of any such vehicle is within one foot of
any point in the nearest boundary line.




      (4)   Under no circumstance may any recreational vehicle,
boat, or trailer be permitted to remain in a residential area more than five
consecutive days and no more than a total of 25 days per year.




      (5)   However, a recreational vehicle, boat or trailer less
than twenty feet in length from tongue to bumper may remain indefinitely
provided it rests on a paved surface behind the front-most portion of the
home. The paved surface may also be in the rear of the house.




   (H)   The accumulation of any municipal solid waste anywhere unless
it is enclosed within a covered municipal solid waste container.




   (I)   The location of any municipal solid waste container in the
front yard of any lot or parcel of real estate in the city at any time other
than that period of time that begins at 6:00 p.m. on the day before the day
that municipal solid waste is scheduled by the city for collection from that
real estate and ends at 6:00 a.m. on the following day.




   (J)   Being the owner of an animal, to permit or to allow his or her
animal to do any of the following:




      (1)   To run at large within the city. "At large" means on or
off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate effective control
of the owner or custodian either by leash, cord, or chain, or effectively
confined within a fenced area on the owner's premises.




      (2)   To trespass upon another person's real property or to in
any manner injure or destroy any real or personal property belonging to
another person.




      (3)   To bark, howl, cry, whine or make any other noise or do
anything else in such a manner that it unreasonably interferes with the
occupation, use and enjoyment of any other property in the city.




   (K)   The occurrence of any sound, odors or anything else from any
animal or animals on any lot or parcel of real estate in the city that
unreasonably interferes in any way with the occupation, use or enjoyment of
any other lot or parcel of real estate in the city by any owner, tenant,
occupant, resident or user thereof.




   (L)   The location of any rubbish on any public sidewalk and the
failure of those with any ownership or possessory interest in any lot or
parcel of real estate abutting thereon to remove it within a reasonable
period of time after such rubbish has been deposited thereon.




   (M)   Any commercial sign that isn't in a condition of good repair,
and in a clean, neat and safe and functional condition in compliance with all
applicable laws, including, without limitation, all building and property
maintenance codes.




   (N)   The occurrence, existence or continuation of any graffiti.




   (O)   The outside storage or other location of any equipment in any
front or side yard where it may be seen from a public street, while that
equipment is in a position or condition in which the design and purpose of
that equipment may not be accomplished.




   (P)   Any outdoor swimming pool in which:




      (1)   The water in the pool is contaminated with dangerous
disease causing pathogens, including bacteria; however




      (2)   Water may be retained and impounded in the pool to a
depth of 24 inches or more at any one point so long as the pool area is
surrounded by a fence that is at least four feet in height. The fence must
limit access to the pool, except that it may have one or more gates. Each
gate must have an automatic self-closing mechanism.




   (Q)   Any livestock within 500 feet of any residence.




   (R)   Roosters are entirely prohibited.




   (S)   The distribution or accumulation of any unsolicited written
material on any portion of any lot or parcel of real estate in the city
outside of a building other than:




      (1)   On a porch, if one exists, nearest to the front door;




      (2)   Securely attached to a door;




      (3)   Between an exterior door and an interior door; or




      (4)   Personally with any occupant of the lot or parcel of
real estate.




   (T)   The use of any portion of any residential lot or parcel of
real estate outside of a building for the storage or other location of any
inoperable motor vehicles or any motor vehicle parts.




   (U)   The use of any lot or parcel of real estate, or any portion
thereof, including, without limitation, any building or any portion thereof
located on that lot or parcel of real estate, for any criminal activity to
such an extent that there have been documented responses to any of them by
peace officers or other personnel of the city on five or more separate
occasions within any one period of 12 consecutive calendar months; provided
that an owner of that lot or parcel of real estate has been notified at least
once during that period of 12 consecutive calendar months of the occurrence
of any such criminal activity; and provided further that the eviction of any
tenants of that lot or parcel of real estate who were involved in such
criminal activity shall be a defense to any civil or criminal prosecution for
a violation of this section.




   (V)   The use of any paved area other than sidewalks within the
right-of-way of any street within the city for any athletic or other
recreational activity.




   (W)   The location of any apparatus for the athletic or other
recreational use of any area within the right-of-way of any street within the
city, whether that apparatus is located within or outside of that
right-of-way.




   (X)   Any tree, shrub, or bush located on private property, which
dangers any public street or highway, any vehicle or person, any public
sidewalk or any public property.




   (Y)   The location of any motor vehicle in any manner that any
portion of it is on or above any portion of any sidewalk in the city,
potentially blocking the pedestrian use thereof.




   (Z)   The location of any inoperable motor vehicle anywhere within
the right-of-way of any street in the city.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.04  HEARING BOARD AND HEARING OFFICERS.



   There is hereby established a Hearing Board consisting of three persons
appointed by the Mayor of the city for the purpose of conducting hearings,
which shall be named and known as the Fort Wright Nuisance Hearing Board
which shall be identified and referred to hereinafter simply as the "Board."
The Board may appoint hearing officers; and any action of a hearing officer
shall be deemed to be the action of the Board.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.05  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   The responsibility for the enforcement of the nuisance code hereby
established is hereby delegated to the a Code Enforcement Officer as
designated by the City Council.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.06  STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE PROVISIONS OF
THIS CHAPTER.



   There are hereby established the following standards and procedures for
the enforcement of this chapter.




   (A)   Enforcement proceedings before the Board shall be initiated by
the issuance of a notice of violation and civil citation (citation) by a
person who is a Code Enforcement Officer.




   (B)   Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer either:




      (1)   Observes or otherwise personally senses a violation of
this chapter; or




      (2)   Has reason to believe that a violation of this chapter
has occurred or is occurring, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized to issue a citation to everyone who the Code Enforcement Officer
has reason to believe has, by either act or omission, conspired, caused,
permitted, encouraged, aided, assisted, allowed or engaged in that violation.




   (C)   The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
in a form prescribed by the executive authority of the city; but it shall
include at least the following information:




      (1)   The date and time of issuance;




      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;




      (3)   The date and time the violation occurred;




      (4)   The facts constituting the violation;




      (5)   The section of this chapter that has been violated;




      (6)   The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;




      (7)   The civil fine that will be assessed for the violation
if that person does not contest the citation;




      (8)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if that
person elects to contest the citation;




      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay
the fine or to contest the citation; and




      (10)   A description of the circumstances in which the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer becomes final; and that,
thereupon, the city shall cause the violations described in the citation to
be abated; and that the cost thereof shall be assessed upon the person to
whom the citation was issued; and that the owner of the property upon which
those violations occurred shall also be liable therefor and for all fines,
penalties, charges abatement costs and fees assessed for those violations,
for which the city shall possess a lien on that property.




   (D)   After issuing a citation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
cause the citation to be served upon the person to whom it was issued either
by personal delivery, or by any other means that conforms to the due process
provisions of the federal and state constitutions.




   (E)   After issuing and serving a citation upon the person to whom
it was issued, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Board thereof by
delivering a copy of the citation to the Board.




   (F)   When a citation is issued and served upon the person to whom
the citation was issued, that person shall respond to the citation within
seven calendar days after the date the service of the citation, by either
paving the civil fine set forth in the citation or delivering to the Board a
written request for a hearing to contest the citation. If there is no
response to the citation by the person to whom it was issued within seven
days after the service thereof on that person, then that person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to a hearing to contest the citation and the
determination that a violation was committed by that person shall become
final. In that event, the Board shall enter a final order determining that
the violation was committed by that person and assessing upon that person the
civil fine set forth in the citation, plus the abatement costs, costs of
collection and attorney fees of the city, if any.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.07  BOARD HEARINGS.



   (A)   When a hearing before the Board has been requested by a person
to whom a citation has been issued, the Board shall schedule a hearing. Not
less than seven days before the date set for the hearing, the Board shall
cause to be delivered to the person who requested the hearing a written
notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. Any person requesting a
hearing before the Board who fails to appear at the time and place scheduled
for the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing to
contest the citation and the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer
that a violation was committed by that person shall become final. In that
event, the Board shall enter a final order determining that the violation was
committed by that person and assessing upon that person the civil fine set
forth in the citation, plus the abatement costs, costs of collection and
attorney fees of the city, if any.




   (B)   All testimony before the Board shall be under oath and shall
be recorded. The Board shall receive testimony from the Code Enforcement
Officer, the person to whom the citation was issued, and any other witnesses
to the facts identified in the citation or any other relevant facts offered
by the Code Enforcement Officer or the person to whom the citation was
issued. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but constitutional
procedural due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings.




   (C)   At the hearing, the Board shall determine from the evidence
presented whether or not a violation of this chapter was committed by the
person to whom the citation was issued. When the Board determines from that
evidence that no such violation was committed, the contrary determination of
the Code Enforcement Officer shall be reversed and an order dismissing the
citation shall be signed and entered into the record of the proceedings of
the Board. When the Board determines that a violation was committed, the
Board shall issue an order sustaining the citation and assessing the person
to whom the citation was issued for a civil fine in an amount as provided in
§ 92.11. In its discretion, the Board may issue a fine less than permitted
in § 92.11.




   (D)   Every final order of the Hearing Board shall be written and
signed on behalf of the Board; and it shall include the date the order was
issued, and a copy of the order shall be delivered to the person to whom the
citation was issued. If the person to whom the citation was issued is not
present at the time of the final order of the Hearing Board, the final order
shall be delivered to that person by postage pre-paid first class U.S. mail
to the address identified in the citation or a different address identified
by that person.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16)




§ 92.08  ELIMINATION OF VIOLATIONS BY THE CITY.



   In the event that a determination of the Code Enforcement Officer that
the violation(s) described in a citation were committed by the person to whom
the citation was issued becomes final, and the violations identified therein
continue thereafter, the city shall cause those violations to be abated
through either employees of the city or contracts with others.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16)




§ 92.09  VIOLATIONS.



   A violation of this chapter occurs whenever anybody, by either act or
omission, conspires causes, permits, encourages, aids, assists, allows or
engages in any of the acts, actions, behavior, conditions and occurrences
prohibited by this chapter; and each and every separate non-continuing
occurrence thereof, and each and every day of each continuing occurrence
thereof is a separate violation of this chapter.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16)




§ 92.10  OWNERS LIABILITY AND LIEN OF THE CITY.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8840(10), the owner(s) of the property at
the time of the occurrence of violations of this chapter on that property
shall be liable for all civil fines, penalties, charges, abatement costs and
fees assessed for those violations.




   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 65.8840(8), the city shall possess a lien on
all charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement
of this chapter, including abatement costs. The lien shall also include
attorneys’ fees incurred as an additional penalty. The affidavit of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount
of the lien and the regularity of the proceedings, and shall be recorded in
the office of the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from
the time of its recording and shall bear interest thereafter until paid. The
lien created shall take precedence provided in KRS 65.8840(9). The city shall
possess the lien for ten years following the date of the final,
non-appealable order of the Board or final judgment of the court. The lien
may be enforced by judicial proceeding.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.11  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE FOR IMMINENTLY DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Any property condition which the city reasonably determines to
be imminently dangerous to the health and safety of city residents may be
summarily abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.




   (B)   Actions taken to abate imminently dangerous property
conditions may include, but are not limited to. repair, removal, or
demolition of the condition creating the danger and/or the restriction from
use or occupancy of the property on which the dangerous condition exists or
any other abatement actions determined by the city to be necessary.




   (C)   (1)   Whenever the city determines that summary abatement
is justified by an imminently dangerous condition, circumstance, or
occurrence, the city shall give reasonable notice, not to exceed five
business days, to the property owner as to the nuisance and prior to the
demolition of any unfit or unsafe structure, the property owner shall be
afforded the right to a hearing before the Mayor or his or her designee.




      (2)   If the property owner cannot be located or the owner
fails to take prompt appropriate action to abate the condition, the city may
proceed to take abatement action authorized in this section to the extent
necessary to remedy the immediate danger without further notice or right to a
prior hearing.




   (D)   (1)   Whenever the city takes action to abate imminently
dangerous property conditions, the property owner shall be liable for all
costs of such abatement. Charges for nuisance abatement shall be a lien upon
the premises. Whenever a bill for charges remains unpaid for 14 days after it
has been rendered, the City Clerk/Treasurer may file with the County Clerk a
statement of lien claims. This statement/affidavit shall contain a legal
description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred, the date the
nuisance was abated, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this
amount. The affidavit of the authorized city officer shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the
proceedings. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of the
recording and shall bear interest at 6% per annum thereafter until paid.
Notice of the lien shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her
address is known. However, failure to record the claim or to mail the notice,
or the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien for charges.




      (2)   The lien shall take precedence over all other liens,
except state, county, school board, and city taxes, and the city may bring a
civil action against the owner and have the same remedies as provided for the
recovery of a debt owed. The city’s lien shall include the costs incurred
in all legal actions necessary to foreclose the lien, which costs shall
include reasonable attorneys’ fees.




   (E)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid imminent danger
abatement charges shall be sold for nonpayment, and the proceeds of the sale
shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in
the foreclosure of statutory liens. This foreclosure shall be in equity in
the name of the city.




   (F)   The City Attorney is authorized to institute such proceedings
in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over the matter
against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid for 14 days after
it has been rendered, upon direction by the Mayor.





(Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES



§ 92.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words or phrases shall
have the meaning prescribed below.




   “ABATE.”  To repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy
a condition that constitutes a violation of this subchapter by such means and
in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable city department
director or designee(s) determines is necessary in the interest of the
general health, safety and welfare of the community.




   “CONTROL.”  The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate,
counteract or govern property, or conduct that occurs on a property.




   “CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.”  Any real property on which any
combination of three or more nuisance activities occur or exist during any
90-day period.




   “DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY.”  Any unlawful activity at a property that
consists of the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession or giving
away of any controlled substance as defined under KRS Chapters 217 and 218A,
legend drug as defined in KRS chapter 217, or imitation controlled substance
as defined in KRS Chapters 217 and 218A.




   “NUISANCE ACTIVITY.” 




   (A)   Means and includes:

      (1)   Any nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance
occurring on, around or near a property, including but not limited to,
violations of the following laws and regulations:




         (a)   Abandoned and junk vehicles;




         (b)   Fire prevention;




         (c)   Health and sanitation;




         (d)   International Property Maintenance Code as adopted
by the city in § 150.02;




         (e)   Noise control;




         (f)   Animals;




         (g)   Nuisances;




         (h)   Building regulations;




         (i)   Violations of § 92.03.




      (2)   Any criminal conduct as defined by state law or local
ordinance occurring on, around or near a property, including but not limited
to, the following activities or behaviors:




         (a)   Stalking;




         (b)   Harassment;




         (c)   Failure to disperse;




         (d)   Disorderly conduct;




         (e)   Assault;




         (f)   Reckless endangerment;




         (g)   Prostitution;




         (h)   Patronizing a prostitute;




         (i)   Public disturbance noises;




         (j)   Any firearms or dangerous weapons violations;




         (k)   Drug-related loitering;




         (l)   Any dangerous animal violations; and




         (m)   Any drug-related activity.




      (3)   Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter:




         (a)   Contact made to police or other emergency
services, if:




            i.   The contact was made with the intent to
prevent or respond to domestic violence, sexual violence, or any non-criminal
emergency situation;




            ii.   The intervention of emergency assistance was
needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence, sexual violence, or a
non-criminal emergency situation; or




            iii.   The contact was made by, on behalf of, or
concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was
related to that individual's disability.




         (b)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened
domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or
guest occurring in the dwelling unit on the premises.




   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, “NUISANCE ACTIVITY” shall
not include conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and
had no control over the criminal act.




   “PERSON.”  A natural person, joint venture, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the
manager, lessee, agent, officer or employee of any of them.




   “PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR PROPERTY” or “PERSON RESPONSIBLE.” 
Unless otherwise defined, any person who has titled ownership of the property
or structure subject to this subchapter, an occupant in control of the
property or structure subject to this subchapter, a developer, builder,
business operator or owner who is developing, building or operating a
business on the property or in a structure subject to this subchapter, and/or
any person who has control over the property and allows a violation of this
subchapter to continue.




   “PREMISES AND PROPERTY.”  May be used interchangeably, mean any
public or private building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate
or land, or portion thereof, including property used as residential property.




   “RENTAL UNIT.”  Any structure or that part of a structure,
including but not limited to, a single-family home, room or apartment rented
to another and used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more
persons




(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)



§ 92.21  PROHIBITION.



   (A) Any property within the city that is a chronic nuisance property is
declared a public nuisance, in violation of this subchapter and subject to
the remedies provided herein; and




   (B)   Any person responsible for property who permits property to be
a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)



§ 92.22  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE FOR CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES.



   (A)   When the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee(s),
receives documentation or information confirming the occurrence of three or
more nuisance activities within a 90-day period on or at any premises or
property, the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee(s), shall
review such documentation or information to determine whether it describes
the nuisance activities enumerated in this subchapter.  Upon such a finding,
the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee(s), shall warn the
person responsible for such property, in writing, that the property is in
danger of being declared a chronic nuisance property.




   (B)   The warning shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall contain:




      (1)   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;




      (2)   A concise description of the nuisance activities that
exist or have occurred on the property;




      (3)   A demand that the person responsible for the property
respond to the notice, within ten days of its service, to discuss the
nuisance activities and create a plan to abate the chronic nuisance;




      (4)   Offer the person responsible an opportunity to abate the
nuisance activities giving rise to the violation; and




      (5)   A statement describing that the property could be
subject to closure and civil penalties and/or costs assessed up to $200 per
day if the property is declared a chronic nuisance property.




   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee(s), shall
serve, or cause to be served, the warning and notice to abate upon the person
responsible by certified mail, return receipt requested, or may personally
serve the person responsible in accordance with the procedures set forth in
KRS 65.8825.




   (D)   If the person responsible fails to respond to the warning
within the time prescribed, the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her
designee(s), shall issue a notice declaring the property to be a chronic
nuisance property, and post such notice at the property and issue the person
responsible a citation for a civil infraction, punishable by a maximum
penalty of $200.  If the personal responsible fails to respond to the
warning, notice or citation, the matter shall be referred for enforcement.




   (E)   If the person responsible responds as required by the notice
and agrees to abate the nuisance activity, the Code Enforcement Officer, or
his or her designee(s), and the person responsible, may work out an
agreed-upon course of action that would abate the nuisance activity. If an
agreed-upon course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance
activities, or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached, the matter
shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Board, or other city enforcement
board or agency and any additional appropriate entity or office, for
appropriate official enforcement action.  Provided, that in the event the
Code of Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee(s), determine that the
person responsible has taken reasonable steps to abate the nuisance activity,
the city shall not commence an enforcement action under this subchapter,
notwithstanding the continuance of the nuisance activity.




   (F)   It is a defense to an action for chronic nuisance property
that the person responsible, at all material times, could not, in spite of
the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to
the determination that the property is chronic nuisance property.




(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.23  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A violation of this subchapter constitutes a civil offense. 
In addition to other remedies set out in this subchapter or by statute,
should the chronic nuisance property not be abated at the time stated in the
notice to abate, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to issue
any appropriate citation.  Upon failure of the property owner to request a
hearing before the Fort Wright Nuisance Hearing Board, an order may be issued
condemning and vacating the premises, or portions thereof, to the extent
necessary to abate the chronic nuisance property.  Any close and vacate
order shall be for a period of less than one year from the date of closing
and rescind within 14 days of an abatement.  If the property consists of
multi-unit dwellings, and the nuisance activity has occurred solely within a
single unit, the condemnation and vacate order may be limited to the single
unit.




   (B)   Upon the issuance of any order provided for in this section, a
copy of the order shall be served on the owner of the property in the same
manner as the warning, and shall be conspicuously posted on the property.




   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the city from
pursuing additional remedies, including judicial actions provided by statute
or common law, to enjoin or otherwise remedy the chronic nuisance.




(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 06-14, passed 6-4-14; Am. Ord. 13-2016,
passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.24  SUMMARY CLOSURE.



   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits the city from taking any emergency
action for the summary closure of such property when it is necessary to avoid
an immediate threat to public welfare and safety.



(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)



§ 92.25  PENALTY UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   Upon the failure of the property owner to comply with an order to close
and vacate, the Code Enforcement Department may prohibit the furnishing of
utility service, including but not limited to, gas, electric, water and
heating oil, to the premises by any public utility holding a franchise to use
the streets and public ways of the city; revoke the certificate of occupancy
of the premises; or use any other legal remedy available under the laws of
the state.



(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)



§ 92.26  RELIEF FROM ORDER.



   The Code Official may vacate or suspend the provisions of an order to
close and vacate upon a showing, by clear and convincing evidence, that the
nuisance activity has been abated and will not be maintained or permitted on
the property or a unit thereof.



(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11)



§ 92.27  LIEN.



   Pursuant to KRS 65.8840(8), the city shall possess a lien on all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of
this chapter, including abatement costs. The lien shall also include
attorneys' fees incurred as an additional penalty. The affidavit of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of
the lien and the regularity of the proceedings, and shall be recorded in the
office of the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all person from the
time of its recording and shall bear interest thereafter until paid. The lien
created shall take precedence over all other liens, except state, county,
school board, and city taxes, except as provided in KRS 65.8840(9). The city
shall possess the lien for ten years following the date of the final,
non-appealable order of the Board or final judgment of the court. The lien
may be enforced by judicial proceeding.





(Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord. 13-2016, passed --)




§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil offense. Each separate violation of this chapter is
hereby classified as a civil offense; and the penalties to be imposed upon
persons determined to have violated this chapter are hereby established as
follows:




      (1)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed for each
separate violation of this chapter is hereby established at $500 for a first
violation, $750 for a second occurrence of the same violation, and $1,000 for
the third and each subsequent occurrence of the same violation plus the costs
of collection, including, without limitation, court costs and attorney fees;
and




      (2)   The specific civil fine that shall be imposed for each
separate violation of this chapter in the event that a citation for that
violation is not contested is hereby established at $100 for a first
violation, $250 for a second occurrence of the same violation, and $500 for
the third and each subsequent occurrence of the same violation, plus the
costs of collection, including, without limitation, court costs and attorney
fees.




   (B)   Criminal offense. Each violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor for which everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the
maximum amount of $500 as set forth in KRS 534.050(2)(a) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of 12 months as set forth in
KRS 532.090(1), or both.




   (C)   In an addition to an order condemning and vacating the
property, a maximum civil penalty shall be imposed for any violation of §§
92.20 et seq. However, if the responsible party does not appeal the citation
to the Fort Wright Nuisance Hearing Board, then the civil penalty may be
reduced.





(Ord. 454-1992, passed 2-5-92; Am. Ord. 07-11, passed 11-2-11; Am. Ord.
06-14, passed 6-4-14; Am. Ord. 15-2015, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 13-2016,
passed --)




CHAPTER 93:  FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION




Section






   Fireworks






   93.01   Definitions; legality of items





   93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display





   93.03   Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale





   93.04   Bond or liability insurance requirement





   93.05   Exempted sales and uses





   93.06   Destruction of fireworks






Fire Prevention






   93.20   Blasting permit





   93.21   Storage of flammables and other matter





   93.22   Open burning of trash





   93.23   Obstruction of hydrants or gas cut-off valves






Smoke Detectors










   93.30   Definitions





   93.31   Smoke detectors required





   93.32   Type and placement





   93.33   Installation and maintenance





   93.34   Supplemental standards





   93.35   Enforcement





   93.36   Certification of compliance






   93.99   Penalty




FIREWORKS



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.



   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, “FIREWORKS” means any
composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the
definition of “consumer fireworks”as defined in division (B) or
“display” fireworks as defined in division (D) and as set forth in the
U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT) hazardous materials regulations.



 



      (1)   Exception number 1:  Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns,
or other devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance
with DOT regulations, and packed and shipped according to said regulations,
are not considered to be fireworks and shall be allowed to be used and sold
at all times.



 



      (2)   Exception number 2:  Model rockets and model rocket
motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable
aero models are not considered to be fireworks.



 



      (3)   Exception number 3:  Propelling or expelling charges
consisting of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter are not considered
as being designed for producing audible effects.



(KRS 227.700)



 



   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, “CONSUMER
FIREWORKS” means fireworks that are suitable for use by the public,
designed primarily to produce visible effects by combustion, and comply with
the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission. The types, sizes, and amount of
pyrotechnic contents of these devices are limited as enumerated in this
chapter.  Some small devices designed to produce audible effects are
included, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing 50 milligrams
or less of explosive composition, and aerial devices containing 130
milligrams or less of explosive composition.  “CONSUMER FIREWORKS” are
further defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 CPSC,
16 C.F.R. Pts 1500 and 1507, are classified as division 1.4 explosives by the
U.S. Department of Transportation and include the following:



 



      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.



 



         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler.  These
devices consist a metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with
pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower
of sparks is produced.  Sparklers may contain up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition per item.  Those devices containing any perchlorate or chlorate
salts may not exceed five grams of pyrotechnic composition per item.  Wire
sparklers which contain no magnesium and which contain less than 100 grams of
composition per item are not included in this category, in accordance with
DOT regulations.



 



         (b)   Cylindrical fountain.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than 75 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition, a shower of colored sparks, and sometimes a whistling effect or
smoke, is produced.  This device may be provided with a spike for insertion
into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or plastic base for placing on the
ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard handle, if intended to be
hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one tube is mounted on a common
base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if
the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least
1/2 inch.



 



         (c)   Cone fountain.  Cardboard or heavy paper cone
containing up to 50 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  The effect is the
same as that of a cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is mounted on
a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or
500 grams of the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a
distance of at least 1/2 inch.



 



         (d)   Illuminating torch.  Cylindrical tube containing
up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition, colored fire is
produced.  May be spike, base, or hand- held. When more than one tube is
mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed
200 grams, or 500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the
base by a distance of at least 1/2 inch.



 



         (e)   Wheel.  A device attached to a post or tree by
means of a nail or string.  A wheel may have one or more drivers, each of
which may contain not more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  No
wheel contain more than 200 grams total pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition, the wheel revolves, producing a shower of color and sparks and,
sometimes, a whistling effect.



 



         (f)   Ground spinner.  Small device containing not more
than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a wheel but
intended to be placed on the ground and ignited.  A shower of sparks and
color is produced by the rapidly spinning device.



 



         (g)   Flitter sparkler.  Narrow paper tube attached to
a stick or wire and filled with not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition. The paper at one
end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.



 



         (h)   Toy smoke device.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon
ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.



 



      (2)   Aerial devices.



 



         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Sky rockets
contain a wooden stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air upon
ignition.  A burst of color or noise or both is produced at the height of
flight.



 



         (b)   Missile-type rocket.  A device similar to a sky
rocket in size, composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a stick
for guidance and stability.



 



         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner.  A tube containing up
to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  A propeller or blade is attached,
which, upon ignition, lifts the rapidly spinning device into the air.  A
visible or audible effect is produced at the height of flight.



 



         (d)   Roman candles.  Heavy paper or cardboard tube
containing up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition, up to
ten stars (pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright
color) are individually expelled at several second intervals.



 



         (e)   Mine, shell.  Heavy cardboard or paper tube
usually attached to a wood or plastic base and containing up to 60 grams of
total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible or audible
effect composition).  Upon ignition, “stars,” components producing
reports containing up to 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report,
or other devices are propelled into the air.  The term “mine” refers to
a device with no internal components containing a bursting charge, and the
term “shell” refers to a device that propels a component that
subsequently bursts open in the air.  A mine or shell device may contain
more than one tube provided the tubes fire in sequence upon ignition of one
external fuse.  The term “cake” refers to a dense-packed collection of
mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition including lift charges of any
multiple tube devices may not exceed 200 grams. The maximum quantity of lift
charge in any one tube of a mine or shell device shall not exceed 20 grams,
and the maximum quality of break or bursting charge in any component shall
not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical composition in the component.



 



         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube.  A package kit
containing a cardboard, high-density polyethylene (HDPE, or equivalent
launching tube with multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is limited
to a maximum of 60 grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, bust
charge, and visible or audible effect composition), and the maximum diameter
of each shell shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches. In addition, the maximum
quantity of lift charge in any shell shall not exceed 20 grams, and the
maximum quantity of break or bursting charge in any shell shall not exceed
25% of the total weight of chemical composition in the shell.  The total
chemical composition of all the shells in the kit, including lift charge,
shall not exceed 400 grams.  The user lower a shell into the launching tube,
at the time of firing, with the fusing extending out of the top of the
tube.  After the firing, the tube is then reloaded with another shell for
the next firing.  All launching tubes shall be capable of firing twice the
number of shells in the kit without failure of the tube.  Each package of
multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning label requirements
of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.



 



      (3)   Audible ground devices.



 



         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes.  Small paper-wrapped or
cardboard tube containing not more than 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic
composition.  Those used in aerial devices may contain not more than 130
milligrams of explosive composition per report.  Upon ignition, noise and a
flash of light is produced.



 



         (b)   Chaser.  Small paper or cardboard tube that
travels along the ground upon ignition.  A whistling effect, or other noise,
is often produced.  The explosive composition used to create the noise may
not exceed 50 milligrams.



(KRS 227.702)



 



   (C)   Items listed below are classified as “NOVELTIES” and
“TRICK NOISEMAKERS” and are not classified as consumer fireworks by the
U.S. Department of Transportation and their transportation, storage, retail
sale, possession, sale, and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all
times.



 



      (1)   Snake, glow worm.  Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic
composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning.  The ash
expands in length as the pellet burns.  These devices may not contain
mercuric thiocyanate.



 



      (2)   Smoke device.  Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the
primary effect.



 



      (3)   Wire sparkler.  Wire coated with pyrotechnic
composition that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition.  These items may
not contain magnesium and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per
item.  Devices containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed
five grams of composition per item.



 



      (4)   Trick noisemaker.  Item that produces a small report
intended to surprise the user.  These devices include:



 



         (a)   Party popper.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is
friction sensitive.  A string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite
it, expelling paper streamers and producing a small report.



 



         (b)   Booby trap.  Small tube with string protruding
from both ends, similar to a party popper in design.  The ends of the string
are pulled to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small
report.



 



         (c)   Snapper.  Small, paper-wrapped item containing a
minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand.  When
dropped, the device explodes producing a small report.



 



         (d)   Trick match.  Kitchen or book match that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition of the match a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.



 



         (e)   Cigarette load.  Small wooden peg that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive composition.  Upon ignition of a
cigarette containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced.



 



         (f)   Auto burglar alarm.  Tube which contains
pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when
ignited.  A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams may
also be used to produce a small report.  A squib is used to ignite the
device.



(KRS 227.704)



 



   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, “DISPLAY
FIREWORKS” means pyrotechnic devices or large fireworks designed primarily
to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or
detonation.  This term includes, but is not limited to, firecrackers
containing more than two grains (130 milligrams) of explosive composition,
aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and
other display pieces which exceed the limits for classification as consumer
fireworks.  Display fireworks are defined by the Consumer Product Safety
Commission in CPSC, 16 C.F.R. Pts. 1500 and 1507, and are classified as class
B explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation.



(KRS 227.706)



 



   (E)   Legality of items.



 



      (1)    Items described in division (B)(1) above are legal for
retail sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with
respect thereto are met.



 



      (2)   Items described in divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), and (D) are
not legal for retail sale but are legal under permits granted pursuant to
this chapter for the purposes specified in this chapter for public displays
and may be sold at wholesale as provided in this chapter.



 



      (3)   Items described in division (C) are legal for retail
sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect
thereto are met.



(KRS 227.708)



 



   (F)   Age requirement.  No person or business shall give, offer for
sale, or sell any consumer fireworks listed in KRS 227.702 to any person
under eighteen (18) years of age.



(KRS 227.715)



§ 93.02  SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.



   No person, firm, co-partnership or corporation shall offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell, possess, use, or
explode, any display fireworks, except as follows:



 



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized
city official may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks
by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or
groups of individuals. 



 



      (2)   Every display shall be handled by a competent display
operator to be approved by the public official by whom the permit is granted,
and shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the
opinion of the official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person.



 



      (3)   “COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR” shall be defined as the
person with overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a
fireworks display.  The competent display operator shall have a Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) License and have
participated as an assistant in firing at least five public displays.  A
“competent display operator” is also an employee possessor.  A permit
under division (1) shall be issued only to a competent display operator
holding an ATF license.



 



      (4)   At least one competent display operator shall be on site
during display set- up and firing.  This complement display operator shall
maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by the local authority
having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site and at all times
the display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of the State Fire
Marshal or local Fire Chief.  All public displays that require issuance of a
permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of National Fire
Protection Association (NEPA) 1123 Code for Fireworks Display (adopted
edition).



 



      (5)   Permits shall be filed with the office of the State Fire
Marshal at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display. 
After this privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose
only.  No permit granted under this subsection shall be transferable.  For
the purpose of this section, “public display of fireworks” shall include
the use of pyrotechnic devices or pyrotechnic materials before a proximate
audience, whether indoors or outdoors.



 



      (6)   Any person remaining within the display area shall be
identified as licensed by the ATF, or an employee thereof, or be an assistant
in training to become a competent display operator.  All persons remaining
within the display area shall be at least 18 years of age.



 



      (7)   The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings
and Construction with recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall
promulgate administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 13A to
administer the provisions of this division. The regulations shall address the
process by which permits are issued and any other procedures that are
reasonably necessary to effectuate this division.



 



   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, and Explosives if the sale is to a person holding a display permit
as outlined in subsection (A) of this section.  The permit holder shall
present the permit along with other verifiable identification at the time of
sale.



 



   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license
issued by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.



 



   (D)   The sale, and use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic
signaling devices and distress signals for marine, aviation, and highway use.



 



   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads.



 



   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or
theater or for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports.



 



   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations.



 



   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the
direct supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent
or local agency.



 



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm,
co-partnership, non-profit, or corporation from offering for sale, exposing
for sale, selling at retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using
consumer fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702 as permitted pursuant to KRS
227.715.




(KRS 227.710)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.03  CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 93.02, the consumer fireworks
described in KRS 227.702 may be offered for sale, sold at retail, or kept
with the intent to sell, only if the requirements of this section are met.



 



   (B)   Any person firm, co-partnership, non-profit, or business
intending to sell consumer fireworks described in KRS 227.702(1) shall
register annually with the State Fire Marshal's office in accordance with KRS
227.715, and display its registration certificate in a conspicuous location
at the site.



 



   (C)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the International Building Code, with
Kentucky Amendments (adopted edition), and NFPA 1124 (National Fire
Protection Association) Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage,
and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted addition);



 



   (D)   No person or business shall give, offer for sale, or sell any
consumer fireworks listed in § 93.01(B) to any person under 18 years of age.



 



   (E)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed by a fireworks
distribution facility, or manufacturing facility.  No person under 18 years
of age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer fireworks retail sales
facility registered under KRS 227.715 unless the individual is supervised by
a parent or guardian.




(KRS 227.715 (7) through (9)) Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.04  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.




   No permit shall be issued under § 93.02 unless the applicant shall
give bond or evidence of liability insurance deemed adequate by the official
to whom application for the permit is made, in a sum not less than
$1,000,000.  However, the appropriate city official or the State Fire
Marshal may require a larger amount if in their judgment the situation
requires it, conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused
thereby either to a person or to property by reason of the permitted display,
and arising from any acts of the licensee, his agents, employees or
subcontractors.





(KRS 227.720)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.05  EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.




   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of
explosives or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or
industry, or gold star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or
chlorate, toy snakes which contain no mercury, smoke novelties and party
novelties, which contain less than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of
explosive mixture, or shells or cartridges, used as ammunition in firearms,
or blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal or ceremonial
purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations, or the
sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be shipped by the
seller directly out of the state.





(KRS 227.730)




§ 93.06  DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having
jurisdiction which has been deputized to act on behalf of the state fire
marshal, shall cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks which are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a
period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid
to a properly certified fireworks wholesaler.



 



   (B)   After a period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered
for sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer, distributor, or
wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class 1.3G or "Display"
designation shall require the notification of the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The state fire marshal shall
provide the owner or possessor a receipt containing the complete inventory of
any fireworks seized within five business days of the seizure.



 



   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:



 



      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the
state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall give notice by registered
mail or personal service to the owner of the state fire marshal's intention
to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the state
fire marshal's intent. The state fire marshal shall conduct an administrative
hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the disposal of
fireworks; or



 



      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is
not known to the state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall cause to be
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
seizure was made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal's
intention to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once
each week for three consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of the
fireworks within ten days of the date of the last publication, the state fire
marshal may proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim
the fireworks within ten (10) days of the date of the last publication, a
hearing as set out in division (A) shall be held.



 



   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local
government from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks
within its jurisdiction.



(KRS 227.750)




FIRE PREVENTION




§ 93.20  BLASTING PERMIT.




   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the authorized city
official.  The authorized city official, before granting such permit may
require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other
persons against injury or damages which might result from the proposed
blasting.





Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.21  STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.




   (A)  All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and
stored in a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.






   (B)  Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any
material of a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar
or any other portion of any building of any kind.  Proper fireproof
receptacles shall be provided for such hazardous materials.






   (C)  No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which impedes
or prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.





Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.22  OPEN BURNING OF TRASH.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer the open burning or
cause to be burned, in or upon property or land within the confines of the
city, trash, foliage, or other debris, except as herein provided.






   (B)   The Fire Chief or his designee shall issue Burning Permits in
accordance with Section C and D of this section.  The Fire Chief shall
revoke permits in accordance with Section E.






   (C)   The following regulations controlling open burning are in
accordance with local, state, and federal laws, and accepted safety practices
of safety organizations such as the National Fire Protection Association:






      (1)   Fire in non-combustible containers shall be a minimum of
15 feet from any structure.






      (2)   All other open fires must be a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from any structures, and provisions must be made to assure that the fire
will not spread to within fifty (50) feet of any structure.






      (3)   All open burning shall be attended at all times by a
responsible adult until the fire is extinguished.






      (4)   All fires must be extinguished by 5:00 p.m.






      (5)   Appropriate fir extinguishing equipment (i.e. garden
hose, fire extinguishers, etc.) must be available for immediate use at all
open fires.  This requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the
issuing person, it is not practical and the fire is far enough away from any
other combustibles to allow it to spread.






      (6)   Open burning shall not be used for waste disposal
purposes, except for felled trees and brush.  There is excepted from this
provision fires for the disposal of hazardous or toxic materials when the
E.P.A. determines that there is not practical alternative method of disposal.






      (7)   Burning permits for large-scale clearing: When large
piles will be burned, the permittee must use a mechanical blower of the type
to accelerate clean burning.  This blower must be approved by an official
from the Fort Wright Fire Department prior to starting the fire.  EPA
regulations state that the emissions from such fires shall have at least
forty (40%) percent opacity.  There shall also be at least one piece of
earth moving equipment, with an operator, on the site until the fire is
completely extinguished.  This piece of equipment shall be capable of
covering the burn site quickly in case an emergency arises.  The 5:00 p.m.
extinguishes time may be waived if thee will be someone in attendance at all
times until the fire is completely out.






      (8)   Permitted bonfires shall use only seasoned dry firewood
as fuel and shall not exceed five feet by five feet by five feet in size.  A
small quantity of paper may be used to start the bonfire.  The size may be
increased if it is necessary for longer duration and proper fire safety
requirements are met.






      (9)   Permits are not needed for the following: outdoor
cooking fires, outdoor fireplaces, hand-warming fires in non-combustible
containers, smudge pots and similar occupational needs.






      (10)   Burning shall not be permitted on Sundays and holidays.





Penalty, see § 93.99(D)






   (D)   Procedures for obtaining/issuing permits.






      (1)   Permit applications must be filled out and returned to
the Fire Department at least three (3) working days prior to the intended
burn date. The application shall contain the name/legal entity requesting the
right to burn, their address, social security number or tax identification
number, date of birth, title/occupation of individual acting for a legal
entity, the date, location, time, materials and reason for burning.  The
person requesting the permit will be required to acknowledge the procedures
regarding open burning.






      (2)   The individual executing the permit for any legal entity
shall acknowledge individual acceptance for citation violations and criminal
violations of this section, and acknowledge that the agents or employees
present and/or in control of the burning site will be cited for violations. 
The issuing officer must inspect the site of the burn prior to issuing the
permit and return the applicant's portion of the permit at least one (1) day
prior to the burn date.  If the burn date would need to be changed after the
permit is issued due to extenuating circumstances, it may be done by
telephone or verbally if necessary.  Extended permits may be given for
things such as construction sites where burning will be conducted several
days.  The Fire department's portion of the permit will be kept on file at
least sixty (60) days after the actual burn date.  The following agencies
must be notified: Fort Wright Police, Fort Wright City Office Staff, Kenton
County Emergency Dispatch Center, any neighboring departments that may be
affected.






      (3)   Individuals or entities who have been cited in violation
of this section, or who have had permits revoked for failure to comply with
the provisions of this section on one (1) or more occasion, may be denied
future permits.






      (4)   A bond to assure compliance with the burning regulations
may be required prior to the issuance of a permit at the discretion of the
Fire Chief or his designee in an amount no to exceed one-thousand dollars
($1,000.00).






      (5)   The Fire Department shall keep a permanent file of all
revoked permits and citations of this section for future reference.






   (E)   Procedures for suspension and/or revocation of permits:






      (1)   The Fire Chief or his designee shall have the authority
to revoke or suspend a permit for failure to comply with these rules and
regulations.  If neither the Fire Chief nor an appropriate designee are
available, a police officer shall have this authority.






      (2)   A permit may be suspended to allow time to correct
unsafe conditions.  A permit may also be suspended for unsafe conditions in
the area, such as drought, high winds, o other emergencies.






      (3)   A permit may be revoked for not complying with the
regulations set forth in this section, or refusal to comply with orders to
correct unsafe conditions.  When  permit is revoked, the fire shall be
immediately extinguished.






      (4)   Notification of suspension or revocation shall be done
immediately by verbal means, and followed by written notification as quickly
as possible.  Reasons for such actions shall be given, and recorded on the
permit.






      (5)   When extinguishment of a fire is required by this
section, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee.  if they are not
available or capable, or if they refuse, the fire department shall extinguish
the fire and the permittee shall be responsible for the cost as set forth in
a schedule on file at the fire department.






      (6)   All revoked permits shall be kept in a separate
permanent file for future reference when issuing permits.






   (F)   Enforcement.  The requirements of this section shall be
enforced through the city police department and/or the chief of the fire
department by citation.





('77 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 255-1981, passed 10-28-81; Am. Ord. 471-1993, passed
4-7-93)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.23  OBSTRUCTION OF HYDRANTS OR GAS CUT-OFF VALVES.




   It shall be unlawful for any occupant or owner of real estate within
the city to permit fire protection water hydrants and gas cut-off valves
located on or in front of their property to become covered with earth,
foliage, or other matter or to become hidden or partially hidden from public
view.





('77 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 194(LH), passed 5-11-64)  Penalty, see § 93.99




SMOKE DETECTORS



§ 93.30  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "DWELLING UNIT."  Any group of rooms located within a building,
including mobile homes, and forming a single housekeeping unit with
facilities which are used or designed to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating.






   "DWELLING."  Any building which contains one or more dwelling units or
any rooming unit, rooms, or area designated or used for sleeping purposes,
either as a primary use or use on casual occasions.





"DWELLING" shall include a rooming house, motels, tourist homes, school
dormitories, apartment buildings, and condominiums but not the exclusion of
other dwelling units.






   "OWNER."  Any person or legal entity who alone, jointly, or severally
with others:






      (1)   Shall have all or part of the legal title to any
dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof, or shall have all or part of the beneficial ownership of any
dwelling or dwelling unit and a right to present use and enjoyment thereof,
including a mortgage in possession; or






      (2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit as owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian of
the estate, or duly authorized agent of the owner.  Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the owner's
obligations under this section.






   "ROOMING UNIT."  Any room which is designed or used for sleeping
purposes.  A rooming unit may include a room in a rooming house, a hotel, a
motel, a tourist home, a school dormitory, or an apartment building which may
or may not have some additional facilities for eating or cooking contained
therein.





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)




§ 93.31  SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.




   (A)  Subject to such exceptions and conditions for compliance as
stated herein, six months after the effective date of this subchapter, smoke
detectors shall be required in all dwellings privately owned or rented for
occupancy.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new or
existing occupied dwelling unit to install smoke detectors in each dwelling
unit as hereinafter provided.  The smoke detectors shall be capable of
sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion and providing a suitable
audible (or visual for the deaf or hearing-impaired) alarm.






   (B)  This subchapter shall apply to any and all dwellings or dwelling
units, new or existing, which do not fall under the jurisdiction of the
currently adopted Kentucky Building Code or the currently adopted Life Safety
Code (LSC 101).





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.32  TYPE AND PLACEMENT.




   (A)  In order to comply with this subchapter, only ionization or
photoelectric type detectors approved by a nationally-recognized testing
laboratory shall be installed.  As an alternative to self-contained smoke
detectors, under certain limited conditions (i.e., battery-powered smoke
detectors), an approved fire detection system or a combination thereof may be
installed.  The City Fire Inspector may subjectively, and on a case-by-case
basis, approve each and every alternative system in written form.






   (B)  Smoke detectors in new residential dwellings shall be wired
directly (hard wired) to the building's power supply.  In existing
buildings, it is preferred that smoke detectors be wired directly to the
power supply; however, the detectors may be powered by self-monitored battery
or operated by an electrical plug-in outlet which is fitted with a plug
restrainer device, provided that the outlet is not controlled by any switch
other than the main power supply.






   (C)  Smoke detectors shall be placed in accordance with applicable
N.F.P.A. Standards (see § 93.34).  Detectors may be ceiling or wall
mounted, provided that if wall mounted they shall be within 12 inches, but
not closer than six inches, of the ceiling.






   (D)  At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each
sleeping area.  A sleeping area is defined as the area or areas of the
dwelling unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are located.  Where
bedrooms or rooms ordinarily used for sleeping are separated by other used
areas (such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets), they
shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purposes of this
section.  In a dwelling unit which contains a well-defined sleeping room
separated from the other activity areas of the same unit, the detector shall
be located in the corridor within the unit or interior area giving direct
access to the rooms used for sleeping purposes.  Where sleeping areas are
separated or where a single smoke detector will not adequately service all
sleeping areas, there shall be smoke detectors installed adjacent to each
sleeping area.






   (E)  In a rooming unit, the detector shall be centrally located on the
ceiling.






   (F)  In a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or any
rooming unit, in addition to the requirements for individual smoke detectors
in each dwelling unit or rooming unit, detectors shall be placed in centrally
located common areas, so that smoke detectors will adequately service all
sleeping areas.





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.33  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.




   (A)  The owner of the dwelling shall be responsible for supplying and
installing in an operable condition the required detectors and for providing
maintenance and testing in an owner- occupied residence; or for providing the
manufacturer's maintenance and testing instructions to a tenant in the case
of rental property.






   (B)  The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for maintenance and
testing of detectors, in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, which
are located in common areas or detectors in rooming units where the tenant
usually has short periods of occupancy (hotels, motels, rooming or tourist
homes).






   (C)  The tenant shall be responsible for maintaining and testing the
detector, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, which are
within his exclusive control during the life of the tenancy. The tenant shall
be responsible for notifying, in writing, the owner when a detector becomes
inoperable, whereafter the owner has ten days in which to repair or replace
in operable condition the detector.  In the battery-operated type of
detector, battery replacement shall be the responsibility of the tenant.






   (D)  At every change of tenancy, it shall be the duty of the owner to
test and ascertain that those detectors contained in the unit are in operable
condition, and if not, the owner shall be responsible for placing them in
operable condition prior to re-renting the unit.






   (E)  At every change of occupancy of every dwelling unit occasioned by
or incidental to a sale, lease or sub-lease of the unit, it shall be the duty
of the grantor thereof (i.e., the seller, lessor or sub-lessor, as the case
may be) to provide, before occupancy, to the new occupant that all smoke
detectors as required by this section (or other applicable laws) are
installed and in proper working condition.  Failure to comply with this
division shall be punishable as set forth herein; provided, however, that
this division shall not be construed to violate or render void any contract,
lease, or sub-lease subject hereto.






   (F)  No smoke detector or alternative system shall be directly
connected (permanently wired) to the electrical system of a structure without
the proper electrical certification.





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.34  SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS.




   This subchapter is intended to be used with, and supplemented by, the
applicable provisions of the National Fire Protection Standards Nos. 72-E and
74 (current edition) which are hereby incorporated herein; however, if there
shall be any conflict between this subchapter and the supplemental standards,
this subchapter and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall
prevail.  All amendments to or changes in N.F.P.A. Nos. 72-E and 74 shall be
adopted and made part thereof without further reference.





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)




§ 93.35  ENFORCEMENT.




   The requirements of this subchapter shall be enforced through the
officers, employees, and volunteers of the Fire Department of the city; and
all other officers, employees, and the city all information relevant thereto
acquired by them in the course and scope of their employment or association
with the city.  No licenses, permits, or certificates of any kind or nature
shall be issued on behalf of the city in regard to the condition of or any
activity within any dwelling unit unless smoke detectors have been installed
and located therein according to the requirements and specifications hereof.





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)




§ 93.36  CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.




   (A)  All owners of dwellings, dwelling units, or rooming units shall,
within six months of the effective date of this subchapter, certify in
writing on a form to be provided by the Fire Department, to the Chief of the
Fire Department, compliance with this subchapter. The failure of any owner to
so certify compliance shall give rise to a presumption of noncompliance and
shall be grounds for citing the owner under the penalty section hereof.






   (B)  The presumption of noncompliance may be rebutted by evidence
established during an inspection as provided in § 93.99.





(Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)  Penalty, see § 93.99




§ 93.99  PENALTY.




   (A)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not more than $250.






   (B)  Any person violating the provisions of §§ 93.02 or 93.03, the
regulations issued thereunder or any order issued thereunder, or who
knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions
of those sections, shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days, or both.  (KRS 227.990(4))






   (C)  The minimum penalty for noncompliance with §§ 93.30 through
93.36 is $250.  The penalty for noncompliance is automatically waived if the
dwelling unit is brought into compliance with §§ 93.30 through 93.36 within
30 days of the original violation.  The property owner must request an
inspection from the Fire Department to verify compliance and have the waiver
provision applied.  Continued failure to comply may result in a maximum
penalty of $500 or six months in jail.  (Ord.  -1985, passed  -  -85)






   (D)   The penalties for violation of § 93.22 are established as
follows:






      (1)   Large scale burning, as defined in § 93.22(C)(7), First
Offense Class A Misdemeanor, shall carry a fine not to exceed $500.00 and a
jail sentence not to exceed one year.





(KRS 83A.065; 534.040(2); 532.090)






      (2)   All other burnings.






         (a)   First offense - a citation of the violation will
be issued and a fine of $100.00 imposed.






         (b)   Second offense - a citation of the violation will
be issued and a fine of $200.00 imposed.






         (c)   Third offense - a citation of the violation will
be issued and a fine of $250.00 imposed.






         (d)   Offenses after the third offense are classified as
Class A Misdemeanors which shall carry a fine not to exceed $500.00, and a
jail sentence not to exceed one year.





(KRS 83A.065; 534.040(2); 532.090)






      (3)   Each cited burning shall be considered a separate
offense, and each day of the offense shall be cited as a a separate offense.






      (4)   Appeals and enforcement of the administrative citations
shall be through the civil division of the Kenton District Court.





('77 Code, § 7-3)  (Ord. 255-1981, passed 10-28-81; Am. Ord. 471-1993,
passed 4-7-93)




CHAPTER 94:  LITTERING




Section






   94.01   Throwing litter from vehicle





   94.02   Tracking foreign matter on streets and public places





   94.03   Sweeping litter into gutters





   94.04   Litter on private property






   94.99   Penalty




§ 94.01  THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.




   No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon
private property.





Penalty, see § 94.99




§ 94.02  TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES.




   (A)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within
the city unless such vehicle is so constructed and loaded as to prevent any
load, contents, or litter from being thrown or deposited upon any street,
alley, or other public place.  No person, being the owner, driver, or other
person in charge of a vehicle hauling excavated material, coal, coke,
construction or building materials, or other materials within the city shall
permit any part of such material to fall or drop or be blown therefrom on a
city street, alley, or other public place.  When a vehicle carries trash,
sawdust, ashes, cinders, sand, earth, lime, manure, or other substance liable
to be blown away, the owner, driver, or other person in charge thereof shall,
before driving or operating it on any street, alley, or other public place,
cause such substance or substances to be completely covered with a canvas,
duck, or other substantial covering in such manner that the same cannot fall
or be blown from such vehicle.






   (B)  No person shall operate on any street, alley, or other public
place a vehicle with mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter
on its wheels or other parts, if such operation results in the depositing or
tracking of mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter on any street,
alley, or other public place.  No person being the owner of real property or
a prime contractor in charge of a construction site shall maintain such
property or construction site so that vehicles upon the property or
construction site pick up mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign
matter on the wheels or other parts and deposit or track the mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter onto any street, alley, or other
public place.






   (C)  Whenever construction, demolition, excavation, trenching, or
grading by any person creates a condition where mud, dirt, sticky substances,
litter, or foreign matter may be washed upon any street, alley, or other
public place, or tracked upon same by vehicles, the person shall take the
precautionary measures necessary to prevent the mud, dirt, sticky substances,
litter, or foreign matter from being washed or tracked upon the street,
alley, or other public place.






   (D)  Where mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter has
been washed upon or tracked or deposited on any street, alley, or other
public place in violation of this section, it shall be removed, and the
street, alley, or other public place shall be cleaned and cleared so that
same is restored to its original condition by the person or persons
responsible.  If the street is not restored within 12 hours, the City
Administrator is authorized to cause such mud, dirt, substances, litter, or
foreign matter to be cleaned from such street and to charge the cost thereof
to the person or persons responsible.  The cost of cleaning shall be
collected by civil suit. The term "responsible person" as used in this
section shall mean the driver of the vehicle which deposited or tracked the
mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter on the street, or the
driver's employer, or the owner of the real property or prime contractor in
charge of a construction site from where the deposited or tracked mud, dirt,
substances, litter, or foreign matter on the street, alley, or other public
place originated.






   (E)  The city shall have a lien upon the entire property from which
the mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter originated and to
which the offending vehicle was proceeding to secure the costs of removing
same and cleaning the street, alley, or other public place pursuant to this
section, and further to secure the expenses incurred by the city in the
collection of the aforesaid costs.  Such lien may be enforced by an action
for the foreclosure thereof.






   (F)  Any material violation of this section is declared to be an
unsafe and dangerous practice, for which the Building Inspector may issue a
stop-work order.  This action by the Building Inspector shall be in addition
to any other remedies which may be available.





(Ord. 362-1986, passed 8-6-86)  Penalty, see § 94.99




§ 94.03  SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.




   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other
public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.





Penalty, see § 94.99




§ 94.04  LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.




   (A)  No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon streets,
sidewalks, or other public places, or upon any private property.






   (B)  No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant
private property within the city whether owned by that person or not.





Penalty, see § 94.99




§ 94.99  PENALTY.




   (A)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which
no other penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than $500.  Each day the violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.






   (B)  Any person violating any of the provisions of § 94.02 shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than $500.  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.  (Ord. 362-1986, passed 8-6-86)




CHAPTER 95: TREES




Section






   95.01   Definitions





   95.02   Notice of removal





   95.03   Maintenance of trees





   95.04   Permission required for certain actions





   95.05   Private tree planting on public property





   95.06   Tree inventory






   95.99   Penalty




§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   “CITY.”  City of Fort Wright, Kentucky (including any of its
officers, employees, or designated representatives).





   “CITY TREE.”  A tree located on property owned by the city or
located on public right-of-way, which was planted by the city.




   “TREE.”  Any living, self supporting woody or fibrous plant,
usually having a single woody trunk, and having a diameter of not less than
two inches measured at a point four feet above the ground.




(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 563-98, passed 2-4-98; Am. Ord.
03-2018, passed 3-7-18)




§ 95.02  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   Any public utility serving the city with overhead services shall have
the right to remove city trees, without prior approval of the city, only when
an emergency exists and when obtaining the prior approval of the city is not
practical.  All public utilities with overhead services shall coordinate all
non-emergency tree trimming activities with the city staff that are
reasonably required for the purpose of providing the appropriate utility
service or to avoid danger to the public or overhead utility personnel or
equipment pursuant to the requirements contained in the franchise agreements
as authorized by the City Council.  Any other person or firm, except the
public utility with overhead lines having line clearing operations (tree
trimming) done by them or for them by any person or firm shall first obtain
written approval from the city.




(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18)




§ 95.03  MAINTENANCE OF TREES.



   The responsibility of tree maintenance is outlined as follows:




   (A)   All city trees located on property owned by the city on public
right-of-way planted by the city shall be maintained by the city.




   (B)   Trees present prior to this chapter in the public right-of-
way of the city shall continue to be the responsibility of the abutting
property owner.




   (C)   New trees privately planted in the public right-of-way shall
be maintained by the property owner abutting the public right- of-way.




(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 563-98, passed 2-4-98; Am. Ord.
03-2018, passed 3-7-18)  Penalty, see § 95.99




§ 95.04  PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts with
respect to city trees without the prior written permission of the city.




      (1)   Cut, prune, break, injure, alter, or remove any tree; or
cut, unduly disturb, or interfere in any way with any root of a tree or trees
unless permitted to do so by the city.




      (2)   Fasten any object, rope, wire, sign, insulator, or other
device to a tree or trees.




      (3)   Install, remove, or injure any guard or device placed to
protect trees.




      (4)   Close or obstruct any open spaces provided about the
base of a tree or trees to permit the access of air, water, and fertilizer to
the roots of such tree or trees.




      (5)   Cut any roots within ten feet of any trunk or any roots
four inches or more in diameter except in accordance with the city Sidewalk
Improvement Plan.




   (B)   The city may grant such written permission if the activity for
which such permission is requested, is in the public interest and is not
likely to injure any city tree.  Any person or persons who may cause damage
to any city tree shall be held liable for damages to said tree.




   (C)   No person shall operate, place, or maintain, within the drip
line of any city tree, any machinery, equipment, heavy object, stone, rocks,
cement, earth, soil or other substance which may harmfully affect such city
tree by preventing the access of water or air to the roots of such tree or
excavate around to remove earth from or cause any water to flow upon the
roots of any tree.  The city may waive in writing, in whole or in part such
provisions, but only to the extent absolutely necessary to alleviate undue
hardship in the provision of necessary public utilities and the appropriate
use and enjoyment of property.




(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18)  Penalty,
see § 95.99




§ 95.05  PRIVATE TREE PLANTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Private planting on public right-of-way does not need
approval  of the city,  however,  the  following  guidelines  are
recommended.




   (B)   Spacing.  The spacing shall generally conform with the
designated small, medium and large categories.  The spacing guidelines are
as follows:




      (1)   Small trees, 30 feet;




      (2)   Medium trees, 40 feet; and




      (3)   Large trees, 50 feet, except in special plantings
designated or approved by a landscape architect.




   (C)   Distance from curb and sidewalk.  The distance trees may be
planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the
city zoning code.  The guidelines for distance based on three species size
class are as follows:




      (1)   Small trees, two feet;




      (2)   Medium trees, three feet; and




      (3)   Large trees, four feet.




   (D)   Distance from street corners and fireplugs.  No tree shall be
planted closer than required by the zoning code.  Twenty feet from any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curblines is the suggested placement.  No tree shall be planted closer than
ten feet of any fireplug.




   (E)   Tree planting privately on property owned by the city on
public right-of-way shall be maintained by the abutting property owner in
conformity with this chapter.




(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92; Am. Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18)  Penalty,
see § 95.99




§ 95.06  TREE INVENTORY.



   (A)   The Public Works Department shall periodically inventory as
many city trees as allowed by time and budget, for the purpose of creating a
list of city trees to be removed based on priority (the “Tree
Inventory”). The tree inventory shall identify the problem(s) associated
with the city tree(s) as follows:




 


Tree Problem Key



1
 
Dead or Dying


2
 
Cavity or Decay


3
 
Pest Problem


4
 
Poor Structure


5
 
Exotic Invasive Species


6
 
Other



 



   (B)   The Public Works Department shall provide an annual update to
City Council regarding the tree inventory. At the annual meeting, the City
Council shall vote on what city tree(s), if any must be removed during the
following year.




(Ord. 03-2018, passed 3-7-18)




§ 95.99  PENALTY.




   Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted
and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction or a plea of
guilty, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.





(Ord. 464-1992, passed 10-7-92)




CHAPTER 96:  EMERGENCY MEDICAL
AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES




Section






   96.01   Fee required





   96.02   Schedule of fees





   96.03   Fund established





Cross-reference:





   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles, see § 71.26




§ 96.01  FEE REQUIRED.




   (A)   Everybody who uses any emergency medical or transportation
services shall be and is hereby obligated to pay a reasonable fee therefor,
according to the schedule and incorporated herein by reference, plus any
costs and expenses incurred by the city for the collection thereof,
including, without limitation, court costs and reasonable attorney fees.






   (B)   Any Fort Wright resident or persons that pay license or
payroll fees to the city shall be exempt from paying any fees not covered by
insurance.





(Ord. 505-95, passed 6-21-95)




§ 96.02  SCHEDULE OF FEES.




   The schedule of fees shall be:




 



Non-emergency BLS
 
$450.00


Milage rate
 
$14.00


Emergency BLS
 
$600.00


Non-emergency ALS
 
$700.00


Emergency ALS
 
$800.00


ALS-2
 
$900.00


Oxygen rate
 
$30.00


Defibrillation kit
 
$225.00


Use of bag-valve-mask
 
$50.00


Extrication fee
 
$375.00










(Ord. 505-95, passed 6-21-95; Am. Ord. 525-96, passed 4-17-96; Am. Ord. 2-01,
passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 2-02, passed 3-27-02; Am. Ord. 5- 09, passed 3-4-09;
Am. Ord. 14-2018, passed 12-5-18)




§ 96.03  FUND ESTABLISHED.




   The executive authority of the city shall provide for the collection of
the fees hereby established through an independent contractor; and the fees
hereby established shall be used for the payment of the costs and expenses of
the collection thereof, with the balance thereof deposited in a special fund
hereby established, which shall hereafter be identified and referred to as
the Fire and EMS Long Term Equipment Acquisition Fund, and used only for the
acquisition of long term equipment for the use of the fire department and
life squad of the city.





(Ord. 505-95, passed 6-21-95)




CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATION       



Section



 




   General Provisions




 



   97.01   Use and Privilege; use by organized groups or clubs



   97.02   Hours of operation



   97.03   Animals in parks



   97.04   Operation of motor vehicles restricted



   97.05   Permit required for certain activities



   97.06   Prohibited activities



 




   Parks and Recreation Board




 



   97.15   Established



   97.16   Appointments



 



   97.99   Penalty



   GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  USE AND PRIVILEGE; USE BY ORGANIZED GROUPS OR CLUBS.



   (A)   City parks and recreational facilities are maintained and
operated by the city primarily for the use of individuals, families, and
small groups of recreation seekers and for picnickers who desire to avail
themselves of the facilities offered by the city. No person, firm, or
corporation shall hold, conduct, or attend any public meeting to be given by,
under the auspices of, under the name of, or for the benefit of any organized
group or club, unless there has first been obtained written permission from
the Mayor or City Administrative Officer to conductor hold the affair
pursuant to established guidelines for the issuance of such permits.



 



   (B)   The city assumes no responsibility for any use of any city
park or recreational facility except the maintenance, control, and operation
of same as a part of its park system and where other uses as herein are
permitted, such uses shall be deemed a strict privilege, and the city assumes
no responsibility whatsoever for loss, injury, or destruction to persons or
property, whatever the cause, because of the exercise thereof and such
privileges shall be subject to revocation at anytime without notice and
without payment of compensation or return of any fee.



 



   (C)   Any person or persons exercising any privilege in or upon any
city park or recreational facility in the city, when such privilege is
permitted and/or authorized together with all vehicles, and/or equipment used
in connection with the exercise of such privilege shall be subject to all the
regulations, limitations, restrictions, and penalties hereinafter contained
or hereafter imposed, all of which shall be subject to inspection.



(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)



§ 97.02  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The city park and recreational system shall be open to the
public between dawn and dusk. The Mayor or City Administrative Officer may
grant written permission for use of any park or recreational facility outside
of the posted time pursuant to established guidelines for the issuance of
such permits.



 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or on any city
park or recreational facility or property without permission after said park
or recreational facility or property has closed.



(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)



§ 97.03  ANIMALS IN PARKS.



   (A)   No animals shall be permitted within the improved picnic or
play areas of the parks or recreational facilities.



 



   (B)   No person shall take any dog or other animal on or within any
park or recreational facility or property unless it is held by a leash,
chain, or cord held by that person at all times. No person shall permit any
animal of any kind to run at large upon or within the parks or recreational
facility or property, nor shall any animal be tied to any tree, plant, or
shrub in any park or recreational facility or property by any person.



 



   (C)   Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human beings
or other animals by its demeanor or actions shall be prohibited from being in
a city park or recreational facility or property.



 



   (D)   No animal that constitutes a nuisance by odor, noise, or other
means shall be permitted in any city park or recreational facility or
property.



 



   (E)   No owner or custodian shall fail to clean up after his or her
pet, including, but not limited to, animal feces, in any city park or
recreational facility.



(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)



§ 97.04  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle or any
other vehicle or conveyance upon any park or recreational facility or
property, except on the roadway provided for that purpose.



 



   (B)   No person shall operate any ATV's (all-terrain vehicles) in
any park or recreational facility or property at any time without written
permission of Mayor or City Administrative Officer.



 



   (C)   No person shall drive any vehicle within any park or
recreational facility or property at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour.



 



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate said motor vehicles beyond any
gate, cable, or any other obstruction, or proceed beyond any parking area or
sign prohibiting such travel, except for city owned and operated vehicles,
unless written permission is received from the Mayor or City Administrative
Officer.



 



   (E)   Motorized vehicles shall be permitted in the park and
recreational system solely for the purpose of transportation to and from the
parks, and not for any other use.



 



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for vehicles to be parked other than in
the designated parking areas. Existing regulations regarding handicapped
parking apply.



 



   (G)   No parking is permitted off the paved areas, or along
driveways, or on bicycle or walking or hiking trails, or outside the hours of
operation of any park or recreational facility, except for city owned and
operated vehicles, without the consent of the city. Vehicles in violation may
be towed at the owner's expense.



 



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform vehicle repairs
in any city park or recreational facility or property.



(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)



§ 97.05  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   A city permit is required for exclusive use of a shelter
house, athletic field, court, or any other city park or recreational facility
or property pursuant to established guidelines for the issuance of such
permits. For events operated by non-city organizations charging an entry fee,
the city may assess a charge to the organization.



 



   (B)   Fishing.



 



      (1)   Fishing is permitted from the shore only.



 



      (2)   Frog-gigging is not permitted on any city-owned or
maintained lake or pond. Ice fishing is not permitted on any city-owned or
maintained lake or pond. All persons shall possess a Kentucky fishing license.



 



      (3)   All state fishing regulations shall be applicable.



(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)



§ 97.06 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Advertising.  No person, firm, or corporation, or other
entity shall display, post, distribute, or place any sign, advertisement,
circular notice, statement, banner, emblem or design in any park or
recreational facility or property without written permission of the city.



 



   (B)   Alcoholic beverages.  No person shall possess or consume any
alcoholic beverage in any park or recreational facility or property, except
as a planned event with the written permission of the city.



 



   (C)   Artifacts.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, or other entity to remove or possess any artifacts or other
items from any city park or recreational facility or property.



 



   (D)   Boating.  It shall be unlawful to use any boat or canoe or
any other watercraft device including inflatable devices in any city park or
recreational facility or property, except city employees on official business
or other so authorized agents of the city on official business, and except
property owners with an easement of record granting them the right to boat
thereon.



 



   (E)   Camping. It shall be unlawful to camp overnight in any city
park or recreational facility or property, except as a planned event with
permission of the city. Any authorized camping shall be done only in areas
designated by the city.



 



   (F)   Cooking. No person shall make, set, cause, or use any fire
within any city park or recreational facility or property except in grills
provided by the city, and only for the purpose of cooking food, within the
park property for that purpose, unless they have first obtained written
permission to do so from the city.



 



   (G)   Destroying park or recreational facility or property.



 



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take, carry away,
disturb, molest, destroy, mar, deface, mutilate, mark, or damage any tree,
shrubbery, or any other property within the parks or recreational facilities.



 



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any
object, abuse, deface, or alter the park system, including properties and
equipment associated with the park or recreational system.



 



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or remove any
trees, flowers, or vegetation within any city park or recreational facility
(except when required for reasons of public safety or maintenance and then
only by the city Public Works Department personnel, or agents/contractors of
the city or utility companies operating within their easements).



 



   (H)   Excavating. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, or other entity to excavate in any city park or recreational
facility without written permission of the city.



 



   (I)   Fireworks. It shall be unlawful to possess any fireworks
anywhere in any city park or recreational facility or property except as a
planned event with written permission of the city.



 



   (J)   Glass containers. It shall be unlawful to bring or use glass
beverage containers in any city park or recreational facility or property.



 



   (K)   Hunting. It shall be unlawful to hunt, trap, or in any way
injure or molest any wild animal found within any city park or recreational
facility (except when required for reasons of public safety or as authorized
by the city or a Conservation Officer with the Kentucky Department of Fish
and Wildlife) or property.



 



   (L)   Ice skating. It shall be unlawful to ice skate on any city
owned or maintained lake or pond in the City without written permission of
the Mayor or City Administrative Officer.



 



   (M)   Littering. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park
or recreational facility or property within the city except in trash
receptacles provided for that purpose and in such a manner that the litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where trash
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the
park or recreational facility by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of.



 



   (N)   Metal detectors. It shall be unlawful to possess or operate
any metal detecting device in any city park or recreational facility or
property without written permission of the city.



 



   (O)   Selling. No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall
conduct or engage in any form of trade, business, or other commercial
activity or perform any type of service for consideration within any park or
recreational facility or property without the written permission of the city.



 



   (P)   Smoking. It shall be unlawful to smoke or use tobacco in any
city park building or facility except for picnic shelters.



 



   (Q)   Swimming. It shall be unlawful to swim or otherwise enter any
body of water in any city park or recreational facility or property.



(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)



   PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD



§ 97.15  ESTABLISHED.



   There is now established the Parks and Recreation Board. This Board
shall possess all powers and be subject to all the responsibilities of KRS
97.010 to 97.050.



(Ord. 9-03, passed 7-9-03)



§ 97.16  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Board shall consist of five members who will be appointed
by the Mayor to serve for terms of four years and until their successors are
appointed.



 



   (B)   The initial Board members will be appointed as follows:



 



      (1)   One member for one year;



 



      (2)   One member for two years;



 



      (3)   One member for three years; and



 



      (4)   Two members for four years.



 



   (C)   Any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments for the unexpired term.



(Ord. 9-03, passed 7-9-03)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject
to a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $250 or imprisonment of not more
than 30 days or both for each offense. Violators may be cited with either a
state citation to District Court or city citation. The fine for the city
citation shall be $20.



 



   (B)   In addition the violator may be ordered to pay restitution to
the city for any damage caused.



 



   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation or this chapter may be
prohibited from being in or on any city park or recreational facility or
property for a period of 30 days up to permanent expulsion following such
conviction at the determination of the Mayor.



 



   (D)   All violations of the Kentucky fishing regulations shall be
reported to the Kentucky Division of Fish and Wildlife.




(Ord. 5-04, passed 7-14-04)




TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS




   Chapter






      110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE






      111.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS






      112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES






      113.   AMUSEMENTS






      114.   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS






      115.   GARAGE SALES






      116.   INSURANCE COMPANIES






      117.   PAWNBROKERS






      118.   CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS






      119.   PRECIOUS STONES AND METALS DEALERS










      120.   HOTELS, MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES










      121.   USED PERSONAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS










      122.   JOB DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES










      123.   REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS




CHAPTER 110:  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE



Section




General Provisions










   110.01   Definitions





   110.02   Purpose










Business Regulations










   110.10   Requirements





   110.11   Prohibitions





   110.12   Form and content of annual business regulatory license and
application





   110.13   Application process





   110.14   Appeals





   110.15   Expiration date





   110.16   County Fiscal Court










Business Taxation










   110.25   Levy and imposition





   110.26   Rate





   110.27   Appointment of gross receipts





   110.28   Exceptions





   110.29   Administrative provisions





   110.30   Purpose of occupational license fee





   110.31   Collection










   110.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS



 



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



 



   “ANYBODY.”  Any human being, and any combination thereof, in the
form of partnership, corporation, joint venture, unincorporated association,
or otherwise.



 



   “APPLICABLE LAWS.” The constitutions, statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations and other laws of the United States, Commonwealth of Kentucky,
County of Kenton and any other governmental entity or agency having
jurisdiction.



 



   “BUSINESS.” Any and all franchises, trades, occupations,
professions or other businesses within the meaning and context of KRS 92.280,
KRS 92.281 and Section 181 of the Kentucky Constitution.



 



   “BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE.” A license required by the city,
pursuant to the police power thereof, for the purpose of regulating business
activities and operations within the city.



 



   “BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE FEE.” A fee required by the city for
each business regulatory license, pursuant to KRS 82.082 and the police power
thereof,, to provide the funds necessary to pay the expenses of regulating
business activities and operations within the city, including, without
limitation, the expense of issuing business regulatory licenses.



 



   “CITY.” The City of Fort Wright, in Kenton County, Kentucky.



 



   “NOBODY.” Not anybody, or no human being, or any combination
thereof, in the form of a partnership, corporation, joint venture,
unincorporated association, or otherwise.



 



   “OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE.” A tax for revenue, pursuant to the
taxing authority of the city, including, without limitation, the authority
therefor established by KRS 82.082, KRS 92.280, KRS 92.281 and Section 181 of
the Kentucky Constitution, wherein it is sometimes identified and referred to
as a power to impose and collect license fees on stock used for breeding
purposes, on franchises, trades, occupations and professions.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to both regulate and tax those engaged
in franchises, trades, occupations, professions and other businesses.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



BUSINESS REGULATIONS



§ 110.10  REQUIREMENTS.



   Everybody who is engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other business in the city, other than those who are only so
engaged as employees, shall obtain an annual business regulatory license for
that franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business; and pay to
the city a business regulatory license fee in the amount of either fifty
dollars ($50.00) or that part of a multi-jurisdictional occupational permit
fee, collected by Kenton County and allocated to the city, pursuant to the
provisions of an inter-local agreement between the city and the county and
some other cities therein, for a single multi-jurisdictional annual
occupational permit fee of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00), which
the Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to sign on behalf of the city.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07; Am. Ord. 14-08, passed 12-3-08)



§ 110.11  PROHIBITIONS.



   Nobody, other than those who are only engaged as employees in the city,
shall conspire, cause, permit, promote, allow, aid, assist, encourage or
engage in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business in
the City for which the annual business regulatory license required hereby has
not been issued.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.12  FORM AND CONTENT OF ANNUAL BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE AND
APPLICATION.



   The form and content of the annual business regulatory license required
by this chapter and the application for it shall be determined by the City
Administrative Officer; provided, however, that the application shall include:



 



   (A)   Sufficient information for the identification of the persons
involved in the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business.



 



   (B)   The computation of the annual occupational license fee imposed
by this chapter.



 



   (C)   Sufficient information and inspection authorization for a
determination by the city of compliance by the licensee with all applicable
laws.



 



   (D)   The name in which the business will be conducted; the address
of the real estate upon which the business will be conducted, and the mailing
address of the business if different from the location; and the business
telephone number and the state tax identification numbers of the business.



 



   (E)   The name, address, date of birth and Social Security number of
each owner of the business and each partner, officer or director, if any.



 



   (F)   The name, residence address and telephone number of a duly
authorized representative of the business who is responsible for operating
and managing, the business in the city, and a night emergency number at which
some responsible representative of the business can be reached in case of an
emergency.



 



   (G)   A full description of the business operations to be conducted.



 



   (H)   The date on which the business began or will begin operations
in the city.



 



   (I)   The accounting period of the business.



 



   (J)   The number of employees working or expected to be working for
the business in the city during the license year.



 



   (K)   A statement describing the circumstances of each denial,
suspension or revocation of any business regulatory license for any person
named or identified in the application.



 



   (L)   A statement describing the circumstances of each conviction of
any person named or identified in the application of a felony, misdemeanor
for which imprisonment or other confinement was a possible penalty, any other
crime in which moral turpitude was involved, or any other crime directly
related to a business similar to that which is the subject of the application.



 



   (M)   A statement as to whether any license, permit, degree,
certification or similar document is required by any applicable law for the
conduct or employment in the business.



 



   (N)   A statement as to whether there are hazardous material kept at
the business premises and the location thereof, and whether there are pets,
guard dogs or other animals usually kept therein and any other information
which the applicant believes would be necessary or helpful to emergency
personnel responding to a call to said premises.



 



   (O)   The gross receipts and hereinafter described property factor,
sales factor, and payroll factor of the business for the previous calendar
year.



 



   (P)   Such additional information that the City Administrative
Officer determines to be reasonably necessary.



 



   (Q)   A warning in the following or similar language:



 



      “WARNING: Statements in this application shall be made under
oath, by affirmation or any other legally authorized manner of attesting to
the truth of such statements, with the signatures notarized, according to
law; and any false statements made herein shall be punishable according to
law; and may be cause for denial of the application or the revocation of any
Business Regulatory License issued pursuant thereto.”



 



   (R)   Information incorporated by reference. All information from
any previous application for an annual business regulatory license required
by this chapter, which continues to be accurate, may be incorporated by
reference into subsequent annual applications for the same license by the
same applicant.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.13  APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   Signature to application. Each application for an annual
business regulatory license required by this chapter shall be signed by the
applicant or an authorized representative of the applicant, who shall attest
to the truth of the statements therein, with knowledge that any false
statements constitute perjury, for which the signatory may be prosecuted and
punished according to law; and such signatures shall be notarized according
to law.



 



   (B)   Each application for an annual business regulatory license
required by this chapter shall be presented to the City Clerk/Tax Collector,
or any designee thereof, along with both the business regulatory license fee
and any occupational license fee that is due from the applicant. No
application for a business regulatory license shall be accepted or received
by the City Clerk without payment of the business regulatory license fee and
any occupational license fee due from the applicant.



 



   (C)   Review of applications. Each application for an annual
Business Regulatory License required by this chapter that is received and
accepted by the City Clerk/Tax Collector shall be immediately referred to the
City Administrative Officer, who shall review it according to the following
standards within thirty (30) days after the receipt and acceptance thereof by
the City Clerk/Tax Collector.



 



      (1)   When the applicant, or employees of the applicant, are
required to have any license, permit, degree, certification or other similar
document pursuant to the provision of any applicable law for the conduct of
or employment in the business which is the subject of the application; the
license, permit, degree, certification or other similar document shall have
been duly issued to the applicant or employees of the applicant prior to the
issuance of the Business Regulatory License. Documentary evidence of the
issuance satisfactory to the City Administrative Officer shall be provided by
the applicant.



 



      (2)   The criminal record of the persons named or identified
in the application shall be considered to the extent such record includes
conviction of a felony, a misdemeanor for which imprisonment or other
confinement was a possible penalty, any other crime in which moral turpitude
was involved; or any other crime which was directly related to a business of
the type which is the subject of the application. In determining if a
conviction was directly related to a business, the City Administrative
Officer shall consider:



 



         (a)    The nature and seriousness of the crime for which
the person was convicted.



 



         (b)    The relationship of the crime to the purpose of
the regulation of the business.



 



         (c)    The relationship of the crime to the ability,
capacity and fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the operation of the business.



 



         (d)    The extent to which the person convicted has been
successfully rehabilitated.



 



      (3)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider whether
the business is of a type that the operation, unless closely supervised, has
a probability of generating or resulting in criminal activity or adversely
affecting the health, safety, morals and welfare of occupants or residents of
adjoining property, the citizens and residents of the city, or will
constitute a nuisance.



 



      (4)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider the
business history of the applicant including:



 



         (a)   Whether the persons named and identified in the
application have been denied or had suspended or revoked a similar license by
the city or any other city, county or state and the reasons therefor.



 



         (b)   Whether complaints have been received by the city
about the business practices or responsibility of the persons named and
identified in the application, and the disposition of those complaints.



 



      (5)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider whether
the persons named and identified in the application are indebted to the city
for delinquent taxes, assessments, fines or similar obligations.



 



      (6)   The City Administrative Officer shall consider whether
the business and the proposed location complies with all applicable laws,
including, without limitation, land subdivision and use, zoning, building
construction and maintenance, and fire prevention and life safety regulations.



 



      (7)   After review of the application in conformity with this
chapter, the City Administrative Officer shall notify the City Clerk/Tax
Collector, or any designee thereof, of either:



 



      (8)   The approval of the application.



 



      (9)   The approval of the application conditionally; but if
the application is approved conditionally, the City Administrative Officer
shall determine and require those conditions that are reasonably necessary to
accomplish the intent of this chapter, including, without limitation:



 



         (a)   A requirement that the applicant post bond with
surety acceptable to the City Administrative Officer in a reasonable amount
determined by the City Administrative Officer to ensure compliance.



 



         (b)   A requirement that a debt to the city be paid
before a specified date.



 



         (c)   A requirement that the applicant permit periodic
inspection of certain parts of the premises or of certain records.



 



         (d)   A requirement that certain alterations be made in
the premises before a specified date.



 



      (10)   The disapproval of the application.



 



   (D)   Notice to the applicant. Unless the City Clerk/Tax Collector
receives a written notice from the City Administrative Officer, within thirty
(30) days after an application for a Business Regulatory License required by
this chapter has been referred to the City Administrative Officer for review
pursuant to division (C), that the application was either conditionally
approved or disapproved, the City Clerk/ Tax Collector, or the designee
thereof shall issue the business regulatory license that is the subject of
the application and mail it to the applicant at the address indicated in the
application; and, thereafter, the applicant may engage in the franchise,
trade, occupation, profession or other business described in the application,
but only at the address thereof indicated in the application, until that
business regulatory license expires or is suspended or revoked according to
the provisions of this chapter.



 



   (E)   Conditional approval of application. In the event that the
City Clerk/Tax Collector receives a written notice from the City
Administrative Officer, within thirty (30) days after an application for a
Business Regulatory License required by this chapter has been referred to the
City Administrative Officer for review pursuant to division (C), that the
application was conditionally approved, the City Clerk/Tax Collector shall
notify the applicant thereof and the reasons therefore identified by the City
Administrative Officer, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the applicant indicated in the application, along with a notice
that the license will be issued by the City Clerk/Tax Collector only upon
receipt by the City Clerk/Tax Collector of a written signed acceptance by the
applicant of the conditions to be performed prior to the issuance of the
license. The notice shall also state that if the acceptance is not received
by the City Clerk/Tax Collector within such time, the application will
thereby be disapproved.



 



   (F)   Disapproval of application. In the event that the City
Clerk/Tax Collector receives a written notice from the City Administrative
Officer, within thirty (30) days after an application for a business
regulatory license required by this chapter has been referred to the City
Administrative Officer for review pursuant to division (C), that the
application was disapproved by the City Administrative Officer, the City
Clerk/Tax Collector shall notify the applicant of that denial and the reasons
therefore identified by the City Administrative Officer, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address of the applicant indicated in the
application, with a refund of any anticipated City Occupational License Fee
paid with the application, and a notice of the procedure established in this
chapter for an appeal from the denial of that application.



 



   (G)   Business regulatory license revocation or suspension.



 



      (1)   Any business regulatory license required by this chapter
may be revoked or suspended by the City Administrative Officer for any period
of time determined by the City Administrative Officer to be reasonable and
appropriate for any of the following reasons; but only after a due process
evidentiary hearing in regard thereto, for which a notice has been sent to
the licensee at the address indicated in the licensee's application, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing.



 



      (2)   Any false or intentionally misleading statement or
information provided in the license application.



 



      (3)   Any failure or refusal to perform or abide by any of the
conditions of a conditional license.



 



      (4)   The criminal conviction of any person named or
identified in the license application of a felony, a misdemeanor for which
imprisonment or any other confinement is a possible penalty, any other crime
in which moral turpitude is involved, or any other crime which directly
relates to a business of the type for which the license was issued. However,
the consideration of such a criminal conviction shall include:



 



         (a)   The nature and seriousness of the crime for which
the person was convicted.



 



         (b)   The relationship of the crime to the purposes of
the regulation of the business.



 



         (c)   The relationship of the crime to the ability,
capacity and fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the operation of the business.



 



         (d)   The extent to which the person has been
successfully rehabilitated.



 



      (5)   The revocation, suspension or expiration without renewal
of any license, permit, degree, certification or similar document which is
required by any applicable law for the conduct of or employment in the
business for which the license was issued.



 



      (6)   The violation of any applicable law in the conduct of
the business by any person engaged therein.



 



      (7)   Violations of applicable laws by any person within the
business premises of the licensee, or under the control thereof.



 



      (8)   The revocation or suspension of a city business
regulatory license pursuant to Fort Wright ordinance shall be in addition to
the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by ordinance or any other
applicable law.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.14  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any conditional approval or disapproval of an application for
a business regulatory license required by this chapter, or any suspension or
revocation of any such license may be appealed to the Mayor, by filing with
the City Clerk/Tax Collector, within thirty (30) days after the conditional
approval, disapproval, revocation or suspension.



 



   (B)   A written notice of the appeal.



 



   (C)   A copy of the conditional approval, disapproval, revocation or
suspension that is the subject of the appeal.



 



   (D)   A statement why there should be an approval without
conditions, or no disapproval, revocation or suspension.



 



   (E)   An appeal fee in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00), to
provide for the expenses of conducting a due process hearing in regard
thereto.



 



   (F)   In such an appeal, a de novo due process hearing in regard to
the suspension or revocation shall be conducted by the Mayor, or by a hearing
officer appointed by the Mayor, who shall file a record with the Mayor, with
a written recommendation regarding findings of fact, conclusions of law and a
decision based thereon. Within ninety (90) days after the date the appeal was
filed, the Mayor shall issue a written decision in regard thereto, including
findings of fact, conclusions of law and a decision based upon a record of
the due process hearing; and the appellant shall be notified thereof by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address thereof indicated in
the application for the license. Unless an appeal from the decision of the
Mayor is filed in the court having jurisdiction thereof within thirty (30)
days after the decision of the Mayor, the decision of the Mayor shall become
final.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.15  EXPIRATION DATE.



   Unless an earlier expiration date is provided therein, all business
regulatory licenses required hereby shall expire at midnight on the fifteenth
day of the fourth month after the end of the fiscal year of the licensee.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.16  COUNTY FISCAL COURT.



   The executive authority of the city may contract with the Fiscal Court
of Kenton County, Kentucky, for the performance of the duties imposed by this
chapter on the City Clerk/Tax Collector.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



BUSINESS TAXATION



§ 110.25  LEVY AND IMPOSITION.



   For the purpose of providing funds for the general operating expenses
of the city and the municipal services and functions provided thereby, and
subject to the provisions of KRS 67.750 through 67.795, and except as
provided in § 110.28, an occupational license fee is hereby levied and
imposed upon everybody engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation,
profession or other businesses in the city, for the privilege of that
engagement.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.26  RATE.



   The occupational license fee that is levied and imposed by this chapter
is at the rate of:



 



   (A)   Employees. One and fifteen one-hundredths percent (1.15%) of
all compensation earned by an employee for labor, work or services provided
in the city.




   (B)   Those not employees.  0.075% of the taxable gross receipts of
everybody, other than employees, who is engaged in any franchise, trade,
occupation, profession or other business in the city.




   (C)   The occupational license fee enacted herein will apply only to
taxable compensation that is subject to Federal Insurance Contributions Act
(FICA), 26 U.S.C. § 3101 et seq. This “FICA-Cap” means that wages above
the FICA-Cap are not subject to the provisions of this section.




   (D)   In the event that changes or amendments are made to federal
statutes governing the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, this section
shall comply with all such changes or amendments to the extent required by
law; and any taxable amounts affected by such changes or amendments will be
collected accordingly. If any provision of this section or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid because of changes or amendments
to the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07; Am. Ord. 15-12, passed 10-3-12)



§ 110.27  APPORTIONMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 67.753(4), it is hereby
determined that the apportionment provisions of KRS 67.753 do not fairly
represent the extent of the engagement in the city of those, other than
employees, who are engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or
other business both within and outside of the city; and



 



   (B)   Accordingly, the following described property factor is hereby
added to the payroll factor and the sales factor provided in KRS 67.753 for
the apportionment of the gross receipts of those, other than employees, who
are engaged in any franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business
both within and outside of the city.



 



      (1)   The property factor is a fraction, the numerator of
which is the average value of the taxpayers real and tangible personal
property owned or rented and used in the city during the computation period,
and the denominator of which is the average value of all of the taxpayer's
real and tangible personal property owned or rented and used anywhere during
the computation period. In the determination of the property factor:



 



         (a)   Property owned by the taxpayer is valued at its
original cost. Property rented by the taxpayer is valued at eight (8) times
the net annual rental rate which is the annual rental rate paid by the
taxpayer less any annual rental rate received by the taxpayer from
sub-rentals.



 



         (b)   The average value of property shall be determined
by averaging the values at the beginning and ending of the computation
period, but the City Administrative Officer may require the averaging of
monthly values during the computation period if reasonably required to
reflect properly the average value of the taxpayer's property.



 



      (2)   The proportion of the total gross receipts everywhere of
those, other than employees, who are engaged in any franchise, trade,
occupation, profession or other business both within and outside of the city
that are subject to the occupational license fee established by this chapter,
shall be determined by multiplying the total gross receipts thereof
everywhere by the quotient of the total of the payroll factor and the sales
factor described in KRS 67.753(2) and (3), and the property factor described
in division (1), that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other
business had in the city during the tax period, divided by the total number
of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other
business had in the city during the tax period . The total number of those
factors that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business
had in the city during the tax period will always be either 1, 2 or 3. For
example, if the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or other business:



 



         (a)   Had only the sales revenue factor in the city,
during the tax period, without either the property factor or the payroll
factor in the city, the total number of those factors that the franchise,
trade, occupation, profession or other business had in the city during the
tax period would be 1; or



 



         (b) Had both the sales revenue factor and the payroll
factor in the city, during the tax period, without the property factor in the
city, the total number of those factors that the franchise, trade,
occupation, profession or other business had in the city during the tax
period would be 2; or



 



         (c)   Had the sales revenue factor, and the payroll
factor, and the property factor in the city, during the tax period, the total
number of those factors that the franchise, trade, occupation, profession or
other business had in the city during the tax period would be 3.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.28  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following franchises, trades, occupations, professions and other
businesses are exempted from the occupational license fee levied and imposed
in §§ 110.26 and 110.27:



 



   (A)   The employment of domestic servants in private homes.



 



   (B)   Organizations that have been determined to be exempt from
federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954, as amended.



 



   (C)   Owners of their principal and primary residence who let or
lease no more than one separate residential unit in that principal and
primary residence.



 



   (D)   No license shall be required of a minister of religion who has
been ordained in accordance with the ceremonial ritual or discipline of a
recognized church, religious sect, or religious organization, to teach and
preach its religious doctrines or to administer its rites in public worship,
in the performance of one or more of those duties. However, it is not
intended to exempt such ordained minister of religion from the necessity of
paying a license fee for work done or services performed in the city in
activities not connected with his regular duties as a minister of religion.



 



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean the
employees of churches, religious congregations, or religious societies of all
creeds (except duly ordained ministers) shall be relieved from the payment of
any occupational license fee in compliance with all regulations established
by the License Inspector with respect to making returns and payment of the
fees.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.29  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the City Administrative Officer, who is hereby authorized to promulgate any
additional regulations in regard thereto which are not inconsistent with any
state statute, or any ordinance of the city, or any executive order of the
Mayor.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.30  PURPOSE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEE.



   The purpose of the business regulatory license fees and the
occupational license fees imposed and levied by this chapter is to fund the
general operating expenses of the city, including, without limitation,
police, fire, emergency medical, public works and administrative services.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.31  COLLECTION.



   The business regulatory license fees and occupational license fees
imposed and levied by this chapter shall be received and collected by the
City Clerk/Tax Collector or by the Fiscal Court of Kenton County, Kentucky,
with which the executive authority of the city is hereby authorized to
contract for those services.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalties. Each separate violation of this chapter is
hereby classified as a civil offense, for which:



 



      (1)   The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b)
that may be imposed for each separate violation of this chapter, is hereby
established as five hundred dollars ($500.00); and



 



      (2)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(c)
that will be imposed for each separate offense and violation of this chapter
if the person who has committed the violation and offense does not contest a
citation therefor, is hereby established as five hundred dollars ($500.00);



 



      (3)   An enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately
issuing a civil citation, give notice that the violation of this chapter
shall be remedied within a specific period of time.



 



   (B)   Criminal penalties. Each violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor for which everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the
maximum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) as set forth in KRS
534.050(2)(a) or a term of imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of
twelve (12) months as set forth in KRS 532.090(1), or both.



(Ord. 10-07, passed 12-05-07)



CHAPTER 111:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



 




   111.01   Definitions





   111.02   Registration of owners, operators and employees





   111.03   Certification requirement





   111.04   Health and safety inspection





   111.05   General prohibitions





   111.06   Occupational license and zoning requirements





   111.07   Insurance





   111.08   Existing establishments to come into compliance




 




   111.99   Penalty




 



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



 



   “BOARD.”  The Kentucky Board of Licensure for Massage Therapy.



 



   “BOARD-APPROVED MASSAGE PROGRAM.”  A program that meets minimum
standards for training and curriculum as determined by the Board.



 



   “LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL.”  A licensed massage
therapist, physician, nurse, occupational therapist, physical therapist,
podiatrist or chiropractor.



 



   “LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST.”  A person who is licensed by the
Board to administer massage or massage therapy to the public for compensation.



 



   “MASSAGE.”  The application, by a massage therapist licensed by
the Board, of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding
to the soft tissues of the human body with the intent to enhance or restore
the health and well-being of the client. The practice includes the external
application of water, heat, cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical
preparations; use of electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the
actions of the hands; and determination of whether massage therapy is
appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care
practitioner is appropriate.



 



   “MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.”  An establishment providing massages, for
hire, by persons other than a licensed health care professional.



 



   “MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.”  An individual, other than a licensed
health care professional, engaged in the practice of giving or performing a
massage.



 



   “PERSON.”  An individual (male or female), firm, partnership,
joint venture, association, independent contractor, foreign or domestic
corporation, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.



 



   “NUDITY” or “STATE OR NUDITY.”  The showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



 



   “SEMI-NUDE” or “IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.”  The showing of the
female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its
highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition
shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall
not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other apparel, provided
the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.02  REGISTRATION OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Any person owning, operating, employed, or working in any
capacity in any massage establishment is required to register with the Fort
Wright Police Department, and he or she is hereby required to be registered
by the Police Department prior to the date of commencing operation or
employment with or in such establishment. No person shall fail to register
prior to commencing such operation or employment.



 



   (B)   No owner or operator shall permit any person to be employed
unless the employee has registered within the time period prescribed above.



 



   (C)   Registration shall include, name, address, state
identification number, date of birth and telephone number.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.03  CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.



   Any owner, operator or person employed in any massage establishment and
performing massages therein, as either a masseuse or masseur, shall be
required to provide, at the time of application, proof that he or she has
received professional training and completed the national certification
process and has been certified by the National Certification Board for
Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork, the American Massage Therapy Association,
or any equivalent nationally recognized accreditation body, or has received a
license from any state that regulates massage therapy, to administer same.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.04  HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION.



   Each establishment shall also be required to undergo periodic health
and safety inspections to determine continual compliance with applicable
health and safety codes and regulations.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.05  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Massage establishments shall not be permitted to open for
business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day.



 



   (B)   No owner or operator shall knowingly employ an uncertified
masseur or masseuse.



 



   (C)   No owner or operator shall refuse to allow appropriate state
or local authorities access to the establishment for any health or safety
inspections.



 



   (D)   No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted as a patron
of any massage establishment during the hours the establishment is open for
business, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian and the parent or
guardian has provided written permission to the establishment allowing the
minor to receive massage services, or a physician has provided a written
recommendation indicating the minor's need for massage services.



 



   (E)   Any masseur or masseuse shall be prohibited from touching or
massaging the male anus, penis or scrotum or female anus, vulva or breasts of
any patron, unless required as part of any necessary medical treatment.



 



   (F)   No masseur or masseuse shall perform massage services nude or
in a semi-nude condition.



 



   (G)   The genitalia of all patrons must be properly draped when
massage services are being provided.



 



   (H)   A masseur or masseuse shall not provide massage services for
immoral purposes, or in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to, or gratify
lust, passions, or sexual desires.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.06  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE AND ZONING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any person owning or operating a massage establishment shall
be required to hold a valid occupational license with the city and shall be
properly zoned for operation of the same.



 



   (B)   The city shall deny any application for an occupational
license to operate a massage establishment or may request revocation or
suspension of any previously issued occupational license for any of the
following reasons:



 



      (1)   Falsification of any of the information required for the
application or failure to fully complete the application or provide
documentation required by the provisions of this chapter.



 



      (2)   Failure to cooperate with any required health or safety
inspection.



 



      (3)   If any person named on the application is under the age
of 18.



 



      (4)   A violation of one or more of the general prohibitions
set forth in this chapter.



 



   (C)   These provisions are in addition to all other reasons for
which an occupational license may be revoked or suspended.



 



   (D)   An occupational license issued to a massage establishment
shall be conspicuously posted in the public reception or waiting area of the
establishment at all times.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.07  INSURANCE.



   Any person owning or operating a massage establishment must maintain
liability insurance, including coverage for personal injury, with a minimum
limit of liability in the amount of $100,000 per claim and shall submit a
copy of this policy to the city when the person applies for an occupational
license and when this license is paid on an annual basis.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.08  EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS TO COME INTO COMPLIANCE.



   All existing massage establishments are required to come into
compliance with all necessary provisions set forth herein within 60 days from
the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine and/or jail
time in accordance with the penalties for a Class A misdemeanor provided for
in the Kentucky Revised Statutes.



 



   (B)   Any section or part of a section or any provision of this
chapter, which is declared by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, for any
reason to be invalid, shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2-04, passed 1-14-04)



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES




Section






   General Provisions






   112.01   Definitions





   112.02   State law adopted





   112.03   Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator






Licenses






   112.15   License required





   112.16   Application; contents





   112.17   Restrictions on licenses





   112.18   Conditions for Class C licenses





   112.19   Number of licenses





   112.20   Term; renewal





   112.21   Classifications; fees





   112.22   Disposition of fees





   112.23   Change of location





   112.24   Replacement when lost or destroyed





   112.25   License to be displayed





   112.26   Consumption of alcoholic beverages by employees






Nude or Nearly Nude Activities






   112.35   Definitions





   112.36   Performing nude or nearly nude activities





   112.37   Permitting nude or nearly nude activities





   112.38   License revocation or suspension for violation










   Restrictions on Sales










   112.50   Hours of sale





   112.51   Premises must close





   112.52   Separate departments on premises






   112.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   “ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.”  Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid,
containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, that is
fit for beverage purposes.




   “DISTILLED SPIRITS” or “SPIRITS.”  Any product capable of
being consumed by a human being which contains alcohol in excess of the
amount permitted by KRS Chapter 242, obtained by distilling, mixed with water
or other substances in solution, except wine, hard cider and malt
beverages.  (KRS 241.010(24))




   “MALT BEVERAGE.”  Any fermented undistilled alcoholic beverage of
any name or description, manufactured from malt wholly or in part, or from
any substitute for malt.  (KRS 241.010(36))




   “RETAIL SALE.”  Any sale where delivery is made in Kentucky to any
person not holding a license.  (KRS 241.010(50))




   “WINE.”  The product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the
juices of fruit, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary conditions to
correct defects due to climatic, saccharine, and seasonal changes.  It
includes champagne and sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic content
not to exceed 24% by volume.  (KRS 241.010(69))




('77 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 167-l978, passed
7-14-78; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-13; Am. Ord. 03-14, passed 3-5-14)




§ 112.02  STATE LAW ADOPTED.




   The provisions of the Kentucky Alcohol Beverage Control Act, KRS
Chapters 241-244, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by
reference as fully as though copied herein; and no person or premises who or
which may be ineligible or disqualified from holding any permit or license
pursuant to the provisions thereof shall be eligible or qualified to receive
or hold a license under the provisions of this chapter.





('77 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)




§ 112.03  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.




   The City Administrative Officer shall perform the duties of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator as prescribed under state law.





('77 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. 123-1975, passed 8-8-75)




LICENSES



§ 112.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city
any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or to
be in violation of the terms of such license.




('77 Code, § 3-15) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed
3-6-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.16  APPLICATION; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to
the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator, in writing, signed by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club
or corporation.  The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit, and
shall contain the following statements and information:




      (1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case
of an individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to
share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the names and
addresses of the officers, directors, and any stockholder who owns 5% or more
of the stock of the corporation;




      (2)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business to be operated under the license;




      (3)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted
of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any
matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of this state, or the
ordinances of this city;




      (4)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government, has been revoked, and the reasons
therefor.



('77 Code, § 3-16) (Ord. 125-l975, passed 10-10-75)




   (B)   Application for a temporary license shall be made at least
seven days in advance of the beginning of the sales period for which the
license is issued.




   (C)   With regards to Class “B,” “F” and “G” licenses
under this chapter, there shall be required a separate application and
license for each stationary bar or for each bar for which a license is
required by the Commonwealth of Kentucky.




('77 Code, § 3-17) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed
3-6-13; Am. Ord. 03-14, passed 3-5-14)




§ 112.17  RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES.



   No license shall be issued to:




   (A)   A person who has been convicted of a felony;




   (B)   A person whose license, under this chapter, has been revoked
for cause;




   (C)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;




   (D)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of the
co-partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;




   (E)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof,
or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason;




   (F)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor;




   (G)   Any person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state
retail liquor dealer's license in accordance with KRS Chapters 243 and 244.




('77 Code, § 3-18) (Ord. 125-l975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed
3-6-13)




§ 112.18  CONDITIONS FOR CLASS C LICENSES.




   All Class "C" licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be accepted by the applicant subject to the following
conditions:






   (A)   That the premises so licensed shall be subject to the entry of
police or other duly authorized representatives of the city, at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search and to the removal
from such premises of all things and articles contained upon such premises in
violation of the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state and consent
to the introduction of such articles or things in evidence in any prosecution
that may be brought involving their necessary use;






   (B)   That the licensee shall not sell any alcoholic beverages
behind blinds or screens, but such sales shall be conducted openly and
without any attempt to hide or screen the same from public view, in
conformity with the provisions of the laws of the state pertaining thereto;






   (C)   That the licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in
an orderly manner and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be
allowed at any time on any licensed premises, nor shall violations of any law
be permitted thereon;






   (D)   That no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or dispensed to any
minor;










   (E)   That licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic
beverages on Sunday except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. Monday.






('77 Code, § 3-19) (Ord. 81-1973, passed l-12-73; Am. Ord. 167-1978, passed
7-14-78)






   (F)   That a temporary license may require the licensee to provide
security guards to maintain the peace during the period of sales.  The
requirement shall be based on the following criteria:






      (1)   Purpose of the event;






      (2)   Number of anticipated participants;






      (3)   Amount of the entry fee; and






      (4)   Location of the event.






(Am. Ord. 11-2016, passed --)




§ 112.19  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   The number of all classes of alcoholic liquor licenses issued and in
force with the number of distilled spirits and wine licenses (alcoholic
liquor) permissible under the Kentucky Revised Statutes.  With regards to
Class “B,” “E” and “F” licenses, there shall be required a
separate application and license for each stationary bar and/or for each bar
for which a license is required by the Commonwealth of Kentucky Administrator
of Distilled Spirits.  For the second or additional licenses required for
Classes “B,” “E” and “F”, the license fee will be waived for the
first year the license is required.  Thereafter, a license fee for each
additional stationary bar and/or for each bar for which a license is required
by the Commonwealth of Kentucky Administrator of Distilled Spirits will pay
one-half of the fee applicable for the first bar.




('77 Code, § 3-20) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed
3-6-13)




§ 112.20  TERM; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each license issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of
no more than a year and shall be renewable upon the date established by the
Kentucky Department of Alcohol Beverage Control for the expiration of state
licenses issued for premises located in Kenton County.  ('77 Code, § 3-21)




   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof, provided that he or she is then qualified to receive a license, and
the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for
shall not be construed as a vested right. ('77 Code, 3-25)





(Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-13; Am. Ord.
11-2016, passed --)




§ 112.21  CLASSIFICATIONS; FEES.




   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be divided into the following
classes with the following fees:





   (A)   Class “A,” Quota Retail Package  License.  This license
shall only permit the retail sale of distilled spirits in sealed packages,
but not for consumption on the premises where sold.  The annual fee for such
license shall be $1,000.




   (B)   Class “B,” Quota Retail Drink License.  This license
shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises where sold and not for resale in any form.  The annual fee for such
license shall be $1,000.




   (C)   Class “C,” Special Sunday Retail Drink License.  This
license shall permit the retail sale of distilled spirits and wine for
consumption only on the premises where sold during Sundays, and otherwise in
accordance with the Kentucky Revised Statutes and these city ordinances as to
the hours during which alcoholic beverages may be sold.  The annual fee for
such license shall be $300.




   (D)   Class “D,” NQ-4 Retail Malt Beverage License.  This
license shall only permit the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption
on the premises where sold, and not for resale in any form.  The annual fee
for such license shall be $200.  The purchase of a Class “A” or Class
“B” license, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall by the virtue thereof
entitle the holders to have a Class “D” NQ-4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink
License, without charge.




   (E)   Class “E,” NQ Retail Malt Beverage License.  This license
shall only permit the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption off the
premises where sold, and not for resale in any form.  The annual fee for
such license shall be $200.  The purchase of a Class “A” or Class
“B” license, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall by virtue thereof
entitle the holders to have a Class “E” NQ Retail Malt Beverage Package
License, without charge.




   (F)   Class “F,” Special Temporary License.  This license shall
permit the retail sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises
where sold, and not for resale in any form.  The license shall be limited
for a term of 30 days from its date of issuance, inclusive of that date, and
shall not be extended past the 30-day period. The fee for such license shall
be $25.




   (G)   Class “G,” NQ-3 Retail Drink License. This license shall
permit the retail sale of distilled spirits and wine as well as malt
beverages for consumption only on the premises where sold.  The license
shall be issued to a regularly organized club, with such sales to be made
only to members of the club, or to a duly authorized licensee of the club
pursuant to the subject club's bylaws.  The license shall further be subject
to all restrictions and conditions or prohibitions outlined in the Kentucky
Revised Statutes, as well as the regulations of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.  No Class “G” license shall be issued
until the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator is satisfied that the
club applying for the license was actually, and in fact, organized for some
purpose or object other than the sale or consumption of distilled spirits and
wine or malt beverages.  The annual fee for such license shall be $300.




   (H)   The holder of a NQ Retail Malt Beverage Package License may
obtain a NQ-4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink License for a fee of $50.  The
holder of a NO-4 Malt Beverage Drink License may obtain a NO Retail Malt
Beverage Package license for a fee of $50.




   (I)   The fee for each of the first five supplemental bar licenses
shall be the same as the fee for the primary drink license.  There shall be
no charge for each supplemental license issued in excess of five to the same
licensee at the same premise.





('77 Code, § 3-22) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 167-1978,
passed 7-14-78; Am. Ord. 168-1978, passed 7-14-78; Am. Ord. 191-1979, passed
6-8-79; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed 3-6-13; Am. Ord. 03-14, passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord.
11-2016, passed --)




§ 112.22  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   All such fees shall be paid to the City Clerk, at the time application
is made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the Treasurer.  In the event
the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the
applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the
General Fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the City
Council by proper action.




('77 Code, § 3-23) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed
3-6-13)




§ 112.23  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only on the premises described in the application and license.  Such
location may be changed only when and upon the written permit to make such
change shall be issued by the Mayor.  No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the
provisions and regulations of this chapter.



('77 Code, § 3-24) (Ord. 125-1975, passed 10-10-75; Am. Ord. 1-13, passed
3-6-13)  Penalty, see 112.99



§ 112.24  REPLACEMENT WHEN LOST OR DESTROYED.




   Whenever a license issued under this chapter shall become lost or
destroyed without fault upon the part of the holder, a duplicate of the
original shall be issued by the city upon the payment of a fee of $1 and an
affidavit stating the loss or destruction of the original license.





('77 Code, § 3-27) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)




§ 112.25  LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.




   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, while
in force, be posted in a conspicuous place where alcoholic beverages are kept
for sale.




('77 Code, § 3-26) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.26  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY EMPLOYEES.




   It shall be unlawful for any employee or independent contractor of an
establishment with a liquor-by-the-drink license, to solicit patrons of said
establishment to purchase any beverage for consumption by any employee or
independent contractor of the establishment with the liquor-by-the-drink
license.





(Ord. 456-1991, passed 4-1-92)





NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITIES




§ 112.35  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT."  A business within the city where liquor,
beer or wine is sold for consumption on the premises pursuant to a retail
drink liquor license or retail cereal malt beverage liquor license that has
been issued by the city.






   "LICENSE."  A retail drink liquor license or a retail cereal malt
beverage liquor license issued by the city.






   "LICENSEE."  Any person to whom a retail drink liquor license or a
retail cereal malt beverage liquor license has been issued by the city
including the officers and agents of the licensee.






   "LIQUOR ADMINISTRATOR."  The duly appointed Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator of the city.






   "OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE."  The occupational license issued for the
business establishment pursuant to the city's Occupational License
Ordinance.  (See Chapter 110.)






   “PERSON.”  A human being, and, where appropriate, a public or
private corporation, an unincorporated association, a partnership, a
government or a governmental authority.






   "PREMISES."  The land and building in and upon which any business
establishment regulated by alcoholic beverage statutes is carried on.






   "RETAIL LICENSEE."  Any licensee including its officers and agents,
who sells at retail any alcoholic beverage for the sale of which an
occupational license is required.





(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 456-1991, passed 4-1-92)




§ 112.36  PERFORMING NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITIES.




   It shall be unlawful for and a person is guilty of performing nude or
nearly nude activity when that person appears on a business establishment's
premises in such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the
pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals, or any simulation thereof, or when any
person appears on a business establishment's premises in such a manner or
attire as to expose to view portions of the breast referred to as the areola,
nipple, or simulation thereof.  This definition shall include the entire
lower portion of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not
exposed in while or in part.





(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 526-1996, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty,
see § 112.99




§ 112.37  PERMITTING NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE ACTIVITIES.




   A licensee or retail licensee is guilty of permitting nude or nearly
nude activity when having control of the business establishment's premises
which it knows or has reasonable cause to know, is being used by any person
to appear on the premises in such a manner or attire as to expose to view
portions of the pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals, or any simulation
thereof; or used by any person to appear on the premises in such manner or
attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast referred to as the
areola, nipple, or any simulation thereof.  This definition shall include
the entire lower portion of the human female breast exhibited by a dress,
blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.  It permits such activity or
fails to make reasonable and timely effort to halt or abate such activity or
use.





(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86; Am. Ord. 526-1996, passed 5-1-96) Penalty, see
§ 112.99




§ 112.38  LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION FOR VIOLATION.




   (A)  Performing nude or nearly nude activities as set forth in §
112.36 or permitting such activities as set forth in § 112.37, is a
violation and punishment shall be fixed as set forth in the Kentucky Revised
Statutes.  The second violation of § 112.36 or § 112.37 within a 12-month
period shall constitute a Class B Misdemeanor with punishment as set forth in
the Kentucky Revised Statutes.  Three or more violations of § 112.36 or §
112.37 within a 12-month period shall constitute a Class A Misdemeanor with
punishment as set forth in the Kentucky Revised Statutes.






   (B)  In the event that a violation of § 112.36 or § 112.37 of this
chapter occurs, the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall
forthwith conduct a hearing pursuant to KRS 243.520 (in conjunction with
241.160 and 241.190), to determine whether the liquor licensee, at whose
business establishment the activity prohibited by this chapter occurred, 
shall have his  license  suspended or revoked.  In the event three or more
violations of § 112.36 or § 112.37 occur at a business establishment within
a 12-month period, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator, after a
hearing, shall revoke the retail drink license or retail cereal malt beverage
liquor license or both.






   (C)  In the event that a violation of § 112.36 or § 112.37 occurs,
the City Administrative Officer shall prefer charges against the retail
licensee pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, and after notice and a hearing
held by the City Council, the occupational license shall either be revoked or
suspended.  In the event that three or more violations of § 112.36 or §
112.37 occur at a business establishment within a 12-month period, after
notice and hearing pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, the City Council shall
revoke the occupational license of the retail licensee.










   (D)  Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the
Mayor at any time during the life of such license or permit for any violation
by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance provisions relating to the
license or permit, the subject matter of  the license or permit, or to the
premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.





(Ord. 353-1985, passed 1-8-86)  Penalty, see § 112.99




   RESTRICTIONS ON SALES



§ 112.50  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   Distilled spirits or wine by the drink shall not be sold
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. Subject
to the exception in division (B), distilled spirits or wine by the drink
shall not be sold on Sunday.




   (B)   Those premises which have obtained a Special Sunday Retail
Drink License may sell alcohol according to their license between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. Sunday and 2:30 a.m. Monday.




   (C)   Malt beverages by the drink or by the package shall not be
sold between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday.
Pursuant to KRS 244.480, Sunday sales under this division shall be treated as
any other day.




   (D)   Distilled spirits and wine by the package shall not be sold
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. Monday through Sunday. Pursuant
to KRS 244.290, Sunday sales under this division shall be treated as any
other day.




(Ord. 11-04, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 9-05, passed 6-1-05; Am. Ord. 15-14,
passed 1-7-15; Am. Ord. 11-2016, passed --)



§ 112.51  PREMISES MUST CLOSE.



   During the restricted hours set forth in § 112.50, no person who has a
valid city license for the sale of distilled spirits or wine or malt
beverages at retail shall cause, permit, or engage in any of the actions,
business, or transactions authorized and permitted thereby unless otherwise
provided herein. During such times, all persons who have such city licenses
shall cause the licensed premises to be closed and vacated by all persons
except the applicant and those persons identified on the application for such
city licenses or any supplements thereto as officers, agents, or employees of
the person to whom such license was issued. All other persons shall vacate
the licensed premises and remove themselves therefrom during such times.



(Ord. 11-04, passed 12-13-04)



§ 112.52  SEPARATE DEPARTMENTS ON PREMISES.



   If a separate department of such licensed premises is maintained in a
manner previously approved in writing by the ABC Administrator as being
capable of being locked, closed off, and separated from the remainder of the
licensed premises and all distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages and all
fixtures and apparatus connected with the acts of business and transactions
authorized by the state licenses and city licenses for the retail sale of
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages from such premises are located
within such approved department, and such approved department is continuously
kept locked, closed off and separated from the remainder of the licensed
premises during such times, the remainder of the licensed premises may remain
open and any lawful activity may be conducted thereon during such times.




(Ord. 11-04, passed 12-13-04)




§ 112.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.




CHAPTER 113:  AMUSEMENTS




Section






Businesses Charging Admission






   113.01   Definitions





   113.02   License fee





   113.03   Temporary amusements and entertainment





   113.04   Exclusions





   113.05   Rules and regulations






Carnivals and Exhibitions






   113.15   Definitions





   113.16   Prohibition; exceptions






Mechanical Amusement Devices






   113.35   Definitions





   113.36   Gambling devices not permitted





   113.37   License required





   113.38   Application and fee





   113.39   Inspection





   113.40   Display of license required





   113.41   Prohibitions and restrictions





   113.42   Revocation of license





   113.43   Seizure and destruction of machine






   113.99   Penalty




BUSINESSES CHARGING ADMISSION



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "ADMISSION CHARGE."  Any charge for the right or privilege to any
entertainment or amusement and shall include, among others, the following: 
All charges for seats, chairs, tables, benches, reserved or otherwise, and
other similar accommodations; all charges made for food and refreshment where
any free entertainment is provided other than by mechanical means; all
charges made for the use or rental of equipment or facilities for purposes of
entertainment and amusement, unless persons not using the equipment or
facilities are admitted free; and all automobile parking charges where the
charge is determined by the number of passengers in an automobile; and all
charges made for the privilege of walking through or standing in or around
any display or structure or device.






   "CITY COLLECTOR."  The City Clerk.






   "ENTERTAINMENT" or "AMUSEMENT."  Shall include, among others, the
following:  circuses; motion picture shows; shows of all kinds including
home and garden shows, and home shows; all sporting contests and athletic
events; exhibitions; concerts; lectures; vaudeville; bowling; dancing; golf;
swimming and bathing; side shows; amusement parks and all forms of recreation
therein; billiards; pool; operatic performances; theatrical performances; and
any other form of diversion, sport, pastime, or recreation.






   "TAXPAYER."  Any person who conducts or engages in the business of
providing entertainment or amusement.





('77 Code, § 4-51) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.02  LICENSE FEE.




   There is hereby imposed on every person conducting or engaging in the
business of providing temporary or transient entertainment or amusement to
which a charge is made for admission within the limits of the city, a license
fee of $50.




('77 Code, § 4-52) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  TEMPORARY AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT.




   Every person conducting or engaging in the business of providing
temporary or transitory amusement or entertainment and receiving admission
charges for the same shall be subject to the tax levied by this subchapter. 
Such person shall obtain a permit from the City Collector at least 24 hours
in advance of conducting any operations within the city.  Before a permit
shall be issued under this section, the applicant for the same shall advise
the City Administrative Officer as to the number of participants or persons
anticipated to take part in the event; if, within the sound discretion of the
City Administrative Officer, the number of anticipated participants or
persons warrants, there shall be required of the licensee that there be
provided independent police and security services for the control and
supervision of the participants or persons at the licensee's expense.




('77 Code, § 4-54) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  EXCLUSIONS.




   This subchapter shall not apply to any person conducting or engaging in
the business of providing entertainment or amusement where admission charges
are to be used exclusively for charitable, eleemosynary, educational, or
religious purposes.





('77 Code, § 4-53) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.05  RULES AND REGULATIONS.




   Subject to the approval of the Mayor and the City Council in accordance
with KRS 83A.130, the City Collector shall have power to adopt rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this subchapter for the
purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment of the license fee herein
levied; and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and
available for public examination in the City Collector's office.  Failure or
refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated under this
section shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.




('77 Code, § 4-55) (Ord. 246-1981, passed 8-26-81) Penalty, see § 113.99



CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS



§ 113.15  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:






   "CARNIVAL."  Amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for
the conduct of games of skill, food-dispensing facilities, and sideshows.






   "EXHIBITIONS."  Circuses, menageries, carnivals, sideshows, and other
similar amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for which a
fee is charged to enter or ride such amusement or view such events.





('77 Code, § 4-16) (Ord. 122-1975, passed 8-8-75)




§ 113.16  PROHIBITION; EXCEPTIONS.




   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate within the
city any carnivals or exhibitions of inanimate objects which are open to the
public unless such carnival or exhibition is sponsored by a charitable,
volunteer, or church organization, whose principal offices are located within
the city.




('77 Code, § 4-17) (Ord. 122-1975, passed 8-8-75)  Penalty, see § 113.99



MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 113.35  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:






   "MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE."  Any machine which, upon the insertion
of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not
registering a score.  It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic or
computer-assisted amusement devices, and all games, operations, or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.






   "PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION, OR ASSOCIATION."  Shall include the
following:  any person, firm, corporation, or association which owns any
such machine; the person, firm, corporation, or association in whose place of
business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the person,
firm, corporation, or association having control over such machine; provided,
however, that the payment of such fee by any person, firm, corporation, or
association enumerated herein shall be deemed a compliance with this section
of this subchapter.





('77 Code, § 4-31) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.36  GAMBLING DEVICES NOT PERMITTED.




   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license, or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to
law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of Kentucky.





('77 Code, § 4-32) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.37  LICENSE REQUIRED.




   Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical amusement device as herein
defined by § 113.35 shall be required to obtain a license from the city,
upon payment of a license fee.  Application for such license shall be made
to the City Administrative Officer upon a form to be supplied by the city for
that purpose.




('77 Code, § 4-33) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.38  APPLICATION AND FEE.




   (A)  Application.






      (1)  The application for a license shall contain the following
information:






         (a)  The name and address of the applicant, age, date, and
place of birth;






         (b)  Prior felony convictions of applicant, if any;






         (c)  The place where the machine or device is to be
displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place;






         (d)  A description of the machine to be covered by the
license, mechanical features, name of manufacturer, serial number.






      (2)  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall
be over 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States.





('77 Code, § 4-34)






   (B)  License fees.





      (1)  Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay
an annual license fee in the amount of $10 per machine for the privilege of
operating or maintaining for operation each mechanical amusement device as
defined in § 113.35.






      (2)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance.





('77 Code, § 4-36)





(Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.39  INSPECTION.




   (A)  Application for a license shall be made out in duplicate, one
copy being referred to the Chief of Police and the other copy to the City
Building Inspector.






   (B)  The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of
good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the application.










   (C)  The Building Inspector shall inspect all wiring, the connections
to the machines, determine if the same complies with the electrical code of
the city, and shall either approve or disapprove the application.






   (D)  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by
the Chief of Police and the Building Inspector.





('77 Code, § 4-35) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.40  DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED.




   (A)  The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously on the body of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.






   (B)  Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to
another similar machine upon application to the City Administrative Officer
to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the
new machine or device.  Not more than one machine shall be operated under
one license and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a
license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him.






   (C)  If the licensee shall move his place of business to another
location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location
upon application to the City Administrative Officer, giving the street and
number of the new location.  The new location shall be approved by the Chief
of Police and the City Building Inspector in the same manner as provided in
§ 113.39.




('77 Code, § 4-37) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.41  PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.




   (A)  No more than five licenses shall be issued under this subchapter
for any one person, nor for any single business or establishment which holds
an occupational license under Chapter 110.






   (B)  No person, firm, corporation, or association shall permit the
playing of mechanical amusement devices within 600 feet of any church, public
or parochial school, or public or civic playground.






   (C)  No license shall be granted for any location within the city
except HC, PO-2, and LHS zones, as defined by the city zoning ordinance.  No
license shall be issued within 600 feet of another licensee under this
subchapter, except for sit-down restaurants with taverns.  Licenses in the
HC, PO-2, and LHS zones shall be issued only for:






      (1)  Sit-down restaurants with taverns with no drive-through or
drive-in facilities, and






      (2)  Night clubs.





('77 Code, § 4-38) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81; Am. Ord. 318-1984, passed
4-4-84)




§ 113.42  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.




   Every license issued under this subchapter is subject to revocation
should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any
mechanical amusement device contrary to the provisions of this subchapter,
the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the State of Kentucky.  The
license may be revoked by the City Council after written notice to the
licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with
which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be
guilty of such violations.  Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be given
the licensee.  At the hearing the licensee and his attorney may be present
and submit evidence of witnesses in his defense.





('77 Code, § 4-39) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.43  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE.




   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, the machine may be seized by
the police and impounded.  If upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing the
device to be used as a gambling device the exhibitor is found guilty, such
machine shall be destroyed in accordance with the Kentucky Revised Statutes.





('77 Code, § 4-40) (Ord. 245-1981, passed 8-26-81)




§ 113.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.




CHAPTER 114: COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION




Section






   114.01   Definitions





   114.02   Permit required





   114.03   Application for permit





   114.04   Standards for investigation; insurance





   114.05   Fees





   114.06   Display of permit required





   114.07   Appeal procedure





   114.08   Revocation standards and procedures





   114.09   Requirements for bona fide nonprofit organization






   114.10   Penalty




§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the content clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "BUSINESS."  The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor in this section.






   "GOODS."  Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but
is not restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.






   "ITINERANT MERCHANT."  Any person, whether as owner, agent, or
consignee, who engages in a business of selling goods within the city,
temporarily, and who, in the furtherance of such business, uses any building,
structure, vehicle, or any place within the city.






   "PEDDLER."  Any person who travels from place to place by any means
carrying goods for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or any person
who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for sale
from any public place within the city.






   "SOLICITOR."  Any person who travels by any means from place to place,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the
future or for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a
solicitor is not a peddler.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.




   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor
wishing to engage in such activity, within the corporate limits of the city
shall first obtain a permit from the city. No permit issued under the terms
and conditions of this chapter shall be transferable. Permits issued under
this chapter shall be valid for the time period specified thereon. Under no
circumstances shall the permit be valid after December 31 of the year of its
issuance. Re-application shall be required upon expiration of said permit if
the applicant wishes to continue such activity.






   (B)   Solicitation within the city shall be permitted from 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. Daylight Savings Time and from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. when there
is not Daylight Savings Time.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.




   Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation desiring
to act as an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor and any individual
desiring to act as an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor on behalf of
a sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation, shall submit a completed
application form to the Chief of Police. Said application forms can be
obtained at the Police Department. The application form shall be signed by
the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by
the President if a corporation. The completed application form shall include
at least the following information:






   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.






   (B)   The name of the individual having management or supervisory
authority of the applicant's business during the time it is to occur in the
city:






      (1)   The local address and telephone number of such
individual;






      (2)   The permanent address and telephone number of such
individual;






      (3)   The capacity in which such individual will act.






   (C)   The name, address and telephone number of the person, if any,
for whose purpose the business will be carried on, and if a corporation, the
state of corporation;






   (D)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to
carry on the applicant's business;






   (E)   The nature and quality of the goods or services to be offered
for sale or delivered;










      (1)   If goods, their invoice value and where and by whom such
goods are manufactured or grown;






   (F)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the
business and samples of same when applicable;






   (G)   Whether the individuals identified in § 114.02 or divisions
(A), (B), or (C) of this section have ever been convicted of any crime and,
if so, the nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense;






   (H)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the
business, including its license number.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.04  STANDARDS FOR INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE.




   (A)  Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall cause
a set of the applicant's fingerprints and a picture taken of the applicant to
be attached to the application. Additionally, the Chief of Police shall also
cause an investigation of the applicant's business reputation and moral
character to be made. If the investigation discloses tangible evidence that
the conduct of the applicant or the applicant's business would pose a threat
to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare, then the
application may be denied. For the purposes of this section, tangible
evidence shall be defined as:






      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral
turpitude; or






      (2)   The applicant has made willful misstatements on the
application; or






      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of
ordinances pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers and solicitors; or






      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; or






      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of
solicited contracts; or






      (6)   The applicant has unsatisfactory moral character.






   (B)  The Chief of Police shall approve the application if the
investigation does not uncover tangible evidence of a threat to the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public. Said investigation
shall be completed no later than the conclusion of the third business day
after filing the application. The Chief of Police shall then notify the
applicant by certified mail as to whether the application is approved or
denied. If denied, the letter shall indicate the reasons for the denial.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.05  FEES.




   Any person acting as an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor
shall, upon approval of their application, be required to obtain an
occupational license from the City Licensing Agent and pay a fee of $25 per
day, per employee, or $150 per year, per employee.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.06  DISPLAY OF PERMIT REQUIRED.




   (A)   Any permit issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter
shall be conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one location within the city is used to conduct business, separate
licenses must be obtained for each location.






   (B)  The Chief of Police shall issue a permit to each peddler or
solicitor licensed under this chapter. The permit shall contain the-words
"Licensed Peddler" or "Licensed Solicitor", the expiration date of the
license, and the number of the license. The permit shall be maintained on the
licensee during such time as the individual is engaged in the business
activity so licensed.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.07  APPEAL PROCEDURE.




   Any person aggrieved by a decision made pursuant to the requirements
herein contained shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Council. The
appeal shall be filed with the legislative body within 14 days after receipt
of the decision of the Chief of Police. The Board of Council shall conduct
the hearing of appeal within 14 days after receipt of notification of appeal.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.08  REVOCATION STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES.




   Any permit granted under this chapter may be immediately revoked by the
Chief of Police pursuant to the standards set forth in this section. The
Chief of Police may cause the revocation of a permit granted under this
chapter for any of the following reasons:






   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the permit
application; or






   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the permit; or






   (C)   Any violation of this chapter; or






   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or






   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in
such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or
general welfare of the public.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.09  REQUIREMENTS FOR BONA FIDE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.




   (A)   Bona fide nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the
requirements set forth in this chapter.  When any bona fide nonprofit
organization desires to engage in  solicitation of funds,  donations or
gifts, or the selling or giving away of any evidences, certificates or
tickets for any prizes, drawings or other interests in any awards whatsoever,
written application shall be made to the Chief of Police. Said written
application shall set forth the kind and type of solicitation to be made, the
purpose or purposes for which the proceeds will be used, the date, time and
place said solicitation is intended to be made, and same shall be signed by a
duly authorized representative of the bona fide nonprofit organization.






   (B)   Upon receipt of the written request to engage in solicitation,
the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made concerning the
nonprofit organization and the purpose for which the funds are to be used.
The investigation shall be completed no later than the conclusion of the
third business day after filing the application. The Chief of Police shall
then notify the applicant by certified mail as to whether the request is
approved or denied. No fee shall be required for a bona fide nonprofit
organization to engage in such activity.






   (C)   No more than two nonprofit organizations shall be permitted to
simultaneously engage in solicitation of any kind in the same geographic area
as defined by the City Plat Record Index Sheet.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




§ 114.99  PENALTY.




   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be fined not less than $50 nor more than $250. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense.





(Ord. 522-96, passed 2-2-96)




CHAPTER 115:  GARAGE SALES




Section






   115.01   Definitions





   115.02   Permit required; restrictions on sales





   115.03   Registration





   115.04   Signs





   115.05   Parking regulations





   115.06   Compliance with other regulations required





   115.07   Exceptions






   115.99   Penalty




§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "BUSINESS BUILDING."  A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or structures, by a permanent
roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.






   "GARAGE SALE."  A sale from a residence or residential property of
tangible personal property which has been owned or used previously by the
individual or resident residing on the premises where the sale is
conducted.  A yard, patio, attic, or driveway sale is included within the
definition of "GARAGE SALE."






   "GOODS."  Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other tangible personal
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.






   "OUTDOOR SALE."  Any sale of tangible personal property not otherwise
regulated in the city advertised by any means whereby the public at large is
or can be made aware of such sale, and shall include "sidewalk sales." 
Stocking of merchandise for storage or sale outside the premises of a
building shall be considered an outdoor sale.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)




§ 115.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.




   (A)  The conduct of general retail sales or commercial activities in
residential areas is, except as otherwise expressly authorized under the
Code, prohibited.  Garage sales and outdoor sales, as defined in § 115.01,
are permitted only insofar as they are conducted consistent with the
limitations set forth herein.






   (B)  No garage sale or outdoor sale of goods may be conducted within
the city without first registering the sale with the City Clerk.  The City
Clerk  shall maintain a register book in the city office for purposes of
verifying permitted sales.






   (C)  No more than two such registrations shall be permitted to one
residence or household during any calendar year.  Such permit shall be
limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of two consecutive days. 
No more than three permits may be issued to an established licensed business
in a business zone during any calendar year.  Such permit shall be limited
in time to the normal business hours of the applicant for three consecutive
days.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99




§ 115.03  REGISTRATION.




   Prior to the garage sale or outdoor sale, the person conducting such
sale shall file a written statement with the City Clerk setting forth the
following information:






   (A)  The person's interest in the residential property (ownership,
current lessee, or such other control as the person may have), or the
person's interest in the commercial property (ownership, current lessee, or
such other control as the person may have).






   (B)  The ownership of the personal property goods to be sold.






   (C)  The purposes to which the personal property goods to be sold have
previously been used.






   (D)  In the event the request is by a business, an affirmative
statement that the property to be sold or work being done must be consistent
and compatible with the primary business occupation and occupational license
regularly issued to that business.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99




§ 115.04  SIGNS.




   One temporary sign of not more than four square feet shall be permitted
to be displayed on the property of the residence where a garage sale is being
conducted.  The sign shall be displayed only during the times of the sale as
delineated on the permit.  In no case shall the sign be placed on property
other than the property of the residence to which the permit has been issued,
nor shall any sign be located closer than five feet from the property line.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86; Am. Ord. 12-02, passed 8-28-02) Penalty, see
§ 115.99




§ 115.05  PARKING REGULATIONS.




   All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all
applicable laws and ordinances.  The Police Department may enforce such
temporary controls which may alleviate any special hazards or congestion
created by any garage sale.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99




§ 115.06  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS REQUIRED.




   A garage sale shall be conducted in compliance with all laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations not in conflict herewith; however, no
occupational license shall be required therefor.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed 1-8-86)  Penalty, see § 115.99




§ 115.07  EXCEPTIONS.




   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply or affect the following
persons or sales:






   (A)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court
of competent jurisdiction.






   (B)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.






   (C)  Any sale regulated under provision of other ordinances of the
city.






   (D)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other
business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would
be permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of
the presently nonconforming section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer, or vendor and which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in the ordinances of the
city.






   (E)  Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural, or
governmental institution or organization, provided, however, that the burden
of establishing the exemption under this division shall be on the
organization or institution claiming such exemption.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed l-8-86)




§ 115.99  PENALTY.




   Any person, firm, group, or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.





(Ord. 352-1985, passed 1-8-86)




CHAPTER 116:  INSURANCE COMPANIES




Section






   116.01   Definition





   116.02   License fee imposed





   116.03   Fee for life insurance companies





   116.04   Fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance





   116.05   Due date





   116.06   Written breakdown of collections




§ 116.01  DEFINITION.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   "HEALTH INSURANCE."  Insurance of human beings against medical
expenses resulting from bodily injury, disablement, or sickness, excluding
health coverage provided under automobile, fire and allied perils, inland
marine, and life policies.





('77 Code, § 14-35(b)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-1984,
passed 10-18-84)




§ 116.02  LICENSE FEE IMPOSED.




   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company, a license fee for
the privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate
limits of the city on a calendar-year basis.





('77 Code, § 14-35(a)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-1984,
passed 10-18-84)




§ 116.03  FEE FOR LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES.



   The license fee imposed upon a life insurance company, which issues
life insurance policies upon the lives of persons residing within the
corporate limits of the city, shall be 8% of the first year's premiums
actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of
such policies.  The provisions of this section shall not include premiums
received for single premium annuities.




('77 Code, § 14-35(c)) (Ord. 328-l984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-l984,
passed 10-18-84; Am. Ord. 16-12, passed 10-3-12)




§ 116.04  FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE INSURANCE.



   (A)   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which
issues any insurance policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be 8%
of the premiums actually collected by such company within each calendar
quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies on risks located within
the corporate limits of the city, on those classes of business which such
company is authorized to transact, less all premiums returned to policy
holders.




   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not include:




      (1)   Premiums received for insuring employers against
liability of personal injuries to their employees, or death caused thereby,
under the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, or premiums received
on policies of group health insurance provided for state employees under KRS
18A.225(2), or premiums received on health insurance as defined by § 116.01
or paid to any state employee benefit fund created pursuant to KRS Chapter
18A;




      (2)   Premiums for health insurance policies paid by
individuals or premiums for policies issued through Kentucky Access;




      (3)   Health insurance policies issued to individuals;




      (4)   Policies for high deductible health plans as defined by
26 U.S.C. § 223(c)(2);




      (5)   Premiums paid to insurers of municipal bonds, leases or
other debt instruments issued by or on behalf of a city, county, charter
county government, urban county government, consolidated local government,
special district, nonprofit corporation, or other political subdivision of
the Commonwealth.  However, this exemption does not apply if the debt
instruments are issued for profit or on behalf of a for-profit or private
organization.




('77 Code, § 14-35(d)) (Ord. 328-l984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-l984,
passed 10-18-84; Am. Ord. 16-12, passed 10-3-12)




§ 116.05  DUE DATE.




   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due 30 days after the
end of each calendar quarter.  License fees which are not paid on or before
the due date shall bear interest at the rate as defined by KRS 131.010(6) and
KRS 131.183.





('77 Code, § 14-35(f)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 335-1984,
passed 10-18-84)




§ 116.06  WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.




   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this
chapter shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written
breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the following
categories of insurance:






   (A)  Automobile.






   (B)  Casualty.






   (C)  Fire and allied perils.






   (D)  Inland marine.






   (E)  Life.





('77 Code, § 14-35(e)) (Ord. 328-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord.





335-1984, passed 10-18-84)




CHAPTER 117:  PAWNBROKERS




Section






   117.01   Definitions





   117.02   Bond





   117.03   Register to be kept; daily reports





   117.04   Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article





   117.05   Maximum interest, resale price





   117.06   Receipt to be given for payment of loan





   117.07   Prohibited activities





   117.08   Enforcement






   117.99   Penalty




§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "PAWNBROKER."  Any person who loans money on deposit of personal
property; deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling
the property back again at a stipulated price; makes a public display at his
place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their
business; or who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on
personal property or deposit.





(KRS 226.010)




§ 117.02  BOND.




   Every person to whom a city license is granted to carry on the business
of a pawnbroker shall annually enter into bond to the city, with good and
sufficient surety to be approved by City Council, in the penal sum of
$1000.  This bond shall be conditioned that he will observe the provisions
of this chapter and all ordinances and laws in force in the city not
inconsistent with this chapter.





(KRS 226.020)




§ 117.03  REGISTER TO BE KEPT; DAILY REPORTS.



   (A)  Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases
of all articles by the pawnbroker from the general public.  The register
shall:




      (1)   Be reported to an online, internet based transaction
recording service accessible to law enforcement agencies;




      (2)   Show the dates and the amounts of all loans or purchases
by the pawnbroker from the general public, and the names and: (i) a
driver’s license number; (ii) another state or federally issued picture
identification card number; or (iii) if the identification specified in (i)
and (ii) is not available, a Social Security number may be accepted; of all
persons who have left any property that has been pawned or sold; 




      (3)   At all times be available to the inspection of any law
enforcement officer of the city when in the discharge of his or her official
duty; and




         (a)   Make;




         (b)   Model;




         (c)   Color;




         (d)   Size;




         (e)   Manufacturer;




         (f)   Vintage; and




         (g)   Distinguishing marks or characteristics.




      (4)   When secondhand merchandise is sold to a pawnbroker, the
merchandise shall be held for a minimum of 12 days before being resold.





      (5)   Prior to the release of property to a representative of
law enforcement, the law enforcement representative shall provide to the
pawnbroker a case report or other documentation that the item has been
reported as stolen.
(KRS 226.040)






   (B)  Every pawnbroker shall, by 11:00 a.m. each day, make available to
the Chief of Police a true and correct written report of all goods received
by him, whether by pawn or purchase, during the 24 hours preceding each
report.  The report shall describe the goods as accurately as practicable.
The Chief of Police shall furnish blanks for these reports.  (KRS 226.070)





Penalty, see § 117.99




§ 117.04  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR EACH ARTICLE; SALE OF ARTICLE.




   (A)  Every pawnbroker shall give a plain written or printed ticket for
the loan to the person negotiating or selling, and a plain written or printed
receipt of the articles that have been purchased or upon which money is
loaned, having on each a copy of the entries required by § 117.03(A) to be
kept in his register.  He shall not make any charge for the ticket or
receipt.






   (B)  A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration of
90 days from the maturity of the loan.  However, not less than ten days
before making the sale, the pawnbroker shall give notice to the person by
whom the article was pawned by mail addressed to the post office address of
that person as shown on the pawnbroker's register, notifying such person
that, unless he redeems the article within ten days from the date of mailing
of the notice, the article will be sold.





(KRS 226.050)  Penalty, see § 117.99




§ 117.05  MAXIMUM INTEREST, RESALE PRICE.




   Any pawnbroker as defined in § 117.01, may, in loaning money on
deposit of personal property, charge, contract for, or receive interest at a
rate not exceeding 2% per month on the unpaid principal balance of the loan,
and may charge, contract for, and receive a reasonable fee, not to exceed
one-fifth of the value of the loan per month, for investigating the title,
storing and insuring the property, closing the loan, making daily reports to
local law enforcement officers if required by § 117.03, and for other
expenses, losses, and incidental costs associated with servicing such
loans.  Further, this fee, when made and collected, shall not be deemed as
interest for any purpose of law.  No pawnbroker shall directly or indirectly
charge, receive, or contract for any interest or consideration greater than
that allowed by this section.





(KRS 226.080)  Penalty, see § 117.99




§ 117.06  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR PAYMENT OF LOAN.




   Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payment of money from a borrower,
shall give to that person a plain and complete receipt for such  payment,
specifying  separately the  amount applied  to  principal and  the
amount  applied to  interest.  In a  case  where  the pawnbroker  has
purchased  personal property  under an agreement to  sell  it back at a
stipulated price, the pawnbroker shall, on receiving any  payment  of 
money from  the  person  from  whom the  property was purchased, give
that person a receipt stating the original purchase price, the stipulated
resale price, and the amount received.





(KRS 226.090)  Penalty, see § 117.99




§ 117.07  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.




   No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of either pledge or pawn, any
article whatever from a minor at any time nor from any person between 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.





(KRS 226.030)  Penalty, see § 117.99




§ 117.08  ENFORCEMENT.




   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
unless otherwise provided by KRS 226.100.  However, county police, for the
purpose of locating stolen goods, may carry out the provisions of KRS 226.060
within the city.





(KRS 226.100)




§ 117.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Any pawnbroker or pawnbroker's clerk who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $500, and his license may be forfeited to the city.  (KRS
226.990(1))






   (B)   Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of §
112.03(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
$20 nor more than $100.  (KRS 226.990(3))




CHAPTER 118:  CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS




Section






   118.01   Permit required for charitable solicitations






   118.99   Penalty





Cross-reference:





   Peddlers not to obstruct streets, see § 91.34




§ 118.01  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS.




   Any person, agent, or employee of such person, engaged in the
solicitation of money or other things of value for a charitable purpose, must
first procure a permit from the City Council for such purpose.  The person
must make application to the City Council stating the object and purpose of
the charity, the method by which money or other things of value are to be
solicited and collected, and the specified time in which such solicitation is
to take place.  This section, however, shall not apply to solicitations of
funds from members of the same fraternal or charitable organization.




('77 Code, § 9-5) (Ord. 19-1968, passed 3-4-68)  Penalty, see § 118.99




Statutory reference:





   Charitable Solicitations, see KRS Chapter 367




§ 118.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.  Each day's violation
shall constitute a separate offense.




CHAPTER 119:  PRECIOUS STONES AND METALS DEALERS




Section






   119.01   Daily register; contents; copy to Chief of Police





   119.02   Articles to be retained in original condition; inspection





   119.03   Photograph of seller or exchanger required





   119.04   Transactions with minors prohibited





   119.05   Exemption






   119.99   Penalty




§ 119.01  DAILY REGISTER; CONTENTS; COPY TO CHIEF OF POLICE.




   (A)  It shall be the duty of all persons dealing in the purchase or
exchange of secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other
precious stones, cutlery, old gold, siver, platinum, or other precious
metals, or any other secondhand manufactured articles, composed wholly or in
part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals to keep a daily
register of every article purchased or exchanged by them in the course of
their business and the persons from whom such articles were acquired.  The
register shall contain as minute a description of each article as is
possible, including any identification numbers and the manufacturer's name,
as well as the name, age, sex, race, address, driver's license number, social
security number, general description of the individual or individuals selling
or exchanging the articles, and their signatures.  ('77 Code, § 9-66)





   (B)  All persons engaged in business as described in division (A)
above, shall furnish to the Chief of Police upon request at the police office
by 11:00 a.m., a copy of the register for all transactions which took place
during the preceding day.  ('77 Code, § 9-67)




(Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)  Penalty, see § 119.99




§ 119.02  ARTICLES TO BE RETAINED IN ORIGINAL CONDITION; INSPECTION.




   All persons engaged in business as described in § 119.01 shall retain
each and every article received by them in the same state or condition in
which it was received, and all articles received during any one day's
transaction shall be kept separately and shall not be comingled with articles
received during any other day's transactions. Furthermore, all articles shall
be made available for examination within the city to members of the Police
Department, and the Sheriff's Department, state police, county police, or
other law enforcement official, state or federal, for a period of five
consecutive days after their receipt, before such articles are resold or
exchanged, unless written permission is obtained from the Chief of Police.




('77 Code, § 9-68) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.03  PHOTOGRAPH OF SELLER OR EXCHANGER REQUIRED.




   No person engaged in business as described in § 119.01 shall purchase
or exchange secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other
precious stones, cutlery, or old gold, silver, platinum, or other precious
metals, or other secondhand manufactured articles composed wholly or in part
of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals unless the person first
obtains a photograph of the seller or exchanger of the above enumerated
items.  The photograph is to be identified in such a way that person or
persons shown in the photograph can be identified with each entry of the
register identified in § 119.01.  The photograph and register shall be
maintained for a period of one year after the date on which the transaction
occurred.




('77 Code, § 9-69) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.04  TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS PROHIBITED.




   No person engaged in business as described in § 119.01 shall purchase
or exchange secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other
precious stones, cutlery, or old gold, silver, platinum, or other precious
metals, or any other secondhand manufactured articles composed wholly or in
part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals from any person less
than 18 years of age.




('77 Code, § 9-70) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.05  EXEMPTION.




   Nothing contained herein shall require compliance of §§ 119.01
through 119.04 by a person engaging in business within the city who possesses
a current business license from the city and is accepting returns for cash,
credit, or replacement of any item originally purchased from the person.





('77 Code, § 9-71) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)




§ 119.99  PENALTY.




   Violation of any of the duties, requirements, or prohibitions contained
in §§ 119.01 through 119.04 shall be punishable as a Class A misdemeanor as
defined by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.





('77 Code, § 9-72) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 3-25-81)




CHAPTER 120:  HOTELS, MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES 



Section



 




   120.01   Definitions





   120.02   Guest register required





   120.03   Register to be open for inspection










   120.99   Penalty




§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



 



   “DWELLING.”  A building which is usually occupied by one or more
persons lodging therein.



 



   “HOTEL/MOTEL.”  Any dwelling licensed as such by the State Fire
Marshal and kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to
be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transient
guests, in which six or more rooms are used for the accommodations of such
guests.



 



   “ROOMING HOUSE.”  A dwelling occupied by one or more persons in
which three or more rooms are kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out
to the public to a be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for
pay.



(Ord. 1-04, passed 1-14-04)



§ 120.02  GUEST REGISTER REQUIRED.



   (A)   A guest register shall be maintained at all times and the
hotel, motel or rooming house operator/clerk shall require each person to
whom a room is let for occupancy to sign both name, address, state
identification number and date of birth and verify the information by
checking the identification provided by the renter/guest in the register
prior to renting or occupying the same.  In the case of husband and wife,
one person may sign for both.



 



   (B)   The operator/clerk in charge at the time of signing shall note
opposite the name of each guest, the room number(s) of the room(s) assigned
for occupancy and the time and date of the beginning of such occupancy. 
When a guest relinquishes occupancy, the operator in charge shall note in the
register the time and date of leaving.  All entries shall be in ink and
shall not be in any manner erased, obliterated, or defaced.



(Ord. 1-04, passed 1-14-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.03  REGISTER TO BE OPEN FOR INSPECTION.



   Guest registers shall at all times be open for inspection by members of
the Police and Fire Departments and Building/Zoning Department for the
purposes of conducting investigations pursuant to city ordinances, Kentucky
Revised Statutes or United States Code.



(Ord. 1-04, passed 1-14-04) Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.




(Ord. 1-04, passed 1-14-04)









CHAPTER 121:  USED PERSONAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS








Section




   121.01   Definitions





   121.02   License required










   121.99   Penalty




 



§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.



      For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



 



   “PERSONAL PROPERTY.” is defined as any personal property that does
not require a title for transfer.



 



   “USED PERSONAL PROPERTY VENDOR” Any person or entity that purchases
used or previously owned personal property for the purpose of resale to the
public, makes a public display at its place of business of the merchandise,
advertises that it purchases and resells used or previously owned personal
property.



(Ord. 8-07, passed 11-7-07)



§ 121.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person or entity who engages in the purchase and resale of
untitled personal property as defined in this section as a Used Personal
Property Vendor must obtain a license with the city and disclose the nature
of its business.



 



   (B)   They are required to obtain verified identification of the
vendor and keep a written record or log by date of the name and address of
the vendor including the identification information, social security number,
drivers license number or state identification number and date of birth and
the item purchased, including serial numbers. This information will be kept
on site and will be subject to inspection by any law enforcement officer
without the need for a subpoena.



(Ord. 8-07, passed 11-7-07)



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter is a Class A Misdemeanor, with up to $500.00
in fines and up to a year in jail for each violation.



(Ord. 8-07, passed 11-7-07)








CHAPTER 122: JOB DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES



Section



   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Establishment of incentives



   122.03   Collection options



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.




   “AGREEMENT.”  Any agreement made pursuant to this chapter between
the city and an approved company with respect to an economic development
project.




   “APPLICANT.”  A business whose employees are primarily engaged in,
or will be engaged in, professional, administrative or technical occupations,
or a manufacturer, which business or manufacturer is located, or proposes to
locate its business, in the city, and which commits by agreement to maintain
existing jobs in the event that the business has a reasonable probability of
relocating outside the city, or create a minimum number of new jobs and
annual payroll within the city as hereinafter provided.  An applicant shall
not include sexually oriented businesses or businesses that are primarily
engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages.




   “APPROVED COMPANY.”  An applicant the Mayor deems to have
qualified for an incentive.




   “APPROVED COMPANY'S EMPLOYEES.”  The full- or part-time employees
of an approved company who perform services within the city and are subject
to the city's occupational license fee as set forth in Chapter 110 of this
code of ordinances.




   “COMMENCEMENT DATE.”  The date that the incentive is first
available to the approved company as provided in the agreement.




   “INCENTIVE.”  At the Mayor's discretion, the incentive may be a
reduction of 1% to 50% of the occupational license fees paid by the approved
company's employees.  Alternatively, if the approved company is withholding
and paying the city the full amount of the occupational license fee from the
approved company's employees pursuant to § 122.03(A)(2), then the incentive
may be a refund of between 1 % and 50% of the occupational license fee.  The
city will refund the incentive to the approved company at the end of the
incentive year, subject to the limitations of § 122.03 below.  As well,
upon agreement by the city and approved company, the incentive may be paid to
any TIF district established by the city.  The incentive will not extend for
a period longer than ten years.




   “INCENTIVE YEAR.”  The 12-month period beginning on the
commencement date, and each 12-month period thereafter during the term for
which the incentive is available to the approved company.



(Ord. 02-14, passed 3-5-14)



§ 122.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF INCENTIVES.



   The following shall apply to the establishment of incentives:




   (A)   To the extent any applicant creates or retains a minimum of 25
jobs (“jobs”), and creates or retains a minimum annual payroll of
$2,500,000 that is subject to the city's occupational license fee
(“payroll”) within any given year, as provided in the agreement, the
applicant shall qualify for an incentive.  The incentive will continue for
the authorized term of five to ten years, as applicable, provided that the
approved company maintains or exceeds the jobs and payroll requirement during
any particular successive year, and otherwise is in compliance with the terms
of the agreement.




   (B)   In order to be eligible to receive an incentive, an applicant
must first submit a signed application to the Mayor, on a form prescribed by
the Mayor.  Further, the applicant shall provide any additional information
reasonably requested to enable the Mayor to evaluate the application.  Upon
acceptance, the Mayor will provide the applicant written approval of the
application that will include the terms and conditions of the agreement as
the Mayor deems appropriate to ensure that the city receives the full value
of any benefits to be gained, including, without limitation, provisions
requiring continuing operation within the city for a period beyond the
incentive period, provisions for reimbursement of incentives and potential
penalties not to exceed 50% of the incentives offered in the event of default
by the approved company, and appropriate conditions precedent to the
triggering of incentives to ensure the city receives the full revenue and job
benefits deemed appropriate, within the limits set forth in division (A).




   (C)   If the approved company does not comply with the agreement by
failing to create jobs and/or payroll within any particular year during the
term of the agreement, then the approved company shall not receive the
incentive for that year.



(Ord. 02-14, passed 3-5-14)



§ 122.03  COLLECTION OPTIONS.



   The collection options will apply as follows:



 



   (A)   In the case of an incentive, upon agreement with the city,
through its Mayor, the approved company shall:




      (1)   Reduce the occupational tax paid by the approved
company's employees pursuant to the incentive granted by the city; or




      (2)   Withhold and remit to the city the full amount of the
occupational license tax from the approved company's employees, consistent
with all applicable laws and ordinances, and receive a reimbursement from the
city of the incentive in the form of a refund at the end of each incentive
year.  Alternatively, upon agreement of the city and the approved company,
the incentive may be paid to any TIF district established by the city.




   (B)   Should the approved company elect an incentive as provided in
division (A)(1):




      (1)   The approved company shall be authorized to reduce the
assessment, consistent with the terms of division (A)(1), from each paycheck
of each approved company employee; and




      (2)   Each employee so assessed shall be entitled to a credit
against the city occupational tax thereof equal to the job development
assessment fee withheld from his or her wages during the calendar year.




   (C)   Should the approved company elect to collect its incentive
from the city by withholding and remitting to the city the full amount of the
occupational license fee from its employees, as provided in division (A)(2),
the city, upon satisfaction that the approved company has met all of the
terms and requirements of the agreement, shall then remit the incentive to
the approved company within 90 days after the end of each incentive year.




   (D)   Any approved company receiving an incentive shall make its
payroll book and records available to the city at such reasonable times as
the city shall request, and shall file with the city documentation respecting
any employee assessment as the city may require.




(Ord. 02-14, passed 3-5-14)




CHAPTER 123: REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS 



Section



   123.01   Definitions



   123.02   Abandoning carts prohibited



   123.03   Carts to be confined to business premises



   123.04   Identification of carts



   123.05   Impounding abandoned carts; redemption by owner



   123.06   Destruction of impounded carts



   123.99   Violation and penalties



§ 123.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.




   "CART." Any rolling or non-rolling container or basket made of wire,,
metal, wood or other material commonly used in supermarkets, self-service
stores or markets for transporting merchandise or foodstuffs within the
establishments and from the business establishment to a motor vehicle or
other building.




   "BUSINESS PREMISES." The buildings, parking areas, and storage areas
used in connection with the owner's business.




(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)



§ 123.02  ABANDONING CARTS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall leave or abandon, on any public street, sidewalk or any
other public place in the city, any cart from any business establishment,
market or food-dispensing establishment.




(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)



§ 123.03  CARTS TO BE CONFINED TO BUSINESS PREMISES.



   It shall be the responsibility of every store, supermarket or business
establishment in the city owning carts to keep them or see that they are kept
within the confines of the owner's business premises.




(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)



§ 123.04  IDENTIFICATION OF CARTS.



   Any store, supermarket or business establishment which is the owner of
any cart which is maintained and supplied by the owner for use by customers
at the owner's business premises in the city is required to have permanently
attached to each cart which it owns an identification tag which sets forth
the name of the store, supermarket or business establishment.



 



   (A)   The Police Department shall remove or cause to be removed any
cart found abandoned in any public place. Such cart shall be impounded at any
city-owned storage facility available for such purpose.




   (B)   The Police Department shall notify the owner of the cart by
ordinary mail within three days of such impoundment.




   (C)   The owner may reclaim the cart for $100.00 within 60 days of
sending the notice of impounding.




(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)



§ 123.06  DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED CARTS.



   (A)   If any impounded carts are not redeemed within 60 days of
sending the notice of impounding, the Chief of Police may dismantle, destroy,
sell or dispose of the unclaimed carts in any manner.




   (B)   Any public sale or other disposition of the carts shall be
without liability on the part of the city to the owner of the carts or any
other person legally entitled to or having an interest therein.




(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)



§ 123.99  VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any store, supermarket or business establishment in found
violation of § 123.04 shall be fined $5.00. Each cart to which a proper
identification tag has not been affixed shall be deemed to be a separate
offense and each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense with respect to each cart.




   (B)   Any person in violation of § 123.02 shall be fined $100.00.
Each cart found off the owner's business premises shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.




   (C)   Any store, supermarket or business establishment in violation
of § 123.03 shall be fined $100.00. Each cart found off the owner's business
premises shall be deemed to be a separate offense.





(Ord. 11-2015, passed 7-1-15)




TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES




   Chapter






      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS






      131.   FAMILY OFFENSES






      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY






      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS






      134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES






      135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND JUSTICE






      136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER






      137.   SEXUAL OFFENSES






      138.   INCHOATE OFFENSES






      139.   GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII




CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against persons. 
These citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement
officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of
the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION        PENALTY CLASS



ASSAULT



   First degree   508.010   B felony



   Second degree   508.020   C felony



   Third degree   508.025   D felony



   Fourth degree   508.030   A misdemeanor



   Under emotional disturbance   508.040   B misdemeanor or D felony




CRIMINAL ABUSE



   First degree   508.100   C felony



   Second degree   508.110   D felony



   Third degree   508.120   A misdemeanor




CRIMINAL COERCION   509.080   A misdemeanor




CUSTODIAL INTERFERENCE   509.070   D felony




KIDNAPPING   509.040   A or B felony; capital offense




MANSLAUGHTER



   First degree   507.030   B felony



   Second degree   507.040   C felony




MENACING   508.050   B misdemeanor




MURDER   507.020   Capital offense




RECKLESS HOMICIDE   507.050   D felony




STALKING



   First degree   508.140   D felony



   Second degree   508.150   A misdemeanor




TERRORISTIC THREATENING   508.080   A misdemeanor




UNLAWFUL IMPRISONMENT



   First degree   509.020   D felony



   Second degree   509.030   A misdemeanor




WANTON ENDANGERMENT



   First degree   508.060   D felony



   Second degree   508.070   A misdemeanor



CHAPTER 131:  FAMILY OFFENSES




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common family offenses.  These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.









OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION        PENALTY CLASS



BIGAMY   530.010   D felony




CONCEALING BIRTH OF INFANT   530.030   A misdemeanor




INCEST   530.020   C felony




INCOMPETENT PERSON,
ENDANGERING WELFARE OF   530.080   A misdemeanor




MINORS



   Abandonment of   530.040   D felony



   Endangering welfare of   530.060   A misdemeanor



   Unlawful transaction with



       First degree   530.064   A, B, or C felony



       Second degree   530.065   D felony



       Third degree   530.070   A misdemeanor




NONSUPPORT   530.050   A misdemeanor




NONSUPPORT, FLAGRANT   530.050   D felony




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against property. 
These citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement
officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of
the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION      PENALTY CLASS



ARSON



   Defrauding insurer   513.060   D felony



   First degree   513.020   A felony



   Second degree   513.030   B felony



   Third degree   513.040   D felony




BURGLARY



   First degree   511.020   B felony



   Second degree   511.030   C felony



   Third degree   511.040   D felony



   Possession of burglar's tools   511.050   A misdemeanor




CRIMINAL MISCHIEF



   First degree   512.020   D felony



   Second degree   512.030   A misdemeanor



   Third degree   512.040   B misdemeanor




CRIMINAL TRESPASS



   First degree   511.060   A misdemeanor



   Second degree   511.070   B misdemeanor



   Third degree   511.080   Violation




FORGERY AND RELATED OFFENSES



   Criminal simulation   516.110   A misdemeanor



   Forgery



       First degree   516.020   C felony



       Second degree   516.030   D felony



       Third degree   516.040   A misdemeanor



   Possession of forged instrument



       First degree   516.050   C felony



       Second degree   516.060   D felony



       Third degree   516.070   A misdemeanor



   Possession of forgery device   516.090   D felony



   Using slugs



       First degree   516.120   D felony



       Second degree   516.130   B misdemeanor




LITTERING, CRIMINAL   512.070   A misdemeanor




NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES



   Criminal possession of   512.060   B misdemeanor



   Criminal use of   512.050   B misdemeanor





POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS   512.080   Violation
UNLAWFULLY





THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES



   Device for theft of telephone



     services   514.065   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Obscuring identity of machine   514.120   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Possession of stolen mail   514.150   D felony



   Receiving stolen property   514.110   A misdemeanor



             or



         A, B, or D felony



   Theft by deception   514.040   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Theft by extortion   514.080   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Theft by failure to make



     disposition   514.070   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Theft by unlawful taking   514.030   A misdemeanor



             or



         A, B, or D felony



   Theft of labor   514.090   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Theft of mail matter   514.140   D felony



   Theft of property   514.050   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Theft of services   514.060   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony



   Unauthorized use of vehicle   514.100   A misdemeanor



             or



         D felony




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public
morals.  These citations are intended only as convenient references for
enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the
intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in
this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not
incorporated by reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION      PENALTY CLASS



PORNOGRAPHY



   Advertising obscene material   531.050   B misdemeanor



   Distribution



     Distribution of obscene matter   531.020   A or B misdemeanor



     Distribution to minor   531.030   A misdemeanor or D felony



     Using minors to distribute   531.040   A misdemeanor or D
felony



   Portrayal of sexual performance by minor



     Advertising material   531.360   A misdemeanor



         containing



     Distributing matter   531.340   D felony



         containing



     Promoting sale of matter   531.350   A misdemeanor; C or D
felony



         containing



     Using minors to distribute   531.370   C or D felony



         such matter



   Promoting sale of obscenity   531.060   A or B misdemeanor; D
felony



   Sexual performance by minor



       Promotion of   531.320   A, B, or C felony



       Use of minor   531.310   A, B, or C felony




PROSTITUTION OFFENSES



   Loitering for prostitution   529.080   Violation or B misdemeanor



     purposes



   Permitting prostitution   529.070   B misdemeanor



   Promoting prostitution



     Second degree   529.040   D felony



     Third degree   529.050   A misdemeanor



   Prostitution   529.020   B misdemeanor




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 134:  GAMBLING OFFENSES




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common gambling offenses.  These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION      PENALTY CLASS



CONSPIRACY TO PROMOTE    528.040   D felony
  GAMBLING




HORSE RACES, MESSENGER    528.110   A misdemeanor



  BETTING PROHIBITED




PARI-MUTUEL WAGERING   558.120   A misdemeanor




PERMITTING GAMBLING   528.070   B misdemeanor




POSSESSION OF GAMBLING
  DEVICE   528.080   A misdemeanor




POSSESSION OF GAMBLING RECORDS



   First degree   528.050   D felony



   Second degree   528.060   A misdemeanor




PROMOTING GAMBLING



   First degree   528.020   D felony



   Second degree   528.030   A misdemeanor




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC
ADMINISTRATION AND JUSTICE




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public
administration and justice.  These citations are intended only as convenient
references for enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law.  It
is not the intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory
provisions in this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically
not incorporated by reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION      PENALTY CLASS



BRIBERY AND RELATED OFFENSES



   Bribery of public servant   521.020   C felony



   Receiving unlawful compensation   521.040   A misdemeanor



   Soliciting unlawful compensation   521.030   B misdemeanor




ESCAPE AND RELATED OFFENSES



   Bail jumping



       First degree   520.070   D felony



       Second degree   520.080   A misdemeanor



   Escape



       First degree   520.020   C felony



       Second degree   520.030   D felony



       Third degree   520.040   B misdemeanor



   Hindering prosecution or apprehension



       First degree   520.120   D felony



       Second degree   520.130   A misdemeanor



   Promoting contraband



       First degree   520.050   D felony



       Second degree   520.060   A misdemeanor



   Resisting arrest   520.090   A misdemeanor



   Resisting order to stop motor   520.100   A misdemeanor



     vehicle




JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION,
  INTERFERENCE WITH



   Bribe receiving by juror   524.070   D felony



   Bribe receiving by witness   524.030   D felony



   Bribing a juror   524.060   D felony



   Bribing a witness   524.020   D felony



   Harassing a witness   524.045   A misdemeanor



   Intimidating a judicial officer   524.120   D felony



   Intimidating a juror   524.080   D felony



   Intimidating a witness   524.040   D felony



   Jury tampering   524.090   A misdemeanor



   Retaliating against a witness   524.055   D felony



   Simulating legal process   524.110   B misdemeanor



   Tampering with physical evidence   524.100   D felony



   Tampering with a witness   524.050   A misdemeanor



   Unlawful practice of law   524.130   B misdemeanor




PERJURY AND RELATED OFFENSES



   False swearing   523.040   B misdemeanor



   Perjury



       First degree   523.020   D felony



       Second degree   523.030   A misdemeanor



   Unsworn falsification to   523.100   B misdemeanor



     authorities




PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, OBSTRUCTION OF



   Compounding a crime   519.030   A misdemeanor



   Falsely reporting an incident   519.040   A misdemeanor



   Impersonating a public servant   519.050   A misdemeanor



   Obstructing governmental   519.020   A misdemeanor
     operations



   Tampering with public records   519.060   D felony




PUBLIC OFFICE, ABUSE OF



   Misuse of confidential information   522.040   D felony



   Official misconduct



       First degree   522.020   A misdemeanor



       Second degree   522.030   B misdemeanor




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER




Section






   136.01   Projectile-shooting instruments





   136.02   Statutory offenses





   136.03   Camping prohibited on public access parking lots






   136.99   Penalty




§ 136.01  PROJECTILE-SHOOTING INSTRUMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall discharge any firearm or airgun loaded with
bullets, shot, slugs or other hard substances, anywhere within the city,
except as otherwise provided in this section.  ('77 Code, § 9- 2) (Ord.
12(LH), passed 2-22-38; Am. Ord. 160(LH), passed 6-12-62)




   (B)   It shall be lawful and not a violation of this section to
discharge shotguns or similar weapons for the sole purpose of trapshooting or
skeet-shooting, provided that the owner of the property where the
trapshooting or skeet-shooting takes places shall have previously obtained
from the Chief of Police a permit to conduct a trapshoot or skeet-shoot. The
permits may be issued by the Chief of Police only to the owner of the real
estate where the event is to take place, and the permits shall be valid only
for a period of one day’s duration.




   (C)   It shall be lawful and not a violation of this section for a
person to discharge an airgun loaded with round projectiles made of metal,
hard plastic, or paintballs, including BBs, airsoft pellets, or paintballs,
provided that:




      (1)   The discharged projectile does not enter any adjoining
property, without the express written permission of the adjoining property
owner;




      (2)   The discharged projectile is not fired at, and does not
strike, any person without that person’s permission, or any cat or dog or
other pet;




      (3)   Any discharge by a minor is supervised by an adult; and




      (4)   No discharge shall occur such that any projectile is
fired onto, over, or from any public street, right-of-way, or public property.




   (D)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to any peace
officer who discharges a firearm in connection with the performance of his or
her duties as a peace officer, nor shall this section apply to a person using
self-defense or other lawful justification as provided in KRS Ch. 503.




   (E)   This section is subject to Section 225a of the Kentucky
Constitution.




('77 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 160(LH), passed 6-12-62; Am. Ord. 14-14A, passed
10-1-14; Am. Ord. 04-2018, passed 5-2-18)





Penalty, see § 136.99




§ 136.02  STATUTORY OFFENSES.




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This section contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common offenses against public
order.  These citations are intended only as convenient references for
enforcement officers in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the
intention of the municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in
this code of ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not
incorporated by reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION      PENALTY CLASS



ABUSE OF CORPSE   525.120   A misdemeanor
or
D felony



 



CRUELTY TO ANIMALS



   First degree   525.125   D felony



   Second degree   525.130   A misdemeanor




DESECRATION OF VENERATED OBJECTS



   First degree   525.110   D felony



   Second degree   525.110   A misdemeanor




DISORDERLY CONDUCT   525.060   B misdemeanor





DISRUPTING MEETINGS OR   525.150   B misdemeanor
PROCESSIONS





EAVESDROPPING AND RELATED OFFENSES



   Divulging illegally obtained   526.060   A misdemeanor
     information



   Eavesdropping   526.020   D felony



   Installing eavesdropping device   526.030   D felony



   Possessing eavesdropping device   526.040   A misdemeanor



   Tampering with private   526.050   A misdemeanor
     communications




FAILURE TO DISPERSE   525.160   B misdemeanor




HARASSING COMMUNICATIONS   525.080   B misdemeanor




HARASSMENT   525.070   Violation
or
B misdemeanor




INCITING TO RIOT   525.040   A misdemeanor




LOITERING   525.090   Violation




OBSTRUCTING HIGHWAY OR PUBLIC   525.140   B misdemeanor
  PASSAGE




PUBLIC INTOXICATION   525.100   B misdemeanor




RIOT



   First degree   525.020   D felony



   Second degree   525.030   A misdemeanor




UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY   525.050   B misdemeanor




VIOLATING GRAVES   525.115   A misdemeanor or D felony




Penalty, see § 136.99




§ 136.03  CAMPING PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC ACCESS PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



 



      “CAMP” or “CAMPING.” Those activities normally associated
with the terms, including but not limited to, overnight sleeping or other
general housekeeping activities conducted in an open-air location, whether or
not such activities are conducted in or around a recreational vehicle, camper
shell, travel trailer, tent or other similar temporary shelter, car, truck,
SUV or other vehicle.



 



   (B)   Camping prohibited.



 



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy
campers, RV's, tents, or other camping paraphernalia, including vehicles ,
trucks , vans in any public or private parking lot or public access lots,
improved or unimproved within the city limits of the city.



 



      (2)   Any such person who parks a RV, camper, camper shell,
travel trailer, or vehicle, truck, or SUV for more than four (4) continuous
hours in a public access lot or other public location within the city will be
presumed to be camping and is in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2-08, passed 2-6-08) Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.99  PENALTY.




   (A)     Whoever violates § 136.01 shall be fined not more than
$500 for each offense.






   (B)     See Chapter 139 for descriptions of statutory penalties for
those statutory offenses listed in § 136.02 above.










   (C)   A violation of this non-moving violation in § 136.03 shall be
fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.





(Ord. 2-08, passed 2-6-08)




CHAPTER 137:  SEXUAL OFFENSES




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common sexual offenses.  These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION            PENALTY CLASS



INDECENT EXPOSURE   510.150   B misdemeanor




RAPE



   First degree   510.040   A or B felony



   Second degree   510.050   C felony



   Third degree   510.060   D felony




SEXUAL ABUSE



   First degree   510.110   D felony



   Second degree   510.120   A misdemeanor



   Third degree   510.130   B misdemeanor




SEXUAL MISCONDUCT   510.140   A misdemeanor




SODOMY



   First degree   510.070   A or B felony



   Second degree   510.080   C felony



   Third degree   510.090   D felony



   Fourth degree   510.100   A misdemeanor




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 138:  INCHOATE OFFENSES




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter contains references to those sections of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes which prohibit the most common inchoate offenses.  These
citations are intended only as convenient references for enforcement officers
in citing offenders under state law.  It is not the intention of the
municipality to incorporate such statutory provisions in this code of
ordinances, and such provisions are specifically not incorporated by
reference.




OFFENSE                                             
KRS SECTION      PENALTY CLASS



CRIMINAL ATTEMPT   506.010   A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony




CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY   506.040   A or B misdemeanor;
         A, B, C or D felony




CRIMINAL FACILITATION   506.080   A or B misdemeanor; D felony




CRIMINAL SOLICITATION   506.030   A or B misdemeanor; B or C felony




CRIMINAL SYNDICATE   506.120   B felony




Penalty, see Ch. 139




CHAPTER 139:  GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII




EDITOR'S NOTE:





   This chapter is included for informational purposes only.  The
provisions of this chapter are specifically not incorporated by reference.






Section






   139.01   Fines for misdemeanors and violations





   139.02   Sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor





   139.03   Fines for felonies





   139.04   Sentence of imprisonment for felony




§ 139.01  FINES FOR MISDEMEANORS AND VIOLATIONS.




   (A)  Fines and imprisonment for misdemeanors shall not be mutually
exclusive.  In any case where imprisonment is authorized a fine may be
levied in addition to the imprisonment or a fine may be levied as an
alternative to imprisonment.  Similarly, a fine may be levied in lieu of
imprisonment.  Whether or not the fine is to be levied as the sole penalty
or as an additional or alternative penalty shall be in the discretion of the
judge or jury as the case may be. If the trial is by jury then the jury shall
have the discretion.  This rule shall apply in all cases where a fine is not
the exclusive penalty authorized by law.






   (B)  Except as otherwise provided for an offense defined outside this
title, a person who has been convicted of any offense other than a felony may
be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not to exceed:






      (1)  For a Class A misdemeanor, $500; or






      (2)  For a Class B misdemeanor, $250; or






      (3)  For a violation, $250.






   (C)  This section does not apply to a corporation.





(KRS 534.040)




§ 139.02  SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR MISDEMEANOR.




   A sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall be a definite term
and shall be fixed within the following maximum limitations:






   (A)  For a Class A misdemeanor, the term shall not exceed 12 months;
and






   (B)  For a Class B misdemeanor, the term shall not exceed 90 days.





(KRS 532.090)




§ 139.03  FINES FOR FELONIES.




   (A)  Except as otherwise provided for an offense defined outside this
title, a person who has been convicted of any felony and granted a sentence
of probation or conditional discharge may be sentenced to pay a fine in an
amount not to exceed $10,000 or double his gain from commission of the
offense, whichever is the greater.






   (B)  In determining the amount and method of paying a fine for
commission of a felony, the court shall consider, among others, the following
factors:






      (1)  The defendant's ability to pay the amount of the fine;






      (2)  The hardship likely to be imposed on the defendant's
dependents by the amount of the fine and the time and method of paying it;






      (3)  The impact the amount of the fine will have on the
defendant's ability to make reparation or restitution to the victim; and






      (4)  The amount of the defendant's gain, if any, derived from
the commission of the offense.






   (C)  When a defendant is convicted of two or more felonies committed
through a single act and is sentenced to fines pursuant to division (A)
above, the aggregate amount of such fines shall not exceed $10,000 or double
the amount of the defendant's gain from commission of the offenses, whichever
is the greater.






   (D)  This section does not apply to a corporation.





(KRS 534.030)




§ 139.04  SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR FELONY.




   (A)  A sentence of imprisonment for a felony shall be an indeterminate
sentence, the maximum of which shall be fixed within the limits provided by
division (B) below, and subject to modification by the trial judge pursuant
to KRS 532.070.






   (B)  The authorized maximum terms of imprisonment for felonies are:










      (1)  For a Class A felony, not less than 20 years nor more than
life imprisonment;






      (2)  For a Class B felony, not less than 10 years nor more than
20 years;






      (3)  For a Class C felony, not less than 5 years nor more than
10 years; and






      (4)  For a Class D felony, not less than one year nor more than
5 years.






   (C)  The actual time of release within the maximum established by
division (A) above, or as modified pursuant to KRS 532.070, shall be
determined under procedures established elsewhere by law.





(KRS 532.060)




TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE




   Chapter






      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS






      151.   PLANNING






      152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS






      153.   ZONING




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS




Section






   General Provisions






   150.01   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code; Standards of Safety





   150.02   Adoption of  International Property Maintenance Code





   150.03   Metal sheds or outbuildings





   150.04   Standard specifications for street and drainage construction





   150.05   Adoption of the 2002 Kentucky Residential Code






   Permits






   150.15   Fees to be paid prior to issuance of permits





   150.16   Building and zoning fee schedule






   Electricians






   150.20   Definitions





   150.21   State Building Code to set minimum standards





   150.22   Northern Kentucky Electric Authority





   150.23   License requirements





   150.24   Electric wiring permit





   150.25   Agreement of reciprocity authorized






   Administration and Enforcement






   150.30   Building Inspector





   150.31   Alternate inspector





   150.32   Civil liability of city employees





   150.33   Local Appeals Board






   150.99   Penalty





GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE; STANDARDS OF SAFETY.




   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Chapter 7, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained
in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the
Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in Chapter 10, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; together with any amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this code of ordinances. 
Copies of the above codes and any amendments thereto shall be placed on file
in the office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public
inspection during normal business hours.  The city extends the Kentucky
Building Code to single and two family dwellings.  The CABO One and Two
Family Dwelling Code may be selected by the builder at the time of submission
of the plans as an alternate to the requirements of the Kentucky Building
Code.





(Am. Ord. 458-1992, passed 4-1-92)




§ 150.02  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the 2009
International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code
of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said 2009 International Property Maintenance Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in division (B).



 



   (B)   The following sections of the Property Maintenance Code are
hereby revised:



 



      (1)   Section 101.1.  Insert: The City of Fort Wright,
Kentucky.



 



      (2)   The following subsection of the Property Maintenance
Code is not adopted and shall not constitute a part of the Property
Maintenance Code of the city: Section 106.4.



 



      (3)   Section 106.4.  Insert: "Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 60 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense".



 



      (4)   Section 111.1.  Insert: "Board of Adjustments" for
"Board of Appeals".



 



      (5)   Section 111.2.  Insert: "Board of Adjustments" for
"Board of Appeals".



 



      (6)   Section 303.14.  Insert: January 1st to December 31st.



 



      (7)   Section 602.3.  Insert: January 1st to December 31st.



 



      (8)   Section 602.4.  Insert: January 1st to December 31st.




(Ord. 13-02, passed 10-9-02; Am. Ord. 17-09, passed 1-4-10)




§ 150.03  METAL SHEDS OR OUTBUILDINGS.




   (A)  It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of
unanchored metal sheds or outbuildings in the city, and it shall be unlawful
for the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any metal shed or
outbuilding to permit the same to remain unanchored.






   (B)  Whenever the Building Inspector, Fire Chief, Chief of Police or
Health Officer shall be of the opinion that a metal shed or outbuilding is
unanchored, he shall file a written statement to this effect with the City
Clerk.  The Clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the
owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or
personal service.  The notice shall state that the metal shed or outbuilding
has been declared to be unanchored, that the shed or outbuilding must be
removed or remedied by anchoring same in a concrete pad or by demolishing it,
and that the condition must be remedied at once.






   (C)  If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith
within ten days from the time when the notice is served, then the Building
Inspector may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish or remove the
building.




('77 Code, § 6-18.1) (Ord. 133-1976, passed 8-13-76)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.04  STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET AND DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION.




   (A)  Pursuant to KRS 82.400, Appendix A, B, C, and D, as attached to
Ordinance 360-1986 and incorporated herein, are adopted as required street
and drainage specifications for improvement to be offered for acceptance by
the city for maintenance purposes.






   (B)  Pursuant to those specifications, the developer or contractor is
required to employ at his expense an independent geotechnical engineer to
perform all inspection and testing as required by the adopted specifications.






      (1)  The geotechnical engineer is required to verify all the
inspections and testing results directly to the city.






      (2)  The geotechnical engineer must be recognized by the city as
a qualified geotechnical engineer.  For recognition by the city, application
must be made by the geotechnical engineer to the city.  The city will
determine recognition based on the credentials and past work record of the
applicant.






   (C)  All sanitation sewers shall be installed in conformity with
specifications and standards of the Campbell-Kenton County Sanitation
District #l.






   (D)  The engineer of any sanitary or storm sewers in the city shall
verify to the city:






      (1)  That the sanitary sewer and storm sewer system has been
constructed in accordance with the Campbell-Kenton County specifications and
standards;






      (2)  That it has been laid and constructed in accordance with
the construction drawings; and






      (3)  That the sewer has been pressure-tested and meets all
testing criteria.






   (E)  In the alternative, the city will consider acceptance of
improvements for maintenance with the following bonding requirements:










      (1)  Streets.  Streets shall be bonded for at least a
three-year period at a value to be determined at one-half of the construction
costs of the street.  The bond shall continue during the contruction period
of land abutting or accessed by the street, and continue for an additional
three-year period after the last construction on the street is constructed.






      (2)  Sewers.  Sanitary and storm sewer systems shall be bonded
for at least a three-year period after construction at a value to be
determined at one-half the construction costs of the system. The bond shall
continue and remain in effect for a period to include three years from the
last tap-in connections, with commencement of use of the connection on the
system.





(Ord. 360-1986, passed 8-6-86)




§ 150.05  ADOPTION OF THE 2002 KENTUCKY RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 198B, certain documents,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk and the
Northern Kentucky Area Planning Commission, being marked and designated as
the 2002 Kentucky Residential Code, Chapters 1 through 43, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc. 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls
Church, Virginia, are hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than
three stories in height in the city and providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such 2002 Kentucky Residential Code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



 



   (B)   Revisions and amendments.  The 2002 Kentucky Residential Code
is hereby amended as follows, with the words and numbers being added
indicated by a single solid line beneath them, and the words and numbers
being deleted indicated by a single broken line through them, as required by
KRS 83A.060(3):



 



   Section R101.1: City of Fort Wright.




(Ord. 3-05, passed 3-9-05)





PERMITS




§ 150.15  FEES TO BE PAID PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.




   No permit as required by the building code adopted under this chapter
shall be issued until the fee prescribed in § 150.16 shall have been paid. 
No amendment to a permit shall be approved until the additional fee, if any,
due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall
have been paid.





('77 Code, § 6-19(a)) (Ord. 46-1969, passed 11-14-69; Am. Ord. 186-1979,
passed 3-9-79)




§ 150.16  BUILDING AND ZONING FEE SCHEDULE.




   The city, pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, hereby establishes, for the
necessary zoning and building permit applications, alteration, demolition and
occupancy permits, and for zoning review and appeal, the following schedule
of fees:






   (A)  Zoning permit applications.






      (1)  All uses, whether new construction or additions to existing
construction - $20.00 plus $0.01 per square foot.






      (2)  Change in use when the zoning classification and building
dimensions are not changed - $20.00.






      (3)  Signs and other accessory uses (excluding fences and
parking as regulated by divisions (4) and (5) below) - $20.00 per sign.






      (4)  Fences - $20.00.






      (5)  Off-street parking and loading or unloading area when
developed separately and not included in division (A) above - $20.00 plus
$0.50 per parking space and loading/unloading space.






   (B)  Certificate of occupancy permit.






      (1)  For certification of lawful nonconforming uses and
structures - $75.00.






      (2)  For change in use - no fee (fee included as part of zoning
permit).






      (3)  For new construction - no fee (fee included as part of
building and zoning permits).






   (C)  Move and set permit.  Shall be as required by the zoning permit
and building permit, and in addition a transport permit shall also be
required - $50.00.






   (D)  Demolition permit.  The application fee for the demolition of a
building or structure shall be as follows:






      (1)  Single- and two-family dwellings - $50.00.






      (2) Multi-family dwellings, commercial, residential and other
nonresidential uses (such as churches, schools) - $100.00.






   (E)  Board of Adjustment hearing.  (Conditional use permits,
dimensional variances, changes from one nonconforming use to another appeals)
- $100.  The applicant must also prepay the recording fee to the Kenton
County Clerk's office in the event the application is for a variance.  The
applicant shall be responsible for all expenses related to the processing and
review of the application or appeal.  In addition to the fee of $100, the
applicant must prepay $500 to the city as a bond to cover the expense of the
application or appeal.  If the cost is less than $500, then the balance will
be refunded.  If the cost exceeds $500, the Board may withhold a favorable
decision to the applicant until the costs are paid in full.  The City Zoning
Administrator shall have discretion to accept a bond less than $500, if, in
his opinion the expenses to the city will not exceed the amount required to
be deposited.






   (F)  Amendments to the city's zoning ordinance.  The fee for an
amendment to the city's zoning ordinance shall be as follows (this is in
addition to the fees that are required by the Planning Commission):






      (1)  Text amendments - $50.00.






      (2)  Map amendment (excluding a development plan) - $50.00.






      (3)  Map amendment, including submission of a development plan -
$50.00 plus cost of review of development plan according to divisions (A) and
(B) above.






   (G)  Building permit applications.






      (1)  All uses (new construction, additions, and change of use) -
$25.00 plus $0.09 per square foot of gross floor area.  Gross floor area
shall be measured to outside faces of exterior walls and shall be inclusive
of living areas, garages, basements, storage areas, sales and display areas,
and the like.






      (2)  All uses (remodeling):  Where any structural modifications
are made to the building, changes to the electrical, plumbing, heating, or
other mechanical systems are made or where the cost of remodeling, expended
in a 12-month period, exceeds 50% of the current assessed value - $25.00 plus
$0.05 per gross square feet of area remodeled.






      (3)  Minimum building permit application fee - $25.00.






      (4)  No building permit application fee shall be required by the
following types of construction (all such construction shall be covered by
the zoning permit application fee, as per division (A) above) -






         (a)  Fences and signs.






         (b)  Patio construction without roofs and side walls.










         (c)  Accessory uses such as swimming pools, tennis courts,
driveways, parking areas, and the like.






   (H)  Fees not returnable.  Fees required in any of the foregoing
regulations or in any parts of the city's zoning ordinance shall not be
returnable for any cause, regardless of outcome of decision on any
application.  No fee or any part thereof shall be refunded once an
application has been advertised for public hearing, where applicable.





(Ord. 287-1983, passed 2-2-83; Am. Ord. 361-1986, passed 8-6-86; Am. Ord.
398-1989, passed 2-1-89; Am. Ord. 497-1994, passed 10-19-94; Am. Ord. 1-01,
passed 1-10-01)





ELECTRICIANS




§ 150.20  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.






   "ELECTRICAL."  Pertains to the installation of wires and conduits for
the purpose of transmitting electricity, and the installation of fixtures and
equipment in connection therewith.






   "ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR."  Any individual, partnership or corporation
that engages in the business of or employs others for the construction,
alteration or repair of any electrical wiring used for the purpose of
furnishing heat, light or power.






   "ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR."  Any person certified by the Commissioner of
Housing, Buildings and Construction pursuant to KRS 227.489 who, for
compensation, inspects the construction and installation of electrical
conductors, fittings, devices and fixtures of light, heat or power service
equipment to ascertain compliance with the National Electrical Code
incorporated in the Uniform State Building Code promulgated pursuant to KRS
198B.050 or the Standards of Safety of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.






   "ELECTRICIAN."  Any person who is employed by an electrical contractor
and is engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of any electrical
wiring used for the purpose of furnishing heat, light or power.





(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-9-91)




§ 150.21  STATE BUILDING CODE TO SET MINIMUM STANDARDS.




   The Uniform State Building Code as is established by the Board of
Housing, Buildings and Construction of the State of Kentucky, is hereby
adopted in full by this subchapter, and the same shall have the effect as if
it were written fully herein, as a minimum standard for the construction,
alteration and repair of any electrical wiring done within the effective area
of this subchapter.  These standards shall also be used by the Electrical
Inspector in making his inspections.





(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-9-91)




§ 150.22  NORTHERN KENTUCKY ELECTRIC AUTHORITY.




   The formerly established Northern Kentucky Electric Authority, the
Examining and Appeal Board consisting of seven members as authorized in KRS
227.450 to 227.500, shall:






   (A)   Administer electrical contractor's examinations which have
been selected and approved by the Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction and administer electrician examinations;






   (B)   Have the power to issue, renew, suspend and revoke electrical
contractor and electrician licenses;






   (C)   Have the power to require electrical contractors and
electricians to pay reasonable for examinations, initial licenses and
renewals;






   (D)   Accept an electrical contractor examination certificate issued
by the Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction as evidence that an
applicant has met the examination requirements;






   (E)   Have the power to require all electrical contractors and
electricians to conform to reasonable standards prior to engaging in their
occupation;






   (F)   Compile and submit to the Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction all disciplinary actions taken against licensed electrical
contractors on a quarterly basis;






   (G)   Have all other powers authorized for a "local examining board"
by KRS 227.450 et seq.





(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)




§ 150.23  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.




   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
installing, altering or repairing, within the limits of the city, any
electrical wiring, devices or equipment unless such individual is the holder
of the electrical contractor's license or employed by a licensed electrical
contractor and a holder of an electrician's license.  Application for such
license must be made in writing to the city, stating the name, experience and
qualifications of applicant.  Upon said applicant's complying with the
requirements of this subchapter and passing an examination approved by the
Northern Kentucky Electric Authority, a license shall be granted to the
individual applying for the same.





(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)  Penalty, see § 150.99




§ 150.24  ELECTRIC WIRING PERMIT.




   (A)   Electrical permits shall be obtained prior to the
installation, addition, alteration, repair, relocation, or removal of
electrical wiring, unless an exception is granted by the city.






   (B)   The cost of the permit for electrical installation, additions,
alterations, repair, relocation, or removal shall be $20.






   (C)   All electrical permits shall be obtained from the City of Fort
Wright Building Department.





(Ord. 445-1991, passed - -91)  Penalty, see § 150.99




§ 150.25  AGREEMENTS OF RECIPROCITY AUTHORIZED.




   There is hereby established an agreement of reciprocity between this
city and any other city and county in which there exists legislation
basically containing the provisions of this subchapter and the Mayor is
hereby authorized to execute such interlocal agreement(s) with any city or
county.





(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)





ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 150.30  BUILDING INSPECTOR.




   (A)  The administrative agent who has responsibility for enforcement
of building regulations within the city under this chapter and other
provisions of this code shall be known as the Building Inspector.  ('77
Code, § 6-l) (Ord. 120-1975, passed 8-8-75)






   (B)  The office of Building Inspector is hereby created and the
executive official in charge shall be known as the Building Inspector.





('77 Code, § 6-27)






   (C)  The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor.  His
appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. 
During temporary absence or disability of the Building Inspector, the Mayor
shall designate an acting Building Inspector. ('77 Code, § 6-28)






   (D)  To be eligible to appointment to the office of Building
Inspector, the candidate for the position shall have had experience as an
architect, structural engineer, building inspector or superintendent of
building construction.  He shall meet the requirements for certification of
Kentucky Building Code inspectors as detailed in 815 KAR 7:070.  He shall be
in good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and
inspections.  He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or
indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process, or device
entering into or used in or in connection with building construction,
alterations, removal, and demolition.  ('77 Code, § 6-29)






   (E)  The Building Inspector shall have the following powers and duties:






      (1)  The Building Inspector shall devote his time to the duties
of his office.  He shall receive applications required by this chapter,
issue permits, and furnish the prescribed certificates.  He shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction is prosecuted safely.  He shall enforce all provisions of the
Kentucky Building Code.  He shall, when requested by proper authority, or
when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with
matters referred to in the Kentucky Building Code and render written reports
on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to
require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue
such notices or orders as may be necessary.






      (2)  Inspections required under the provisions of the Kentucky
Building Code shall be made by the Building Inspector or his duly appointed
assistant.  The Building Inspector may accept reports of inspectors of
recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications
and reliability.  No certificate called for by any provision of the Kentucky
Building Code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing
and certified to by a responsible officer of such service.






      (3)  The Building Inspector shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made,
of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued.  He shall retain on
file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so
long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in
existence.






      (4)  All such records shall be open to public inspection for
good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be
removed from the office of the Building Inspector without his written consent.






      (5)  The Building Inspector shall make written reports to his
immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested, including
statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.





('77 Code, § 6-30)






   (F)  The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his official duties,
and upon proper identification, shall have the authority to enter any
building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour. ('77 Code, § 6-31)






   (G)  The Building Inspector may request and shall receive so far as
may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the city.  ('77 Code, § 6-32)





(Ord. 46-1969, passed 11-14-69




§ 150.31  ALTERNATE INSPECTOR.




   (A)  The alternate for the Building Inspector may be any of the
following:






      (1)  Department of Housing, Buildings, and Construction, located
in Frankfort, Kentucky;






      (2)  Kenton County Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator; or






      (3)  Northern Kentucky Planning and Zoning Commission.






   (B)  The alternate for the Zoning Administrator may be any of the
following:






      (1)  Kenton County Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator;






      (2)  Northern Kentucky Planning and Zoning Commission.






   (C)  An alternate shall be appointed by the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator to serve in every case in which a conflict of interest exists
between the individual or business entity and the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator; and the alternate shall be notified of its appointment as
Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator in the regular course of business,
but said notification shall be in writing.






   (D)  In the event the person or business entity or any affected
citizen disagrees with the alternate chosen by the Building Inspector-Zoning
Administrator for either or both alternate positions, they shall have the
right to appeal the decision in writing to the Mayor.  In that event the
Mayor's confirmation or choice of an alternate shall be final.





('77 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. 295-1983, passed 8-3-83)




§ 150.32  CIVIL LIABILITY OF CITY EMPLOYEES.




   The Building Inspector or any employee charged with the enforcement of
this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act
or omission in the discharge of his duties.  Any suit brought against the
Building Inspector or employee, because of such act or omission performed by
him in the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, shall be defended
by the Legal Department of the city until final termination of the
proceedings.





('77 Code, § 6-20) (Ord. 46-1969, passed 11-14-69)




§ 150.33  LOCAL APPEALS BOARD.




   (A)     There is established a Local Appeals Board consisting of
five technically qualified persons with professional experience related to
the building industry, to hear appeals from the decisions of the Building
Inspector.  The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council.  At least three members of the Appeals Board shall not be
employed by the local government hearing the appeal.






   (B)     Any party to a decision by the Building Inspector may
appeal that decision to the Appeals Board.  Upon receipt of an appeal from a
qualified party, the Appeals Board shall convene a hearing to consider the
appeal within 15 days of receipt.  All parties to the appeal shall be
notified of the time and place of the hearing by letter mailed by certified
mail no later than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.  The Appeals
Board shall render a decision within five working days after the hearing.






   (C)  The Appeals Board may uphold, amend, or reverse the decision of
the Building Inspector, and there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Appeals Board other than by appeal to the department. Appeals to the
department shall include citation of those provisions of the uniform state
building code which are at issue, and an explanation of why the decision of
the Appeals Board or the Building Inspector relative to those provisions is
being contested.





(KRS 198B.070(1), (3), (4)) ('77 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 175-1978, passed
11-10-78; Am. Ord. 203-1980, passed 2-8-80)




§ 150.99  PENALTY.




   (A)     Any person who violates any provision of the state codes
adopted in § 150.01 shall be subject to the following penalties:






      (1)     Violators of the Uniform State Building Code or the
Uniform State Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $1000 for each offense.  (KRS 198B.990(1))






      (2)     Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$1000, imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. 
(KRS 227.990(1))





      (3)     Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense.  (KRS
318.990)






   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§ 150.20 through 150.25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both,
to be so fined and imprisoned in the discretion of the court for each
offense.  Each day that said person, firm or corporation violates said §§
150.20 - 150.25 or any provision thereof may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 440-1991, passed 2-6-91)






   (C)     Whoever violates any other provision of this chapter shall
be fined not more than $500 for each offense.




CHAPTER 151:  PLANNING




Section






   151.01   Adoption of Statement of Goals and Objectives and
Comprehensive Plan





   151.02   Agreement to form and operate a joint planning unit




§ 151.01  ADOPTION OF STATEMENT OF GOALS AND OBJECTIVES AND COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.




   (A)  The city hereby adopts by reference the Statement of Goals and
Objectives which was reviewed and adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal
Planning and Zoning Commission on March 16, 1978.






   (B)  The city hereby adopts by reference that portion of the Kenton
County Comprehensive Plan, adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal
Planning and Zoning Commission on January 7, 1982, as it applies to the city,
as the city comprehensive plan.






   (C)  The Statement of Goals and Objectives and the city comprehensive
plan shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city at
1661 Park Road, Ft. Wright.





(Ord. 269-1982, passed  -  -82; Am. Ord., passed  -  -85)




§ 151.02  AGREEMENT TO FORM AND OPERATE A JOINT PLANNING UNIT.




Editor's note:





   The city is a party to an agreement between Kenton County and various
municipalities within Kenton County to form and operate a joint planning
unit.  The agreement was executed  -  -66.




CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS




Section






   152.01   Adoption of regulations





   152.02   Amendments




§ 152.01  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.




   Except for the amendments, modifications, and changes as set forth in
this chapter, the City Council hereby adopts by reference the subdivision
regulations of the county, as previously approved by the Kenton County and
Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission, and further adopts by reference any
and all amendments or changes thereto that may from time to time be enacted
and approved by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning
Commission.





('77 Code, § 13-l) (Ord. 40-1969, passed 4-ll-69)




§ 152.02  AMENDMENTS.




   The following changes are hereby made in the subdivision regulations as
adopted by the county in order that they may properly conform to the
municipal operations of the city:






   (A)  The words "city engineer" shall be substituted for the words
"county engineer."






   (B)  The words "city council" shall be substituted for the words
"fiscal court."






   (C)  The words "City of Ft. Wright" shall be substituted for the words
"Kenton County."






   (D)  The words "planning and zoning commission" shall be substituted
for the words "Covington-Kenton County Board of Adjustments."






   (E)  The words "City of Ft. Wright Board of Adjustment" shall be
substituted for the words "Board of Adjustments."






   (F)  The words "Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning
Commission" shall be substituted for the words "Covington-Kenton Planning and
Zoning Commission."






   (G)  The words "City of Ft. Wright" shall be substituted for the words
"unincorporated area of Kenton County."






   (H)  Section 2.03 entitled "Authority" is deleted and in substitution
therefor, the following is inserted:  "These subdivision regulations are
adopted under the authority of Kentucky Revised Statutes."






   (I)  Section 3 entitled "Definitions," Item "N" is amended so that it
shall read as follows:  "Major arterial street - an existing street or
proposed street which is designated as a major arterial street on the major
street plan as adopted by the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning
Commission; Minor street - an existing or proposed street which is designated
as a minor street on the major street plan as adopted by the Kenton County
and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission."






   (J)  Section 5.10 entitled "Alleys," subsection "a" entitled
"Residential Areas" is amended so that it is changed from "alleys shall be
discouraged in residential districts" to read "alleys shall be prohibited in
residential districts."






   (K)  Subsection "a" of Section 5.13 entitled "Lots" is deleted, and,
in substitution therefor, the following is included: "a. Size, lot
arrangement and design shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory
sites for building and shall be properly related to topography and to
existing probable future requirements.  To this end, minimum lot size shall
conform to or exceed the requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located."










   (1)  The following shall be added to the existing county subdivision
regulations as Section 4.13 and shall be entitled "Fees": "In addition to the
fees payable to the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning
Commission, the following fees shall be paid to the City of Ft. Wright upon
filing of a subdivision plat.  Said fees are for the purpose of covering
city costs in the review of plats and inspection of improvements:  a.
Preliminary plat.  The fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus one
dollar ($1.00) per each lot; b. Final plat.  The fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per each lot.  Such fee shall include
inspection of improvements involved in such final plat."






   (M)  "All streets shall have a minimum street width of twenty-five
(25) feet, except those streets not permanently dead-ended or constituting a
through street which shall have a minimum street width of twenty-eight (28)
feet."





('77 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 40-1969, passed 4-ll-69; Am. Ord. 69-1971, passed
11-12-71)




CHAPTER 153:  ZONING




Section






   153.01   Adoption of zoning regulations





   153.02   Board of Adjustment





Cross-reference:





   Building and zoning permits fee schedule, see § 150.16





   Zoning map changes, see T.S.O. IV




§ 153.01  ADOPTION OF ZONING REGULATIONS.




   (A)  The "proposed zoning ordinance" made a part hereof by reference
and dated July 6, 1983, is hereby adopted as the official zoning ordinance of
the city.






   (B)  The official zoning ordinance of the city shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the city at 1661 Park Road, Fort Wright.






(Ord. 290-1983, passed 7-6-83; Am. Ord. 307-1983, passed - -83; Am. Ord.
315-1984, passed - -84; Am. Ord. 316-1984, passed - -84; Am. Ord. 19-1984,
passed 4-4-84; Am. Ord. 329-1984, passed - -84; Am. Ord. 330-1984, passed -
-84; Am. Ord. 336-1984, passed - -84; Am. Ord. 343-1985, passed 4-3-85; Am.
Ord. 344-1985, passed 4-3-85; Am. Ord. 345-1985, passed 7-3-85; Am. Ord.
347-1985, passed 8-7-85; Am. Ord. 354-1986, passed 2-5-86; Am. Ord. 365-1986,
passed 11-5-86; Am. Ord. 366-1986, passed 11-5-86; Am. Ord. 367-1986, passed
11-5-86; Am. Ord. 368-1986, passed 11-5-86; Am. Ord. 370-1986, passed 1-7-87;
Am. Ord. 372-1987, passed 2-26-87; Am. Ord. 374-1987, passed 6-3-87; Am. Ord.
377-1987, passed 6-3-87; Am. Ord. 384-1988, passed 2-3-88; Am. Ord. 395-1988,
passed 12-10-88; Am. Ord. 397-1989, passed 3-1-89; Am. Ord. 412-1989, passed
10-4-89; Am. Ord. 415-1989, passed 11-1-89; Am. Ord. 420-1990, passed 3-7-90;
Am. Ord. 421-1990, passed - -90; Am. Ord. 422-1990, passed - -90; Am. Ord.
424-1990, passed 5-2-90; Am. Ord. 425-1990, passed - -90; Am. Ord. 435-1990,
passed 12-5-90; Am. Ord. 439-1991, passed 2-6-91; Am. Ord. 444-1991, passed -
-91; Am. Ord. 446-1990, passed 2-21-91; Am. Ord. 447-1991, passed 4-3-91; Am.
Ord. 448-1991, passed 4-3-91; Am. Ord. 451-1991, passed 10-17-91; Am. Ord.
468-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord. 469-1993, passed 4-7-93; Am. Ord. 478-1993,
passed 9-1-93; Am. Ord. 479-1993, passed 9-15-93; Am. Ord. 485-1994, passed
1-26-94; Am. Ord. 486-1994, passed 1-26-94; Am. Ord. 488-1994, passed
1-26-94; Am. Ord. 494-1994, passed 9-21-94; Am. Ord. 508-95, passed - -95;
Am. Ord. 534-1996, passed 11-6-96; Am. Ord. 547-97, passed 3-5-97; Am. Ord.
550-97, passed 5-7-97; Am. Ord. 559- 97, passed 12-3-97; Am. Ord. 560-97,
passed 11-3-97; Am. Ord. 561- 1998, passed 2-4-98; Am. Ord. 565-1998, passed
4-1-98; Am. Ord. 577- 98, passed 11-4-98; Am. Ord. 585-99, passed 8-11-99;
Am. Ord. 591-99, passed 10-13-99; Am. Ord. 592-99, passed 10-13-99; Am. Ord.
3-00, passed 1-26-00; Am. Ord. 4-00, passed 2-9-00; Am. Ord. 6-00, passed
5-11-00; Am. Ord. 11-00, passed 9-13-00; Am. Ord. 13-01, passed 11-28-01; Am.
Ord. 3-02, passed 4-10-02; Am. Ord. 4-02, passed 4-10- 02; Am. Ord. 6-02,
passed 5-8-02; Am. Ord. 14-02, passed 12-11-02; Am. Ord. 12-03, passed
8-27-03; Am. Ord. 13-03, passed 8-27-03; Am. Ord. 14-03, passed 8-27-03; Am.
Ord. 15-03, passed 9-10-03; Am. Ord. 18-03, passed 12-10-03; Am. Ord. 6-04,
passed 8-11-04; Am. Ord. 10-04, passed 10-27-04; Am. Ord. 8-05, passed
6-01-05; Am. Ord. 10-05, passed 6-1-05; Am. Ord. 11-05, passed 9-7-05; Am.
Ord. 14-05, passed 9-7-05; Am. Ord. 3-06, passed 2-1-06; Am. Ord. 6-06,
passed 4-5-06; Am. Ord. 8-06, passed 5-3-06; Am. Ord. 11-06, passed 7-5-06;
Am. Ord. 7-07, passed 10-3-07; Am. Ord. 7-08, passed 4-23-08; Am. Ord. 16-09,
passed 10-7-09; Am. Ord. 11-11, passed 1-11-12; Am. Ord. 01-12, passed
2-1-12; Am. Ord. 04-13, passed 5-1-13; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 5-1-13; Am.
Ord. 15-13, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 09-14, passed 8-6- 14; Am. Ord. 02-15,
passed 2-4-15; Am. Ord. 01-16, passed 3-2-16; Am. Ord. 02-16, passed 5-4-16;
Am. Ord. 09-2016, passed 10- -16; Am. Ord. 14-2016, passed 1- -17; Am. Ord.
10-2018, passed 11-7-18; Am. Ord. 10-2018, passed 11-7-18; Am. Ord. 07-2019,
passed 6-19-19)




§ 153.02  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.




   (A)  There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment, to serve as a
board of appeals on zoning matters established by city ordinance as well as
KRS Chapter 100.  ('77 Code, § 2-17)




   (B)  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of City Council.  The members of
the Board shall serve for a term of four years, in accordance with KRS
100.217(4).  The Board of Adjustment shall have all of the powers, duties,
and responsibilities and be subject to all the requirements and limitations
set forth in KRS Chapter 100 and other applicable statutes.  ('77 Code, §
2-18) (Ord. 182-1979, passed 1-12-79)




   (C)  The members of the Board of Adjustment shall conduct their
proceedings in accordance with KRS Ch. 100. ('77 Code, § 2-19)





(Ord. 110-1975, passed 1-10-75)



OFFICIAL ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF
FORT WRIGHT,
KENTUCKY
Prepared by:
Planning and Development Services
of Kenton County
Table Of Contents i
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
ARTICLE I A ZONING ORDINANCE 1-1
ARTICLE II AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Section 2.0 Authority 2-1
Section 2.1 Purpose 2-1
ARTICLE III SHORT TITLE
Section 3.0 Short Title 3-1
ARTICLE IV INTERPRETATION
Section 4.0 Greater Restriction 4-1
Section 4.1 Permit Or License In Violation 4-1
ARTICLE V CONFLICT
Section 5.0 Conflict 5-1
ARTICLE VI SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
Section 6.0 Severability Clause 6-1
ARTICLE VII DEFINITIONS
Section 7.0 Words And Phrases 7-1
ARTICLE VIII ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 8.0 Zones 8-1
Section 8.1 Official Zoning Map 8-1
Section 8.2 Changes On Zoning Map 8-2
Section 8.3 Replacement Of Official Zoning Map 8-2
Section 8.4 Rules For Interpretation Of Zone
Boundaries 8-2
Section 8.5 Areas Not Included Within Zones 8-3
ARTICLE IX GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 9.0 Purpose 9-1
Section 9.1 Reduction In Building Site Area 9-1
Section 9.2 Interference With Traffic Signals 9-1
Section 9.3 Vision Clearance At Corners, Curb
Cuts, And Railroad Crossings 9-1
Section 9.4 Frontage On Corner Lots And
Double Frontage Lots 9-1
Section 9.5 Utilities Location 9-1
Section 9.6 Railroad Rights-Of-Way Location 9-2
Table Of Contents ii
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 9.7 Excavation, Movement Of Soil,
Tree Removal, And Erosion And Sedimentation Control 9-2
Section 9.8 Unsightly Or Unsanitary Storage 9-3
Section 9.9 Junkyard Location 9-3 Section 9.10 Application Of Zoning Regulations 9-3
Section 9.11 Special Requirements Governing
Home Occupations 9-6
Section 9.12 Nonconforming Lots, Nonconforming
Uses, Nonconforming Structures,
Repairs And Maintenance, And
Nonconforming Signs 9-7
Section 9.13 Exceptions And Modifications 9-10
Section 9.14 Conditional Uses 9-12
Section 9.15 Building Regulations And Water
And Sanitary Sewer Service 9-14
Section 9.16 Move And Set 9-15
Section 9.17 Landscaping Requirements 9-16
Section 9.18 Outdoor Swimming Pools 9-34
Section 9.19 Site Plan Requirements 9-35
Section 9.20 Plan Requirements - Stages I, II,
And Record Plat 9-36
Section 9.21 Regulations Concerning Air Rights 9-40
Section 9.22 Regulations Concerning Design
And Construction Of Improvements 9-40
Section 9.23 Regulations Pertaining To Parking
Or Storing Of Trailers, Mobile
Homes, Campers, Inoperable
Vehicles, And Other Such Type
Equipment 9-40
Section 9.24 Hillside Development Controls 9-41
Section 9.25 Flood Protection Development
Controls 9-42
Section 9.26 General Mobile Home Regulations 9-80
Section 9.27 Land Used For Agricultural Purposes 9-80
Section 9.28 Filing Of Certificate Of Land
Use Restriction 9-80
Section 9.29 Regulations Concerning Television
And Radio Stations 9-84
Section 9.30 Phased Zoning Regulations 9-84
Table Of Contents iii
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 9.31 Residential Care Facilities For
Handicapped Persons 9-85
Section 9.32 Compatibility Standards For Qualified
Manufactured Housing 9-86
Section 9.33 Regulations Of Sexually Oriented
Businesses 9-88
ARTICLE X ZONES
Section 10.0 CO (Conservation) Zone 10-1
Section 10.1 R-RE (Residential Rural Estate) Zone 10-3
Section 10.2 R-1C (Residential One-C) Zone 10-5
Section 10.3 R-1CC (Residential One-CC) Zone 10-7
Section 10.4 R-1D (Residential One-D) Zone 10-9
Section 10.5 R-1DD (Residential One-DD) Zone 10-11
Section 10.6 R-1E (Residential One-E) Zone 10-13
Section 10.7 R-1EE (Residential One-EE) Zone 10-15
Section 10.8 R-1F (Residential One-F) Zone 10-17
Section 10.9 R-1FF (Residential One-FF) Zone 10-19
Section 10.10 R-1G (Residential One-G) Zone 10-21
Section 10.11 R-2 (Residential Two) Zone 10-23
Section 10.12 R-3 (Residential Three) Zone 10-25
Section 10.13 PUD (Planned Unit Development)
Overlay Zone 10-28
Section 10.14 RCD (Residential Cluster
Development) Overlay Zone 10-34
Section 10.15 MHP (Mobile Home Park)
Overlay Zone 10-39
Section 10.16 HC (Highway Commercial) Zone 10-44
Section 10.17 LHS (Limited Highway Service) Zone 10-46
Section 10.18 NC (Neighborhood Commercial) Zone 10-49
Section 10.19 NSC (Neighborhood Shopping
Center) Zone 10-52
Section 10.20 PO-1 (Professional Office
Building) Zone 10-55
Section 10.21 PO-2 (Professional Office
Building) Zone 10-57
Section 10.22 PO-3 (Professional Office
Building) Zone 10-60
Section 10.23 SC (Shopping Center) Zone 10-63
Section 10.24 IP (Industrial Park) Zone 10-66
Section 10.25 I-1 (Industrial One) Zone 10-75
Table Of Contents iv
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 10.26 I-2 (Industrial Two) Zone 10-78
Section 10.27 CC (Community Commercial) Zone 10-82
Section 10.28 HOC (Highway Oriented
Commercial) Zone 10-93
Section 10.29 OP (Office Park) Zone 10-100
Section 10.30 C-PUD (Commercial Planned Unit
Development) Overlay Zone 10-107
Section 10.31 TCFD (Town Center Form District) Zone 10-115
Section 10.32 INST (Institutional) Zone 10-166
ARTICLE XI OFF-STREET PARKING AND ACCESS
CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section 11.0 General Requirements 11-1
Section 11.1 Design And Layout Of Off-Street
Parking Areas 11-6
Section 11.2 Specific Off-Street Parking
Requirements 11-9
Section 11.3 Access Control Regulations 11-16
ARTICLE XII OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR
UNLOADING REGULATIONS
Section 12.0 General Requirements 12-1
Section 12.1 Design And Layout Of Off-Street
Loading And/Or Unloading Areas 12-3
ARTICLE XIII FENCES, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTION
TO VIEW REGULATIONS
Section 13.0 Vision Clearance At Corners And
Railroad Crossings 13-1
Section 13.1 Classification Of Fences And Walls 13-1
Section 13.2 Residential and Institutional Zones 13-1
Section 13.3 Commercial And Industrial Zones 13-2
Section 13.4 Measurement Of All Fence And/Or
Wall Heights And/Or Locations 13-2
Section 13.5 Height Of Fences Atop Retaining
Walls 13-3
Section 13.6 Electrified Fences 13-3
Section 13.7 Permit Required For Erection Of
Fences 13-3
Section 13.8 Structural Elements Of Fences 13-3
Table Of Contents v
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
ARTICLE XIV SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 14.1 Short Title 14-1
Section 14.2 Purpose And Interests Served 14-1
Section 14.3 Temporary Signs 14-3
Section 14.4 Scope, Authority And Applicability 14-4
Section 14.5 Prohibited Sign Types 14-8
Section 14.6 Installation, Design And Construction
Standards 14-8
Section 14.7 Signs Allowed In Conservation, Agricultural
And Rural Districts 14-11
Section 14.8 Signs Allowed In Single-Family And
Two-Family Residential Districts 14-13
Section 14.9 Signs Allowed In Multi-Family Residential
Districts 14-16
Section 14.10 Signs Allowed In Office Districts 14-19
Section 14.11 Signs Allowed In Institutional Districts 14-22
Section 14.12 Signs Allowed In General Business And
Commercial Districts 14-24
Section 14.13 Signs Allowed In PUD, RCD, MHP, and
PO-3 Zones 14-29
Section 14.14 Signs Allowed In Industrial Districts 14-29
Section 14.15 Master Signage Plans 14-32
Section 14.16 Permit Requirements And Procedures 14-36
Section 14.17 Appeals 14-39
Section 14.18 Definitions And Measurements 14-40
Section 14.19 Policies And Rules Of Construction 14-43
ARTICLE XV PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Section 15.0 Application Of Performance
Standards 15-1
Section 15.1 Time Schedule For Compliance
Of Performance Standards 15-1
Section 15.2 Performance Standards 15-1
ARTICLE XVI ADMINISTRATION
Section 16.0 Enforcing Officer 16-1
Section 16.1 Zoning Permits 16-1
Section 16.2 Building Permits 16-3
Section 16.3 Certificate Of Occupancy 16-5
Table Of Contents vi
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 16.4 Certificate Of Occupancy For
Existing Building 16-5
Section 16.5 Certificate Of Occupancy For
Lawful Nonconforming Uses
And Structures 16-5
Section 16.6 Denial Of Certificate Of Occupancy 16-6
Section 16.7 Certificate Of Occupancy Records 16-6
Section 16.8 Complaints Regarding Violations 16-6
Section 16.9 Penalties 16-6
Section 16.10 Intent Concerning Determinations
Involved In Administration And
Enforcement Of Performance
Standards 16-7
Section 16.11 Duties Of Zoning Administrator
Regarding Performance Standards 16-7
ARTICLE XVII AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
Section 17.0 Amendment Procedure 17-1
Section 17.1 Planning And Development Services Of
Kenton County Staff Review And
Recommendation Required Prior
To Or At The Scheduled Public
Hearing 17-8
Section 17.2 Actions Of Local Governmental
Units To Be Furnished To Planning And
Development Services Of Kenton
County 17-8
ARTICLE XVIII BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 18.0 Establishment Of Board Of
Adjustment; Membership;
Appointment; Terms; Vacancies;
Oaths; Compensation; Removal;
Officers 18-1
Section 18.1 Meetings Of Boards; Quorum;
Minutes; By Laws; Finances;
Subpoena Power; Administration
Of Oaths 18-2
Section 18.2 Procedure For All Appeals To
Board 18-3
Table Of Contents vii
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 18.3 Appeals From Planning
Commission Or Board Of
Adjustment Or Legislative
Body 18-3
Section 18.4 Stay Of Proceedings 18-4
Section 18.5 Powers Of Board Of Adjustment 18-5
Section 18.6 Variances; Change From One
Nonconforming Use To Another;
Conditions Governing Applications;
Procedures 18-5
Section 18.7 Conditional Use Permits 18-9
Section 18.8 Decisions Of The Board Of
Adjustment 18-9
Section 18.9 Actions Of Board Of Adjustment To
Be Furnished To Planning And
Development Services Of Kenton County 18-9
ARTICLE XIX SCHEDULE OF FEES
Section 19.0 Schedule Of Fees 19-1
ARTICLE XX MORATORIUM 20-1
APPENDIX A SPECIFICATIONS FOR PAVING OF
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
AND/OR UNLOADING AREAS A-1
APPENDIX B SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS B-1
Article I Zoning Ordinance 1-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE I
A ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1.0 AN ORDINANCE DIVIDING THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, STATE OF KENTUCKY, INTO ZONES. ZONES OF SUCH SHAPE AND AREA AS ARE DEEMED BEST SUITED TO CARRY OUT THESE REGULATIONS: REGULATING THE LOCATION, HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES; REGULATING THE SIZE OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES AND THE DENSITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION AND THE USES OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND USE AND OTHER PURPOSES; PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATIONS; PROVIDING FOR ENFORCEMENT; A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND REPEALING ALL REGULATIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, ORDINANCES AND/OR CODES IN CONFLICT WITH THIS ORDINANCE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT
STATE OF KENTUCKY, AS FOLLOWS:
Article II Authority and Purpose 2-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE II
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
SECTION 2.0 AUTHORITY: The City of Fort Wright, Kentucky, in pursuance of the authority of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS 100.201 - 100.991) hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections.
SECTION 2.1 PURPOSE: The zoning regulations and districts, as herein set forth have been prepared in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city, to facilitate orderly and harmonious development and the visual or historical character of the city, and to regulate the density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air. In addition, this ordinance has been prepared to provide for vehicle off - street parking and loading and/or unloading space, as well as to facilitate fire and police protection, and to prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger, and congestion in the circulation of people and commodities, and the loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, or other dangers. The zoning regulations and districts, as herein set forth, are also employed to protect highways, and other transportation facilities, public facilities, including schools and public grounds, the central business district, natural resources and other specific areas of the city which need special protection by the city.
Article III Short Title 3-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE III
SHORT TITLE
SECTION 3.0 SHORT TITLE: This ordinance shall be effective throughout the city of Fort Wright, Kentucky and shall be known, referred to, and recited to as the "OFFICIAL ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FORT WRIGHT, KENTUCKY".
Article IV Interpretation 4-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE IV
INTERPRETATION
SECTION 4.0 GREATER RESTRICTION: The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, and general welfare. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the buildings, structures, or premises, upon heights of buildings or structures, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by any other ordinances, rules, codes, permits or regulations, or by easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
SECTION 4.1 PERMIT OR LICENSE IN VIOLATION: If any permit or license is issued in violation of any provision of this ordinance, or purports to authorize the doing of any act not permitted by any provision of the ordinance, said permit or license shall be void.
Article V Conflict 5-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE V
CONFLICT
SECTION 5.0 CONFLICT: All ordinances and parts of ordinances of the city in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, providing, however, that such repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any such ordinances and parts thereof hereby repealed prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
Article VI Severability Clause 6-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE VI
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
SECTION 6.0 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: That should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance, for any reason, be held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision or holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. It is the intent of the city of Fort Wright, Kentucky, to enact each section, and portion thereof, individually, and each such section shall stand alone, if necessary, and be in force regardless of the determined invalidity of any other section or provision.
Article VII Definitions 7-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
ARTICLE VII
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 7.0 WORDS AND PHRASES: For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives are herewith defined as follows:
Words used in the future tense include the present;
Words used in the present tense include the future;
Words used in the singular include the plural;
Words used in the plural include the singular;
Words used in the masculine include the feminine;
Words used in the feminine include the masculine;
The word "shall" is mandatory;
The word "may" shall be deemed as permissive.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE, CUSTOMARY: A "customary accessory building or use" is one which:
a. Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or principal use;
b. Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
c. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and
d. Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off - street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same lot with the building or use served.
ACCESS POINT: An access point is:
a. A driveway, a local street, or a collector street intersecting an arterial street;
b. A driveway or a local street intersecting a collector street; or
c. A driveway or a local street intersecting a second local street.
AGRICULTURAL USE: The use of a tract of at least five (5) contiguous acres for the production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including but not limited to livestock, livestock products, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants, including provisions for dwellings of persons and their families who are engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but not including residential building development for sale or lease to the public.
Article VII Definitions 7-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
AIR RIGHTS: The ownership or control of that area of space at and above a horizontal plane over the ground surface of land. This horizontal plane shall be at a height above the existing or proposed development (depending on the individual property in question) which is reasonably necessary or legally required for the full and free use of the ground surface.
ALLEY: Public rights - of - way which normally affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF NURSERYMEN, INC. (STANDARDS): The Association's Horticultural Standards Committee maintains and revises horticultural standards (see American Standards for Nursery Stock) to comply with the standards procedures of the American National Standards Institute.
AMERICAN STANDARD FOR NURSERY STOCK (ANSI Z60.1 - 1990): An American National Standard implies a consensus of those substantially concerned with its scope and provisions. An American National Standard is intended as a guide to aid the manufacturer, the consumer, and the general public.
APARTMENT: A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms intended, designed, or used as a permanent residence by an individual or one (1) family.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See DWELLINGS, MULTI - FAMILY.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than two (2) automobiles, using production line methods. The use of personnel for one or more phases of this operation in conjunction with or without complete automatic or mechanical devices does not alter its classification. For the purpose of this ordinance, coin operated devices, of the above nature, which are operated on a self - service basis shall be construed to be the same.
AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREAS: Any area used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where only minor incidental repair of such automobiles or trailers may take place.
AUTOMOTIVE AND TRUCK SERVICE AND REPAIRS (Major): Establishments primarily engaged in major automotive and truck repairs including, but not limited to, body restoration and engine overhauls. This use also includes establishments engaged in painting and re - finishing of vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE AND REPAIRS (Minor): Establishments primarily engaged in routine general automotive service and repairs.
BASAL AREA: The total cross sectional area of a tree trunk measured at Diameter at Breast Height (DBH).
Article VII Definitions 7-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
BASEMENT: That portion of a building between the average height of which is at least half below grade, which is ordinarily used for purposes such as storage, laundry facilities, household tool shops, and installation and operation of heating, cooling, ventilating facilities, but which is not ordinarily used for purposes of general household habitation.
BILLBOARD: a sign, having an area greater than twenty-five (25) square feet, and which meets any one or more of the following criteria:
a. a permanent structure sign which is used for the display of offsite commercial messages;
b. a permanent structure sign which constitutes a principal, separate or secondary use, as opposed to an accessory use, of the parcel on which it is located; or
c. an outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, i.e., on which display space is made available to parties, other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel (not including those who rent space from the sign owner, when such space is on the same parcel as the sign), in exchange for a rent, fee or other consideration.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS: Board of Adjustments of the city.
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential building, other than a hotel, motel, or tourist cabin where lodging and meals for persons are served for compensation and by prearrangement for defined periods.
BUFFER AREA: Areas so planned and/or zoned which act as a buffering or separation area between two (2) or more uses or structures not compatible, due to design, function, use, or operation.
BUILDING: A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls for the shelter, housing, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ALTERATION OF: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, or girders) of a building, or any addition to a building, or movement of a building from one location to another.
BUILDING AREA OR LOT COVERAGE BY BUILDING: That portion of a lot or building site that can be legally occupied by the ground floor of the principal building or use and all permitted accessory uses.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
Article VII Definitions 7-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot or tract of land.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from average elevation of the finished grade adjoining the building at the front building line to the highest point of the roof surfaces, if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the average height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official or officials appointed by the city to administer and enforce the building codes.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city's building inspector authorizing the construction or alteration of a specific building, structure, sign, or fence.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The building on a lot used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted.
BUILDING SITE: One contiguous piece of land that meets all of the provisions of the city's ordinances, regulations, and codes for building on said site.
BUSINESS EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE: Sale, rental, or repair of office, professional, and service equipment and supplies to the firms themselves rather than to individuals. Excludes automotive, construction, and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops, and hotel and restaurant equipment and supply firms.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES: Provision of clerical, employment, protective, or minor processing services to firms rather than individuals. Storage of goods other than samples is prohibited. Typical uses include employment agencies, secretarial services, telephone answering services, and blueprint services. Also includes business or trade schools that do not involve any outdoor storage or manufacturing processes.
CALIPER: The measurement of the tree trunk taken six (6) inches above the ground up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, or twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger trees.
CAMPING/VACATION MOBILE UNIT: Any coach, cabin, house trailer, house car or other vehicle or structure intended for, designed for, and used for temporary human habitation or sleeping purposes, mounted upon wheels or supports, or supported and/or capable of being moved by its own power or transported by another vehicle.
CANOPY (MARQUEE): A roof - like structure open on three (3) sides serving the purpose of protecting pedestrians from rain, snow, sun, or hail, which structure projects from a building.
Article VII Definitions 7-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
CANOPY COVER: The area that a tree or trees' canopy covers which generally corresponds to a percentage of ground surface area.
CARPORT: See GARAGE, PRIVATE.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, AUTOMATIC: “Automatic changeable copy sign” means a type of sign on which the copy changes automatically through the use of electronic or electro-mechanical technology. All changeable copy shall be included within the allotted face of sign square footage.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL: “Manual changeable copy sign” means any sign on which copy for all or a portion of the sign can be changed by a human being removing or rearranging letters, symbols or numerals. All changeable copy shall be included within the allotted face of sign square footage.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER: See NURSERY SCHOOL.
CITIZEN MEMBER: Any member of the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustments who is not an elected or appointed official or employee of the legislative body.
CLINIC, ANIMAL: A building used by medical persons for the treatment of small animals on an out - patient basis only, without animal runs.
CLINIC, HUMAN CARE: A building used by medical persons for the treatment of persons on an out - patient basis only.
CLUB: An association of persons for some common objective, usually jointly supported and meeting periodically.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Words, symbols, logos, pictures or any combination thereof that identify which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered for sale or a fee.
COMMISSION (PLANNING COMMISSION OR PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION): The Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission, Kenton County, State of Kentucky.
COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS: Standards that have been enacted by a local government under the authority of this section for the purpose of protecting and preserving the monetary value of real property located within the local government’s jurisdiction.
COMPLEX (COMMERCIAL): Multiple sites that do not meet the definition of “Center, integrated) but that meet all of the following criteria: the sites are cumulatively
Article VII Definitions 7-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
contiguous; the sites form a defined geographic area, typically extending to public streets, highways, waterways or other natural or human-built geographic boundaries; the owners or agents for the owners of the sites have common interests in promoting business and other activity in the defined geographic area.
COMPREHENSIVE (MASTER) PLAN: A guide for public and private actions and decisions to assure the development of public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. It shall contain, as a minimum, the following elements:
A. A statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies, and standards;
B. A land use plan element;
C. A transportation plan element;
D. A community facilities plan element;
E. May include any additional elements such as, without being limited to, community renewal, housing, flood control, pollution, conservation, natural resources, regional impact, historic preservation and others.
CONCEALED LIGHTING: An artificial light source intended to illuminate the face of a sign, the direct source of which is shielded from public view and surrounding properties.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is essential to or would promote the public health, safety, or welfare in one or more zones, but which would impair the integrity and character of the zone in which it is located, or in adjoining zones, unless restrictions on location, size, extent, and character of performance are imposed in addition to those imposed within this ordinance.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued by the zoning administrator, pursuant to authorization by the board of adjustments, consisting of two parts:
a. A statement of the factual determination by the board of adjustments which justifies the issuance of the permit; and
b. A statement of the specific conditions which must be met in order for the use to be permitted.
CONFORMING USE: Any lawful use of a building, structure, lot, sign, or fence, which complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
CONSTRUCTION LIMITS: The area affected by the grade changes only.
CULTURAL EXHIBITS AND LIBRARIES: Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of art, or library collection of books, manuscripts, etc., for study and reading.
Article VII Definitions 7-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
CURB CUT: Any interruption, or break in the line of a street curb in order to provide vehicular access to a street. In the case of streets without curbs, curb cuts shall represent construction of any vehicular access which connects to said street.
DAY CARE CENTER: Uses providing care, protection, and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in "decibels".
DECIDUOUS TREE: Not persistent; annual shedding of leaves.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man made change to improve or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Written and graphic material for the provision of a development, including any or all of the following: location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development, streets, ways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, access points, a plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing human-made and natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the applicant.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter, in inches, of a tree trunk, measured four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the existing grade.
DISTRICT: For purposes of this ordinance, synonymous with "ZONE".
DISTURBED LIMITS: The site area affected by grading changes plus an additional twenty (20) foot area on the perimeter
DORMITORY: A residence hall providing rooms for individuals or groups.
DRIVE - IN FACILITY: A facility which, by its design (e.g., window, counter, microphone/speaker, etc.), allows people to receive goods and/or services while remaining in their automobile, for consumption/use on the premises.
DRIVE - THRU FACILITY: A facility which, by its design (e.g., window, counter, microphone/speaker, etc.) allows people to receive goods and/or services while remaining in their automobile, for consumption/use elsewhere than on the premises.
DWELLING: Any building which is completely intended for, designed for, and used for residential purposes, but for the purposes of this ordinance, shall not include a hotel-
Article VII Definitions 7-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
motel, hotel, motel, nursing home, tourist cabins, college or university dormitories, or military barracks.
DWELLING, ATTACHED, SINGLE - FAMILY: A dwelling unit which is attached to one or more dwelling units, each of which has independent access to the outside of the building to ground level and which has no less than two (2) exterior walls fully exposed and not in common with the exterior walls of any other unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED, SINGLE - FAMILY: A dwelling standing by itself and containing only one (1) dwelling unit, separate from other dwellings by open space, but shall not include mobile homes.
DWELLING, TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME.
DWELLING, TWO - FAMILY: A residential building designed, arranged, or used exclusively by two (2) families, living independently of each other.
DWELLING, MULTI - FAMILY: A residential building having three (3) or more dwelling units, as separate housekeeping units.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or portion thereof, providing complete housekeeping facilities for one (1) person or one (1) family.
EASEMENT: A right, distinct from the ownership of the land, to cross property with facilities such as, but not limited to, sewer lines, water lines, and transmission lines, or the right, distinct from the ownership of the land, to reserve and hold an area for drainage or access purposes.
EASEMENT, LANDSCAPING OR PLANTING: The area in which planting must be installed and the setback for buffering between land uses, zones, vehicular use areas, and public or private streets.
EATING ESTABLISHMENTS -- RESTAURANTS: A restaurant is an establishment selling food items ordered from a menu and prepared on the premises for immediate consumption.
A. Carry - out -- A fast service restaurant which does not have sit down eating arrangements and consumption of food on the premises is prohibited (or discouraged).
B. Drive - in -- A restaurant where consumption of food on the premises is encouraged (in car, no seating facilities) and where food is provided by "car - hop" or self - service.
Article VII Definitions 7-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
C. Sit - Down Restaurants -- Those restaurants which provide seating arrangements.
D. Combination -- A restaurant which provides any combination of sit down, carry out, and/or drive - in services.
ENTERTAINMENT: Provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply, or disposal systems; including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories reasonably necessary for furnishing adequate service or for the public health, safety, or general welfare.
FACADE: Any exterior wall of a building which is exposed to public view or any wall which is viewed by persons not within the building.
FAMILY: Shall consist of one individual, or any number of individuals related by genetics, adoption, marriage, or personal affinity, or any number of unrelated individuals occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. The term shall include individuals residing in a residential care facility as defined in KRS 100.984, state licensed adult family homes, homes for the disabled, and foster homes. The term shall not include group homes licensed for juvenile offenders, or other facilities, whether or not licensed by the state, where individuals are incarcerated or otherwise required to reside pursuant to court order under the supervision of paid staff and personnel.
FENCE: A structure made of wire, wood, metal, masonry, or other material, including hedges.
FILLING STATION: See SERVICE STATION.
FINANCIAL SERVICES: Financial or securities brokerage services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loans, and credit unions.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (a) the overflow of inland waters; (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source; and (c) mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground.
FLOOD - 100 YEAR FREQUENCY: The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years.
Article VII Definitions 7-10
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
FLOODPROOFED: Water - tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100 - year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES: The lines marking the limits of floodways on the official zoning map.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a dwelling unit or units exclusive of porches, balconies, and garages, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls or partitions separating dwelling units.
For uses other than residential, the gross floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating such uses and shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements, and similar areas devoted to such uses.
The gross floor area shall not include floors used for parking space when such parking pertains to a residential, commercial, or office used in the same structure.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES, RETAIL: Retail sale of food and beverages for home preparation and consumption. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores, and wine stores.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY: A club or social activity officially associated with and recognized and supervised by an institution for higher education whose membership is limited exclusively to students of the said institution.
FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE: A building used by a fraternity or sorority to provide living quarters for some or all members as well as to provide study, meeting, recreational and other facilities.
FRONTAGE: All the property abutting one (1) side of the right-of-way of a street, measured along the right-of-way line of the street between the intersecting lot lines. In no case shall the line along an alley be considered as acceptable frontage. For purposes of this definition, frontage for a building wall shall be measured for the wall
Article VII Definitions 7-11
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
that is most nearly parallel to that street. In no case shall the same building wall be considered to have more than one frontage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building used for the storage of vehicles and clearly accessory to the principal use permitted.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Decorative elements of a temporary nature intended for the acknowledgement of a holiday or holiday season, exclusive of decorations, which contain business, product sales, or service advertising content. Holiday decorations shall not be considered “signs.”
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling, as permitted herein and further meeting all requirements of this ordinance.
HOSPITAL (HUMAN CARE): A building used by medical persons for treatment of persons generally on an in - patient basis.
HOSPITAL (ANIMAL): A building used by medical persons for treatment of animals generally on an in-patient basis and may have outside runs.
HOTEL: A building or buildings to be used for the temporary abiding place for travelers and transient guests where all entrances, to separate sleeping accommodations, are from a common area.
HOUSE TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater. Impervious surface includes compacted surfaces, streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other similar structures.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: The amount of impervious surface, identified in square feet, divided by the lot area, identified in square feet, expressed as a percent.
INTERIOR LANDSCAPING: All landscaping surrounded by the perimeter landscaping, including all vehicular use landscaping.
JUNK YARD: An open area where waste materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, shredded, baled, packed, disassembled, etc., including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles, inoperative motor vehicles, etc.
KENNEL: Any area specifically used for the raising, boarding, or harboring of small domestic animals.
Article VII Definitions 7-12
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
LABORATORY, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or a portion of a building used for providing bacteriological, biological, medical, x-ray, pathological, and similar analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists.
LAUNDROMAT: A business that provides washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LEASABLE AREA, GROSS: The floor area occupied exclusively by occupant(s), including finished basement and mezzanine areas and excluding such common areas as elevators, stairways, corridors, and lobbies, expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
LEGIBLE: A sign or message is “Legible” when it can be understood by a person with an eighth-grade education (or more). Where this Article requires a determination of “visibility” or “legibility,” the standard shall be based on the eyesight of an adult eligible to receive a Kentucky driver’s license (wearing any corrective lenses required by such license). Where the height of the person is material to the determination, the person shall be presumed to be more then five feet and less then six feet tall.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The City of Fort Wright, Kentucky.
LIVESTOCK: Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for profit or other productive purposes.
LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: A space used for the temporary standing, loading and/or unloading of vehicles.
LOT: A parcel of land or any combination of several lots of record, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a building group, as permitted herein, together with their accessory buildings or uses and such access, yards, and open spaces required under this ordinance.
LOT AREA: The total area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by rights - of - way, the waters of any lake or river, and shall be in one (1) zone only.
LOT, CORNER: A "corner lot" is a lot situated at the intersection of two streets or on a curved street on which the interior angle of such intersection or curved streets does not exceed one hundred thirty - five (135) degrees.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The distance measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines from the midpoint of the front lot lines to the midpoint of the rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage on more than one (1) street.
Article VII Definitions 7-13
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
LOT, FLAG: A lot which abuts a public street, via a narrow strip of land, at least 20 feet in width.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a deeded and occupied public right - of - way.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The common boundary line of a lot and a street right - of - way line. In the case of a corner lot or a double frontage lot, the common boundary line or lines of the lot and the street right - of - way line or lines abutting the lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary line of a lot which is most nearly opposite the front lot line of such lot. In the case of a triangular or wedge shaped lot, for measurement purposes only, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, providing that all requirements for yard space are complied with, the owner may choose either side not abutting a street as the rear lot line, even though it is not opposite the front lot line. Once the choice has been made, it cannot be changed unless all requirements for yard space can be complied with.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary line of a lot, other than a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A designated fractional part or subdivision of a block, according to a specific recorded plat or survey, the map of which has been officially accepted and recorded in the office of the appropriate county clerk, state of Kentucky.
LOT WIDTH: The width of the lot as measured along the building front setback line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A single-family residential dwelling constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq., as amended, and designed to be used as a single-family residential dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and which includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and installed in accordance with KRS 227.570 by a Kentucky certified installer.
MEDICAL SERVICES: Personal health services, including prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses, and other health personnel and medical testing and analysis services. Typical uses include medical and dental offices, medical/dental laboratories, health maintenance organizations, and health centers. Excludes use types more specifically classified, such as hospitals.
Article VII Definitions 7-14
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the front, side, and/or rear lot line and set back from the lot line a distance to provide the required minimum yard space, as specified in this ordinance.
MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH: The minimum distance required by this ordinance to be maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the front lot line, as defined herein, and the front lot line.
MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH: The minimum distance required by this ordinance to be maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the rear lot line, as defined herein, and the rear lot line.
MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH: The minimum distance required by this ordinance to be maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the side lot line, as defined herein, and the side lot line.
MOBILE HOME: A structure manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, which was not required to be constructed in accordance with the federal act, which is transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Mobile homes must be installed in accordance with KRS 227.570 by a Kentucky certified installer.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any lot, parcel, or premises, subdivided, designed, maintained, intended, and/or used to accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes, and meets the requirements as specified in this ordinance. For the purpose of this ordinance, any lot or premises used for the wholesale or retail sale of mobile homes shall not be included within this definition. Double width mobile structures, which are fabricated on individual chassis with wheels and are designed to be joined shall be considered a mobile home for purposes of this ordinance.
MODULAR HOUSING: Housing manufactured off - site, often mass - produced, and designed so that sections are interchangeable. For purposes of this ordinance, this definition shall not include mobile homes.
MOTEL: A building or buildings to be used for the temporary abiding place for travelers and transient guests, where there is a separate outside entrance to sleeping accommodations.
N/A: Where used in the sign regulations, the particular requirement is “not applicable.”
Article VII Definitions 7-15
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
NEIGHBORHOOD: A geographical area containing residences or a combination of residences and businesses, which geographical area meets all of the following criteria:
a. The area shall consist of at least 20 acres that are geographically contiguous;
b. The area shall have direct access from local streets to one or more collector and/or arterial streets;
c. The area shall not be part of another designated neighborhood for which permits for which permanent entrance signs have been issued; and
d. The area shall either have been developed as one planned complex, subdivision or center, or it shall have established its identity as a neighborhood through activities of a community association, neighborhood festivals or other continuing activities separate from the desire for an entrance sign.
NEW LUXURY CAR DEALERSHIP: Shall mean an established place of business:
a. That is being used or will be used primarily for the purpose of selling, buying, displaying, repairing, and services new motor vehicles; and
b. That is operated by a vehicle dealer who holds a valid sales and service agreement, franchise, or contract, granted by a manufacturer, distributor, or wholesaler, for the sale of a manufacturer’s new motor vehicles.
NEW MOTOR VEHICLE: shall mean:
A vehicle that is in the possession of the manufacturer, distributor, or wholesaler, or has been sold to the holders of a valid sales and service agreement, franchise, or contract, granted by a manufacturer, distributor, or wholesaler, for the sale of the make of new vehicle, which is new, and on which the original title has not been issued from the franchised dealer.
NIT: A measure of luminance. One nit is equal to one candela per square meter (1cd/m2). Ten thousand nits are equal to one stilb. A candela, on which the definition is based, is a unit of measurement of the intensity of light. Part of the SI system of measurement, one candela (cd) is the monochromatic radiation of 540THz with a radiant intensity of 1/683 watt per steradian in the same direction. Another way of putting it is that an ordinary wax candle generates approximately one candela.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot which was lawfully created but which does not conform to the minimum area or dimensional requirements specified for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: An activity or a building, sign, fence, structure, or a portion thereof, which lawfully existed before the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but which does not conform to all of the regulations contained in this ordinance, or amendments thereto, which pertain to the zone in which it is located.
Article VII Definitions 7-16
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS: Matter or material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals as determined by the appropriate health department.
NURSERY: Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of plants and including all accessory buildings.
NURSERY SCHOOL: Any building used for the daytime care or education of preschool age children with or without compensation, and including all accessory buildings and play areas.
NURSING HOME: A health establishment which provides nursing care under the direction of a Kentucky licensed physician to patients who, for reason of illness or physical infirmities, are unable to care for themselves properly.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive in any way to a person with reasonable sensitivity.
OFFICES: Professional, governmental, executive, management, or administrative offices of private organizations or government agencies. Typical uses include government offices, administrative offices, legal offices, technology businesses, and architectural firms.
OUTLOT, SHOPPING CENTER: That portion of land in an integrated shopping center or other planned development which does not contain the central or primary building of the development and is: (a) usually located adjacent to a street or frontage street; and, (b) is intended for the development of a smaller, additional and separate building or buildings.
OWNER - OCCUPANT: The property owner who will occupy the residence.
PARKING AREA, OFF - STREET: An open, surfaced area, other than the right - of - way of a street, alley, or place, used for temporary parking of motor vehicles.
Article VII Definitions 7-17
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
PARKING BUILDING OR GARAGE: A building, or portion thereof, designed, intended, and used exclusively for the temporary parking of motor vehicles which may be publicly or privately owned and/or operated.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided, suspended form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions.
PDS: Planning and Development Services of Kenton County.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Criteria established to control building enclosure, landscaping, noise, odorous matter, exterior lighting, vibration, smoke, particulate matter, gasses, radiation, storage, fire, and explosive hazards, and humidity, heat, or glare generated by or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
PERIMETER LANDSCAPING: The landscaping surrounding a land use or a vehicular use area.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION: A system of supports that is: (1) capable of transferring, without failure, into soil or bedrock, the maximum design load imposed by or upon the structure; (2) constructed of concrete; and (3) placed at a depth below grade adequate to prevent frost damage.
PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES: Informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include barber shops, beauty shops, health clubs, yoga or dance studios, driving schools, and martial arts studios. A massage establishment operated by a licensed massage therapist is also included within the “personal improvement service” use category.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A large scale, unified land development which permits a mixture of land uses, clustering of residential units of varying types, and common recreation/open spaces, through flexible regulations which encourage creative design to preserve the natural features and foliage of the site.
QUALIFIED MANUFACTURED HOME: A manufactured home that meets all of the following criteria:
A. Is manufactured on or after July 15, 2002;
B. Is affixed to a permanent foundation as is connected to the appropriate facilities and is installed in compliance with KRS 227.570;
C. Has a width of at least twenty (20) feet at its smallest width measurement or is two (2) stories in height and oriented on the lot or parcel so that its main entrance door faces the street;
D. Has a minimum total living area of nine hundred (900) square feet;
E. Is not located in a manufactured home land-lease community; and
Article VII Definitions 7-18
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
F. Is compatible, in terms of assessed value, with existing housing located immediately adjacent to: (1) either side of the proposed site within the same block front; (2) adjacent to the rear; or (3) within a one-eighth (1/8) mile radius or less from the proposed location of the qualified manufactured home.
RAILROAD RIGHTS - OF - WAY: A strip of land within which the railroad tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation are normally located, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
REPLACEMENT TREE: Any tree planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, either for landscaping or tree density purposes.
RESERVOIR SPACE: An area allotted for the standing of vehicles, as in the case of overload or shutdown of an automobile laundry. The area of the reservoir space shall be determined by using the size of one (1) off - street parking space as sized herein per unit of reservoir space required.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT (RCD): A large scale, unified land development which permits a clustering of attached and detached single - family residential dwellings, with common recreation/open spaces, through flexible regulations which encourage creative design to preserve the natural features, foliage, and other characteristics of the site.
REST HOME: Any building, institution, residence, or home used as a place of abode for the reception and care of three (3) or more persons, who by reasons of age, mental, or physical infirmities, are not capable of properly caring for themselves.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE: Businesses involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products or merchandise to the general public. Typical uses include drug stores, grocery stores, department stores, and apparel stores.
SCHOOLS, PAROCHIAL: An institution or a place for instruction or education belonging to and maintained by a religious organization.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC: An institution or place for instruction or education belonging to and maintained under public authority and open to the public for their attendance.
SEPARATE (LIGHTING OR ILLUMINATION): A prohibition on separate illumination for a sign does not prohibit indirect, incidental illumination that spills over from a light serving another lawful purpose.
SERVICE FACILITIES, PUBLIC UTILITIES: Service facilities include all facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, or the Department of Motor Transportation, or Federal Power Commission, and common
Article VII Definitions 7-19
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
carriers by rail, other than office space, garage and warehouse space and include office space, garage space and warehouse space when such place is incidental to a service facility.
SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, or land, used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale, at retail, of any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing other than body work.
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard or structure, including its component parts, which by display of a visual image draws attention to an object, product, place, activity, opinion, idea, person, institution, organization or place of business, or which identifies or promotes the interests of any person, and which is visible from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or parking area.
SIGN, ANIMATED: a sign which uses movement or change of lighting to simulate action or motion.
SIGN, DETACHED: Any sign erected on a freestanding frame, foundation, mast or pole and not attached in any way to any building. Every face of a freestanding sign shall be considered as a separate sign for purposes of computing the sign area.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: Any sign providing way-finding information by identifying occupants of specific buildings or units within a building and, where necessary, providing directions for finding such building or unit
SIGN, PRINCIPAL: The main freestanding sign on a site. The term is used to distinguish such a sign from other freestanding signs that may be allowed on multi-tenant or large sites.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign which is not permanently affixed. This definition is intended to include all devices such as banners, pennants, flags, searchlights, twirling or sandwich type signs, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or other air or gas filled figures.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign affixed to or installed inside a window and clearly legible to persons outside the building. Note that signs that are installed behind windows but that are legible from other private property or from driving lanes of adjacent streets will be subject to limitations on window signs but will also be regulated as wall signs.
SITE: One or more lots or parcels of land that, for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, are used as a single unit. As an example, but not by way of limitation, a site may include more than one “lot” as shown on a subdivision plat, but, for zoning purposes, the permissible use, setbacks and yard requirements are determined for the larger “site” and not for the individual “lots.”
Article VII Definitions 7-20
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of intensity of sound.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. For purposes of this ordinance, a basement shall not be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF: A story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story.
STREET, PRIVATE: A paved private roadway which affords access to abutting property for private users of such property. For the purposes of density calculations, a private street shall constitute the areas of its paved surface and sidewalks or the private right - of - way if designated on the recorded plat.
STREET, PUBLIC: A public roadway, constructed within the boundaries of an officially deeded and accepted public right - of - way, which affords principal means of access to abutting property. For purposes of density calculations, a public street shall constitute all of the area within the public right - of - way.
STREET, ARTERIAL: Public thoroughfares which serve the major movements of traffic within and through the community, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Public thoroughfares which serve to collect and distribute traffic, primarily from local to arterial streets.
STREET, EXPRESSWAY: A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access, and generally with grade separations at major intersections.
STREET, FREEWAY: A divided multi - lane highway for through traffic with all crossroads separated in grades and with full control of access.
STREET, FRONTAGE ROAD (SERVICE OR ACCESS ROAD): A street adjacent to a freeway, expressway, or arterial, street separated therefrom by a dividing strip and providing access to abutting properties.
STREET, LOCAL: Roadways which are designed to be used primarily for direct access to abutting properties and feeding into the collector street system.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location in or on the ground, including such as: buildings, mobile homes, signs, fences, etc.
Article VII Definitions 7-21
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION (SIGNS): As it applies to signs, any change in supporting members of a building or structure, such as foundation, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. For a sign, any change in or replacement of supporting members of a sign structure, such as foundation, columns, beams or girders shall be considered a structural alteration.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; providing that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of land into parcels of less than one (1) acre occurring within twelve (12) months following a division of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this definition.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR: Any structure or device of any kind that is intended for swimming purposes, including but not limited to: any pool or tank of any material or type of construction, or any depression or excavation in any natural or constructed material, or any dike or berm of any material or type of construction; including all appurtenances to such structure or device and all appliances used in connection therewith; which structure or device is intended to cause, or would cause, if completely filled, the retaining of water to a greater depth than eighteen (18) inches at any point. Any such structure or device shall be deemed to be included within the meaning of the term "structure" as used in this ordinance.
Outdoor swimming pools shall be deemed to consist of the following classes: private, semi - public, public, and commercial, as follows:
a. Private: when consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to a one - family or a two - family dwelling and used only as such by persons residing on the same lot and their private guests.
b. Semi - public: when consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to a multiple dwelling, hotel, motel, church, school, club, etc., and used only as such by persons who reside or are housed on the same lot or who are regular members of such organizations.
c. Public: a swimming pool operated by a unit of government for the general public.
d. Commercial: a swimming pool operated for profit, open to the public upon payment of a fee.
TAVERN: Any establishment selling alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises.
Article VII Definitions 7-22
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
TRAILER: See CAMPING/VACATION MOBILE UNIT.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established, if permitted, in a particular zone provided it conforms with all requirements of such zone.
VARIANCE: A departure from dimensional terms of this ordinance pertaining to the height, width, or location of structures, and the size of yards and open spaces where such departure meets the requirements of KRS 100.241 to 100.247.
VEHICLE: Any device meeting the definition of “motor vehicle” under KRS. §186.010.
VEHICULAR USE AREA: Any area containing more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and used by two or more vehicles for parking, sales, or service, exclusive of driveways.
YARD DEPTH, FRONT: An area extending the full width of the lot or building site measured between a line parallel to the street right - of - way line intersecting the foremost point of any building excluding steps and unenclosed porches and the front lot line, as defined herein.
YARD DEPTH, REAR: An area extending across the full width of the lot and measured between a line parallel to the rear lot line, as defined herein, which intersects the rearmost point of any building excluding steps and unenclosed porches and the rear lot line.
YARD WIDTH, SIDE: An area between any building and the side lot line, as defined herein, extending from the front to the rear yard, or on through lots or building sites from one front lot line to the other front lot line.
ZONE: An established area within the city for which the provisions of this ordinance are applicable. (Synonymous with the word "DISTRICT".)
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official or officials appointed by the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
ARTICLE VIII
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
SECTION 8.0 ZONES: For the purpose of this ordinance, the city may be divided into the following zones:
CO CONSERVATION ZONE
R-RE RESIDENTIAL RURAL ESTATE ZONE
R-1C RESIDENTIAL ONE - C ZONE
R-1CC RESIDENTIAL ONE - CC ZONE
R-1D RESIDENTIAL ONE - D ZONE
R-1DD RESIDENTIAL ONE - DD ZONE
R-1E RESIDENTIAL ONE - E ZONE
R-1EE RESIDENTIAL ONE - EE ZONE
R-1F RESIDENTIAL ONE - F ZONE
R-1FF RESIDENTIAL ONE - FF ZONE
R-1G RESIDENTIAL ONE - G ZONE
R-2 RESIDENTIAL TWO ZONE
R-3 RESIDENTIAL THREE ZONE
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
RCD RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
C-PUD COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
MHP MOBILE HOME PARK ZONE
HC HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
LHS LIMITED HIGHWAY SERVICE ZONE
NC NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
NSC NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
PO-1 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING ZONE
PO-2 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING ZONE
PO-3 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING ZONE
SC SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
IP INDUSTRIAL PARK ZONE
I-1 INDUSTRIAL ONE ZONE
I-2 INDUSTRIAL TWO ZONE
CC COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE
HOC HIGHWAY ORIENTED COMMERCIAL ZONE
OP OFFICE PARK ZONE
TCFD TOWN CENTER FORM DISTRICT
INST INSTITUTIONAL ZONE
SECTION 8.1 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: The zones are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled "OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF FORT
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
WRIGHT, KENTUCKY" and shall so remain on file in the offices of Planning and Development Services of Kenton County. A copy shall also be on file in the office as designated by the legislative body.
SECTION 8.2 CHANGES ON ZONING MAP: Where changes are made in zone boundaries in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and Kentucky Revised Statutes, such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment to this ordinance has been approved by the legislative body. PDS shall be provided a certified copy of the amendment to this ordinance in order that the Official Zoning Map may be changed.
No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map which are not in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance.
SECTION 8.3 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or is deemed necessary to be replaced due to the age of the map or major corrections in location of rights - of - way or subdivisions, the legislative body may cause to have prepared and adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereto.
SECTION 8.4 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES: Rules for interpretation of zone boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map are as follows:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the rights - of - way of a street, alley, or other public way, shall be construed to follow such rights - of - way lines and when said rights - of - way are officially vacated, the zones bordering such rights - of - way shall be extended out to the centerline of said vacated rights - of - way.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundary lines shall be construed as following such boundary lines.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the rights - of - ways of railroad lines shall be construed as following such lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, streams, rivers, ditches, gullies, ravines, or other bodies of water, shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
F. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a topographic elevation, determined by the scale of the map, shall be construed as following such ground elevation lines.
G. Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to features indicated in Rules A through F of this section, shall be construed as parallel to such features. Boundaries indicated as approximate extensions of features shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map, if an accurate legal description cannot be determined.
SECTION 8.5 AREAS NOT INCLUDED WITHIN ZONES: When an area is annexed or proposed to be annexed by the legislative body, the zoning to be applied to the area shall meet the requirements of KRS 100.209 and KRS 81A.420 (1), as amended.
Article IX General Regulations 9-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
ARTICLE IX
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 9.0 PURPOSE: General regulations shall apply to all districts.
SECTION 9.1 REDUCTION IN BUILDING SITE AREA: Except as herein provided, no lot, in any zone, may be reduced in area below the minimum lot area as specified herein for the zone within which said lot is located, except where such reduction has been brought about by the expansion or acquiring of rights-of-way for a street. If, however, by some means (e.g., misinterpretation of law, erroneous lot descriptions, etc.) the lot area is reduced below the minimum required lot area as specified herein for the zone, all of the uses and structures contained on the remaining portion of the area shall be subject to compliance with all other provisions of this ordinance. In the event that the uses and structures cannot comply in such circumstances, the property owner shall seek relief from the board of adjustment, as provided for in Section 18.5 of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.2 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNALS: No sign, structure, tree, planting, or vegetation, or any portion thereof, shall protrude over or into any street so as to create confusion around, or otherwise interfere with, traffic signals of any kind.
SECTION 9.3 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS, CURB CUTS, AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS: No type of structure, vehicle, tree, planting, vegetation, sign, or fence, or any type of obstacle, or any portion thereof, shall be placed or retained in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct the vision clearance at corners, curb cuts, or railroad crossings in any zone.
SECTION 9.4 FRONTAGE ON CORNER LOTS AND DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS: On lots having frontage on more than one street, the minimum front yard depth and the minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line shall be provided for each street, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.5 UTILITIES LOCATION: Electrical transformer stations, gas regulator stations, sewage and water treatment plants, pumping stations, standpipes for public water supply, and other similar utility uses, may be located in any zone subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance. The location of such facilities shall be in accordance with Kentucky Revised Statutes, and all other pertinent regulations, and the following requirements:
A. Such facilities shall be essential for the immediate area or for the proper functioning of the total utility system of which the element is a part.
Article IX General Regulations 9-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
B. A building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
C. Such facilities shall be enclosed by a protective fence as regulated by Article XIII.
D. Open spaces on the premises shall be suitably landscaped and maintained and a screening area according to Section 9.17 of this ordinance may be required in and along any yard.
E. The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises, unless enclosed or screened, shall be prohibited.
F. The surrounding area shall not be adversely affected by, and shall be protected from, noise, odor, glare, dust, gas, smoke, and vibration, by such suitable means and conditions as the board of adjustment may specify.
SECTION 9.6 RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY LOCATION: Railroad rights-of-way, exclusive of such uses as marshaling yards, spur lines, passenger and freight terminals, maintenance shops, fueling facilities, and round houses, may be located in any zone of this ordinance providing said railroad rights-of-way meet the requirements of those sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes and other pertinent state regulations.
SECTION 9.7 EXCAVATION, MOVEMENT OF SOIL, TREE REMOVAL, AND EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
A. No governmental entity or other person or entity shall strip, excavate, fill, or otherwise move soil, trees, or other vegetation, except for minor changes such as: the filling of small depressions, removal of vegetation which is diseased or endangering the public safety, etc. without first insuring that all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the legislative body, if applicable, have been fulfilled and then obtaining a permit from the building inspector.
B. The building inspector may issue the required permit after determining that the resulting change in grade, or removal of trees and other vegetation, in the affected area will be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit normal excavation or grading incidental to the construction or alteration of a building on the premises for which a building permit has been granted as required otherwise in this ordinance.
C. Erosion and Sedimentation Control: Erosion and sedimentation controls for excavation, movement of soil, and tree removal, shall be planned and applied according to the following:
Article IX General Regulations 9-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
1. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time during development.
2. When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of time.
3. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas exposed during development.
4. Sediment basins (debris basins or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing development.
5. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
6. Permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development.
7. The development shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the least erosion potential.
8. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
SECTION 9.8 UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY STORAGE: No rubbish, salvage materials, junk, or miscellaneous refuse shall be openly stored or kept in the open, and weeds shall not be allowed to go uncut within any zones, when the same may be construed to be a menace to public health and safety by the appropriate health department, or have a depressing influence upon property values in the neighborhood, in the opinion of the zoning administrator. Salvage and junkyards shall be adequately enclosed with a solid fence or wall, as regulated by Article XIII, and an approved permanent planting screen, may be required as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.9 JUNKYARD LOCATION: No person shall operate any junkyard which is situated closer than two thousand (2,000) feet from the centerline of any county, state, federal, or limited access highway or turnpike, including bridges and bridge approaches, unless a permit for such operation shall have been obtained from the Kentucky Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways, in accordance with KRS 177.905 to 177.950.
SECTION 9.10 APPLICATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS
A. Except as herein provided, no part of any yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading and/or unloading space about or in connection with any
Article IX General Regulations 9-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
building, structure, or use permitted by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading and/or unloading space for any other building, structure, or use.
B. Except as herein provided, every structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot, as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building and permitted accessory structure on one (1) lot. No building shall be erected on any lot which does not abut at least twenty (20) feet on a public right-of-way. Except as herein provided, no building shall be erected on any lot created hereafter which does not have the minimum lot width at the front yard minimum building setback line. Except as herein provided, access to the lot shall be provided via a paved driveway from that portion of the lot which abuts the public right-of-way. All flag lots must be part of a new subdivision development and part of the preliminary and final plats submitted to the planning commission. No identification plats shall be permitted to allow for flag lots. Flag lots shall be permitted only within areas proposed for development which are greater than three (3) acres in size.
C. Except as herein provided, customary accessory structures and uses shall not be permitted within any required minimum front yard or side yard (on each side of the lot) in any zone. In each residential zone, the following customary accessory structures and uses may be permitted to extend into the minimum rear yard areas, as defined herein, in all zones, provided that such structures are set back from the rear lot line a minimum of ten (10) feet, and required minimum side yard clearances are maintained.
1. A building for storage, provided that no such building shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in gross floor area and no part of any such building shall be located further than twenty (20) feet from the principle permitted building.
2. A private tennis court, including shelter house, and a gazebo.
3. A child's play house, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in gross floor area.
4. Barbecues and outdoor cooking structures.
5. Play equipment.
6. Any other customarily found and in conjunction with and required for full utilization and enjoyment of the principle use and which meets the definition of customary accessory building or use.
Article IX General Regulations 9-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Location of off-street parking, loading and/or unloading areas, fences, and signs, are governed by their respective sections, as provided herein.
Accessory buildings or uses serving conditional uses as permitted within the respective zones, shall be permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Adjustment, as set forth in Section 9.14 and 18.7 of this Ordinance.
D. In each residential zone, the following customary accessory buildings or uses may be permitted to locate in the rear or side yards, provided that all minimum area and side yard setbacks are maintained:
1. For single family dwellings, private garages, carports, and private recreational buildings or any combination thereof, not to exceed eight hundred (800) square feet in gross floor area or a maximum coverage of ten (10) percent of the available yard area in which said structure is to be located, whichever is greater. In all cases, the floor area of such structures shall be less than the gross floor area of the principle structure.
2. For two-family and multi-family dwellings, private garages or carports not to exceed six hundred (600) square feet in gross floor area or a maximum coverage of ten (10) percent of the yard in which said structure is to be located, whichever area is greater. In all cases, the floor area of such structures shall be less than the gross floor area of the principle structure.
E. Permitted Obstructions in Minimum Required Yards: Except as herein provided, the following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the minimum required yards specified:
1. In All Minimum Required Yards - Driveways, providing they are not closer than one (1) foot to the property line to which they run approximately parallel to; a common driveway may be permitted to serve two abutting lots provided that an agreement and/or deed restrictions indicating provisions for maintenance and common access is provided as part of the request for a building permit to construct the driveway; steps, four (4) feet or less above grade, projecting not more than four (4) feet into the minimum required yards which are necessary for access to a lot from a street or alley; fire escapes and chimneys, projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches into the minimum required yards; arbors and trellises; flag poles; bird baths; trees; plants; shrubbery’s; ornaments; utility poles and wires; and outdoor furniture; fences and walls, subject to the requirements in Article XIII; and off-street parking as provided for in Article XI of this ordinance.
2. In Minimum Front Yard Depths - Bay windows, projecting three (3) feet or less into the minimum required yard; overhanging eaves and gutters,
Article IX General Regulations 9-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
projecting not more than three (3) feet into the minimum required front yard; air conditioning equipment; and awnings and canopies, extending not more than four (4) feet into the minimum required front yard.
3. In Minimum Rear Yard Depths - Bay windows, overhanging eaves and gutters, and air conditioning equipment, projecting not more than three (3) feet into the minimum required rear yard; awning and canopies, provided they not extend more than ten (10) feet into the minimum required rear yards.
4. In Minimum Side Yard Width - Air conditioning equipment, excluding compressor for central air conditioning unit; and overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches into the minimum required side yard; awning and canopies, providing that they extend not more than two (2) feet into the minimum required side yard.
SECTION 9.11 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING HOME OCCUPATIONS: Home occupations shall include the use of the premises for services rendered at that location. The following requirements shall apply to home occupations when permitted herein and shall be a part of the occupational license:
A. No persons other than members of the family residing in the premises shall be engaged in such operation.
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of any one floor of the dwelling unit (including the basement or cellar) shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, such as utilization of trucks, that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized, in part, for any purpose other than that of a dwelling unit, except that a name plate, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance, shall be permitted.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building, nor shall there be any exterior storage of any materials on the premises.
E. There shall be no commodity sold upon the premises in connection with such home occupation.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes or type (e.g., trucks) than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
Article IX General Regulations 9-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
G. No equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference, detectable to the normal senses off the lot, shall be used in such home occupation. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises, shall be used.
SECTION 9.12 NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES, NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE, AND NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
1. Any lot of record which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance shall be considered a nonconforming lot of record.
2. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area, as established by this ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet the lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance.
3. Where a single nonconforming lot of record exists having a lot area less than required by the particular zone district wherein said lot is located, development may be permitted on the lot, provided: the lot is located on an existing and improved public street; the lot is of separate ownership from all adjacent and contiguous parcels; the adjacent and contiguous parcels exist as developed building lots or dedicated street right-of-ways, precluding acquisition of additional area to achieve conformity; and development proposed on the lot is in conformance with all other requirements of this ordinance. Where a dimensional variance from any minimum yard, setback, etc., is necessary to develop on said lot, an application for dimensional variance shall be submitted for review and approval by the board of adjustment in accordance with Article XVIII of this ordinance.
B. NONCONFORMING USES
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein provided, the lawful use of any structure or land existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may
Article IX General Regulations 9-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance -- it shall become a legal nonconforming use. However, no nonconforming use or structure may be enlarged or extended beyond its area of use at the time it becomes a legal nonconforming use, unless and until the use is brought into conformance with all provisions of this ordinance.
2. CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER: As regulated by Article XVIII, Section 18.6, D. of this ordinance.
3. TERMINATION: In all cases, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 18.2 of this ordinance. Following that hearing, the board may terminate the right to operate a nonconforming use based on any of the following conditions, and if the decision is to do so, the board shall state its bases, in writing, for such determination.
a. Nonoperative, nonused, or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, providing that the board of adjustment may allow the continuation of such nonconforming use if it is determined that reasons for such nonuse were beyond the owners'/operators' control.
b. Whenever the structure, in which the nonconforming use is operated, is damaged in any manner whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure in which the nonconforming use is operated and a determination is made by the board of adjustment that this structure should not be reconstructed.
c. Whenever the structure, in which the nonconforming use is operated, becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city and the cost of placing such structure in lawful compliance with the applicable ordinance exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure as of the date of the official order under the applicable ordinance and a determination is made by the board of adjustment that this structure should not be reconstructed.
d. Whenever said nonconforming use is determined to be detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
4. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall apply to uses which become legally nonconforming due to zone changes which take place thereafter.
Article IX General Regulations 9-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
C. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein provided, any lawful nonconforming structure, existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, may be occupied, operated, and maintained in a state of good repair, but no nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or extended unless the enlargement or extension can be, and is, made in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
2. TERMINATION: In all cases, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 18.2 of this ordinance. Following that hearing, the board may terminate the right to operate a nonconforming structure based on any of the following conditions, and if the decision is to do so, the board shall state its bases, in writing, for such determination.
a. Whenever the nonconforming structure is damaged in any manner whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure and a determination is made by the board of adjustment that the structure should not be reconstructed.
b. Whenever the nonconforming structure becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city and the cost of placing such nonconforming structure in lawful compliance with the applicable ordinance exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such nonconforming structure as of the date of the official order under the applicable ordinance and a determination is made by the board of adjustment that the structure should not be reconstructed.
c. Whenever said nonconforming structure is determined to be detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
3. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall apply to structures which become legally nonconforming due to zone changes which take place thereafter.
D. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE: On any building devoted in whole, or in part, to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance which rendered it nonconforming, shall not be increased.
Article IX General Regulations 9-10
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring, to a safe condition, of any building, structure, or part thereof, declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, except for the conditions as stated in Section 9.12, B., 3., b., or 9.12, C., 2., b.
E. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein provided, any lawful nonconforming sign, existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, may be continued provided, however, that no such sign shall be changed in any manner unless it is changed in compliance with all provisions of this ordinance.
2. TERMINATION: In all cases, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 18.2 of this ordinance. Following that hearing, the board may terminate the right to operate a nonconforming sign based on any of the following conditions and, if the decision is to do so, the board shall state its bases, in writing, for such determination.
a. Not meeting the requirements for sign regulations, as regulated in Article XIV of this ordinance.
b. Nonuse or abandonment of said nonconforming sign for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
3. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall also apply to signs which become legally nonconforming due to zone changes which take place thereafter.
SECTION 9.13 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
A. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS
1. The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to such things as church spires, various types of towers, smoke stacks, other related structures, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, etc. provided their construction is in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city, and is acceptable to the Federal Aviation Agency and the Federal Communication Commission.
B. OTHER EXCEPTIONS: Service stations shall be constructed so that the centerlines of the pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line.
Article IX General Regulations 9-11
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
C. FRONT YARD VARIANCE
1. Where the average depth of existing front yards within three hundred (300) feet of the lot in question and within the same block front, is greater than the minimum front yard depth required by this ordinance, the required minimum front yard depth on such lot shall be modified to be the average depth of said existing front yards.
2. In any residential zone, no front yard shall be required to exceed the average depth of existing front yards on the same side of the street within the same block, when fifty-one (51) percent or more of lots within that block are improved with residential buildings, provided that in no case shall a front yard depth be less than twelve (12) feet.
D. EXCEPTION TO AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS
1. Where existing or proposed developments within any multi - family (e.g., R-2 and R-3) or commercial (e.g., HC, LHS, NC, NSC, PO, SC, CC, HOC, and OP) Zones is to be subdivided, the minimum area and yard requirements may be less than required by this ordinance provided that:
a. The maximum density of the zone is not exceeded and/or the minimum site for the total development must not be less than that required by the respective zone;
b. A community association or other responsible entity is established prior to the approval by the planning commission of any subdivision of land. The "association" shall be obligated and empowered to own, operate, and maintain all common areas (as specifically identified on the submitted site plan required by item c. of this section) including such items as open space, recreational facilities, access drives, parking areas, pedestrian walkways, etc., and all facilities constructed thereon.
c. A site plan, as regulated by the applicable requirements of Section 9.19 of this ordinance, including the proposed area and yard requirements for the development, is submitted for review and approval by the planning commission.
d. In addition, the planning commission may waive the requirement that all lots abut a minimum frontage along a dedicated right-of-way provided that those lots that do not abut a dedicated right-of-way are assured an unencumbered and maintained accessway by the association to a dedicated right-of-way in accordance with Subsection 9.13, D., paragraph 1., b., above, of this ordinance.
Article IX General Regulations 9-12
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 9.14 CONDITIONAL USES
A. DETERMINATION: Subject to the requirements of Section 18.7, the board of adjustment may authorize a conditional use to be located within any zone in which such conditional use is permitted, if the evidence presented by the applicant is such as to establish, beyond any reasonable doubt:
1. That the proposed use at the particular location is necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general well-being of the neighborhood or the community; and
2. That such use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity.
B. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS: In accordance with KRS 100.237, the board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide applications for conditional use permits to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which are specifically named herein which may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain conditions are met:
1. The board of adjustment may approve, modify, or deny any application for a conditional use permit. If it approves such permit, it may attach necessary conditions such as time limitations, requirements that one or more things be done before the request can be initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such conditions shall be recorded in the board's minutes and on the conditional use permit, along with a reference to the specific section in the zoning regulation listing the conditional use under consideration. In addition, a certificate of Land Use Restriction shall be filed pursuant to Section 9.31 of this ordinance. The board shall have the power to revoke conditional use permits, or variances for noncompliance with the condition thereof. Furthermore, the board shall have the right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at the cost of the violator and may have judgment in personam for such cost.
2. Granting of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with all of the requirements of this ordinance, the building code, housing code, and other regulations of the city.
3. In any case, where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within the limit set by the board, or within twelve (12) consecutive calendar months from date of issuance, such conditional use permit shall not revert to its original designation, unless there has been a public hearing. Exercised as set forth in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for
Article IX General Regulations 9-13
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
the construction of the main building or other improvement has been let; or in the absence of contracts that the main building or other improvement is under construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment shall be under contract, in development, or completed. When construction is not a part of the use, exercised shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions as set forth in the permit.
4. The zoning administrator shall review all conditional use permits, except those for which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at least once annually and shall have the power to inspect the land or structure where the conditional use is located in order to ascertain that the landowner is complying with all of the conditions which are listed on the conditional use permits.
If the landowner is not complying with all of the conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the zoning administrator shall report the fact in writing to the chairman of the board of adjustment. The report shall state specifically the manner in which the landowner is not complying with the conditions on the conditional use permit, and a copy of the report shall be furnished to the landowner at the same time it is furnished to the chairman of the board of adjustment.
The board shall hold a hearing on the report within a reasonable time, and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be furnished to the landowner at least one week prior to the hearing. If the board of adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report of the zoning administrator are true and that the landowner has taken no steps to comply with them between the date of the report and the date of the hearing, the board of adjustment may authorize the zoning administrator to revoke the conditional use permit and take the necessary legal action to cause the termination of the activity on the land which the conditional use permit authorizes.
5. Once the board of adjustment has completed a conditional use permit, and all the conditions required are of such type that they can be completely and permanently satisfied, the zoning administrator, upon request of the applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a determination that the conditions have been satisfied, and enter the facts which indicate that the conditions have been satisfied and the conclusion in the margin of the copy of the conditional use permit which is on file. Thereafter said use, if it continues to meet the other requirements of this ordinance, will be treated as a permitted use.
Article IX General Regulations 9-14
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
6. When an application is made for a conditional use permit for land located within or abutting any residential zoning district, written notice shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing on the application to the applicant, administrative official, an owner of every parcel of property adjoining the property to which the application applies, and such other persons as this ordinance or board of adjustment bylaws shall direct. Written notice shall be by first class mail with certification by the board's secretary or other officer that the notice was mailed. It shall be the duty of the applicant to furnish to the board the name and address of an owner of each parcel of property as described in this subsection. Records maintained by the property valuation administrator may be relied upon conclusively to determine the identity and address of said owner. In the event such property is in condominium or cooperative forms of ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or chairperson of the owner group which administers property commonly owned by the condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be mailed to two or more co-owners of an adjoining property who are listed in the property valuation administrator's records as having the same address.
7. When any property within the required notification area for a public hearing upon a conditional use permit application is located within an adjoining city, county, or planning unit, notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, to certain public officials, as follows:
a. If the adjoining property is part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to that unit's commission; or
b. If the adjoining property is not part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to the mayor of the city in which the property is located or, if the property is in an unincorporated area, notice shall be given to the judge/executive of the county in which the property is located.
SECTION 9.15 BUILDING REGULATIONS AND WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SERVICE
A. BUILDING REGULATIONS: All structures shall be designed, erected, or altered in accordance with the legislative body's housing and building codes.
B. WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SERVICE: No building may be constructed in any zone, except the R-RE Zone, unless such building is connected to a public water and central sanitary sewer system of adequate capacity and design, and approved by proper authorities. In the case of the R-RE Zone, private sewage
Article IX General Regulations 9-15
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
disposal systems may be permitted, provided they are approved in accordance with the requirements of the Northern Kentucky District Board of Health.
Where existing buildings are presently unserved by a public sanitary sewer system, and are located within a reasonable distance of an existing or newly extended sanitary sewer line, as determined by the legislative body and/or the Northern Kentucky District Board of Health, said building shall be required to connect with the public sanitary sewer system and the private sewage disposal system shall be prohibited.
SECTION 9.16 MOVE AND SET
A. REQUIREMENTS: No building, structure, or improvement shall be moved or set from or upon land located in any area or transported upon any public street, in the legislative body, until and unless both: (1) a building permit to move and set; and (2) a transport permit, have been obtained, and said building, structure, or improvement complies with the provisions of this section.
B. COMPLIANCE: All buildings, structures, and improvements shall comply with the legislative body's housing and building code, and all other applicable codes and regulations.
C. PROCEDURE-PERMITS: The applicant shall submit to the building inspector, the following:
1. An application for a building permit requesting an inspection of the building, structure, or improvement to be moved or set;
2. A plot plan, footing and foundation plan, and construction plans for any new construction;
3. A statement from the applicable legislative body(s) insuring that all past and current taxes have been paid.
4. Upon receipt of the foregoing items, the building inspector shall inspect said building, structure, or improvements, and the proposed location where same will be set within the legislative body and determine if the proposed development will comply with all applicable codes and regulations.
5. The move and set shall be referred to the zoning administrator for approval or denial of compliance with this ordinance.
6. Upon approval by the zoning administrator and building inspector, a building permit to move and set shall be issued. The legislative body's
Article IX General Regulations 9-16
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
engineer shall then be notified of same and shall issue a transport permit. The legislative body's engineer or his agent will designate the route to be traveled. The transport permit is good only for the date specified on permit. The transport permit will not be issued if ninety (90) consecutive calendar days or more have lapsed from the date of inspection by the building inspector. The transport permit provided for in this section shall not be in lieu of any other permits which may be required by the legislative body.
7. No transport or building permit to move and set shall be issued until the applicant has first obtained the necessary permits from the telephone company, public utilities companies, railroad companies, and the Kentucky Department of Transportation, and the county road supervisor, whichever is applicable.
D. FEES
1. There will be a building investigation fee, as established by the legislative body, to cover the costs of investigation and inspection for determining the structural soundness of buildings, structures, or improvements to be moved, the fee is payable in advance and must accompany the application provided for herein. This fee is not returnable. If any alterations or improvements to be made are found to be in compliance with the legislative body's applicable codes and regulations, a building permit to move and set will be issued and the fee will be based on the cost of new foundations and all work necessary to place the building or structure in its completed condition in the new location. This fee is in addition to the building investigation fee.
2. No person, corporation, or company shall transport, move, or set any building, structure, or improvement in the legislative body, until and unless such person, corporation, or company shall post with the building inspector a good and sufficient indemnity bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in favor of the legislative body. Such bond shall be made by a surety corporation authorized to do business in the state of Kentucky.
SECTION 9.17 LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of these regulations is to promote and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community through reduction of noise, air, and visual pollution, air temperature and headlight glare and to improve the aesthetic character of the community by improving the appearance of vehicular use areas and property adjoining public/private road rights-of-way and driveways, preserving existing trees, and requiring screening between land uses.
Article IX General Regulations 9-17
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
B. WHO PROVIDES LANDSCAPING: Landscaping required to fulfill these regulations shall be provided by the property owner. If an adjacent property has landscaping fulfilling perimeter landscaping requirements, the requirement for perimeter landscaping along the common boundary may be waived if deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
C. TYPES OF LANDSCAPING REQUIRED: Landscaping required per these regulations includes perimeter landscaping, vehicular use area (parking lot) or interior landscaping, and landscaping for screening of dumpsters.
D. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS TABLE: The Landscape Requirements Table (Table 9-1) contains landscape requirements for perimeter, vehicular use or interior landscaping per these regulations.
E. SITES AFFECTED: Landscaping as required in the Landscape Requirements Table (Table 9-1 ), shall be required as follows:
1. All new building development and construction or development requiring a zoning map amendment, except for single and two-family residential.
2. EXISTING DEVELOPED SITES:
a. New parking lot construction, including the expansion, moving or relocation of existing parking. This requirement shall only affect those newly paved areas of five (5) spaces or larger, or any paved area larger than 1500 square feet. The number of parking spaces added shall also include any spaces added within one (1) calendar year prior to the building permit application for the new spaces. This requirement shall, in no instance, be deemed as retroactively affecting sites prior to the adoption of this amendment.
b. Substantial additions to an existing building - Substantial building additions will be defined per the criteria established below:
Where Existing Substantial Increase
Structure Is An Addition Of
0 - 1,000 sq. ft. 101% or greater
1,001 - 10,000 sq. ft. 40% or greater
10,001 - 25,000 sq. ft. 30% or greater
25,001 - 50,000 sq. ft. 20% or greater
50,001 sq. ft. and above 10% or greater
Article IX General Regulations 9-18
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Perimeter landscaping is required between addition and adjoining land use or public/private street, per the landscape requirements table. See Figure 9-1 for additional information. If this does not involve new parking lot construction, interior (Vehicular Use Area) landscaping is not required.
c. When a land use changes to a different land use requiring the construction of additional parking.
F. PLANTING MANUAL AND LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS GUIDELINES: The legislative body shall have on file a manual that outlines recommended plant materials, illustrations of the landscape ordinance applications and minimum requirements for other landscape materials. This manual shall be used as a guideline to anyone preparing a landscape plan in order to meet the requirements of this Landscape Ordinance.
The Planting Manual and Landscape Regulation Guidelines include plant lists which can be used for reference purposes when selecting trees and shrubs to meet the requirements of these regulations. The lists are as follows:
PLANT LIST A: SHADE TREES (Mature height greater than 30 ft.)
PLANT LIST B: FLOWERING AND NON - FLOWERING TREES
(Mature height less than 30 ft. for use under power lines.)
PLANT LIST C: EVERGREEN/BROADLEAF TREES
PLANT LIST D: DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
PLANT LIST E: EVERGREEN/BROADLEAF SHRUBS
PLANT LIST F: STREET TREES
PLANT LIST G: UNACCEPTABLE SHRUBS AND TREES
Please note that with the exception of Plant List G, Unacceptable Plants, the Plant Lists included in the manual are only suggestions of use groups that have been successful in this region for urban landscaping. The choice of plant materials is not limited to those of the lists, but all plants and trees specified on landscape plans that are not included must have proven acceptability in this region. No shrubs and trees on Plant List G will be permitted.
G. MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Article IX General Regulations 9-19
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
1. EASEMENTS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND SETBACKS: Landscaping must be placed in the required area between the property line and the front, rear and side yard setbacks, except as permitted herein. Required landscaping may be placed wholly or partially in utility or other easements providing all requirements can be fulfilled and approval is granted by the holder of the easements. Trees placed under overhead utility wires must be from List B. The rights-of-way of any public street may also be utilized for the required landscaping provided that approval is granted by the appropriate government. It must be noted that an Encroachment Permit shall be required from the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet to plant within state right-of-way. When rights-of-ways are used for required landscaping it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain said landscaping and to replace any required landscaping subsequently removed by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet or local legislative bodies.
2. SIGHT TRIANGLE: That area at street or drive intersections where all landscaping is prohibited, except ground covers and trees that are without limbs, with a ground clearance seven feet (see Figure 9-2).
3. JOINT DRIVEWAYS: If two properties share a driveway or vehicular use area and have a written reciprocal access agreement, no vehicular use area screening shall be required along the paved portion of the common boundary. Interior landscape shall be required on the property submitting plans.
4. DUMPSTERS: Shall be screened on at least three (3) sides according to Table 9-2.
When dumpsters located less than ten (10) feet from an unwindowed portion of a building on the same property, landscape screening may be waived by the Zoning Administrator for the side of the dumpster facing that building wall. Fencing shall be required on that side.
5. CONFLICTS IN REQUIREMENTS: When an activity or land use falls under more than one of the categories listed in the table, the most stringent of the requirements shall be applied.
H. LANDSCAPE MATERIALS
1. WALLS AND FENCES: When walls or fences are used to fulfill screening requirements, they shall be indicated on the landscape plan. They are to be of weather-proof materials. This includes the use of synthetic or other construction materials or pressure treated lumber or painting of lumber if it is not redwood or cedar and using aluminum or galvanized hardware.
Article IX General Regulations 9-20
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Chain link fences with wood or synthetic slat material shall not be used to meet the requirements of these regulations.
2. PLANTS AND TREES: All plants are to be healthy and part of the acceptable plants listed in the Planting Manual. All plants must be replaced if they die. A plant manual should be obtained from the legislative body that outlines recommended plant material.
a. Quality: Plant materials used in conformance with provision of this ordinance shall comply with the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60. 1-1990, or most current edition) as prepared and published by the American Association of Nurserymen which is on file at the City Hall. In addition all plant materials shall have passed any inspection required under state and/or local regulations.
b. Deciduous Trees (trees which normally shed their leaves in the fall): Shall be species having an average mature crown spread of greater than fifteen (15) feet in Kenton County and having trunk(s) which can be maintained with a minimum of seven (7) feet of clear wood in areas which have visibility requirements. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by a grouping of the same so as to create the equivalent of a fifteen (15) foot crown spread. A minimum of six to eight (6-8) feet overall height or a minimum caliper (trunk diameter, measured by 6 inches above ground for trees up to 4 inches caliper) of at least 1 1/2 inch immediately after planting shall be required. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than fifteen (15) feet from such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior container dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep and for which the construction requirements shall be four (4) inches thick reinforced concrete.
c. Evergreen Trees: Shall be a minimum of five (5) feet high with a minimum caliper of 1-1/2 inches immediately after planting.
d. Shrubs and Hedges: Shall be at least 15" - 20" in average height when installed. All plants shall conform to opacity, mature height, and other requirements within four (4) years after the date of the final approval of each planting or replanting. Privet, Ligustrum species cannot meet the opacity requirements and may not be used to satisfy the requirements of this Article. The height of the planting shall be measured from the level of the surface of the vehicular use area at the edge closest to the screening.
Article IX General Regulations 9-21
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
e. Grass or Ground Cover: Grass of the fescus (Gramineak) or Bluegrass (Poaceae) family shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Kenton County, and may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, where solid sod, erosion reducing net, or suitable mulch shall be used, nurse-grass seed shall be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage otherwise is achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Ground cover shall be planted not more than 15 inches on center and in such a manner as to present and have 75% of complete coverage after two complete growing seasons.
3. EARTH MOUNDS: Earth mounds shall be constructed with slopes which allow easy maintenance of grass or other ground cover. Differences in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute an earth mound.
4. MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION: All landscaping materials shall be installed according to accepted planting procedures (see Planting Manual). The Owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued property maintenance of all landscaping materials, including existing trees, and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one year, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first; while other defective landscape material shall be replaced or repaired within three months. Topping trees or cutting of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy shall not be considered proper for the maintenance of trees as required by this Article. Tree pruning cuts shall be made sufficiently close to the trunk or parent limb without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub so that closure can readily start under normal conditions. All branches that are so heavy as to cause bark splitting or peeling are to be precut. Violation of these installation and maintenance provisions shall be grounds for the legislative body to refuse a building occupancy permit, require replacement of the landscape material or institute legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this Article.
I. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. LANDSCAPE PLAN CONTENT: The landscape plan shall be drawn to a scale no smaller than 1" = 100'-0" and shall include: all property lines; a north arrow; a scale; all easements; all existing and proposed structures and their uses; dumpsters; all vehicular use areas, labeled as to size and
Article IX General Regulations 9-22
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
number of parking spaces; the names and addresses of the owners and plan preparers; and either topographic contour or spot elevations where elevation changes occur in areas to be landscaped.
2. TREE PROTECTION PLAN: Identify all trees within the disturbed limits that are to be preserved and are to be part of the required landscaping. Such trees shall be protected during the construction phase, per guidelines in the Planting Manual and Landscape Ordinance Guidelines, Section ll, C.
3. BUILDING OR ZONING PERMIT: A building or zoning permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plans have been approved.
4. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued even though the required landscaping has not yet been installed. A final Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless either:
a. All landscaping has been installed and accepted by the Building or Zoning Inspector, or
b. A full cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit (on an approved bank), or other form of acceptable surety has been posted in an amount equal to the cost of contracting the purchase and installation of the landscaping, plus 10%.
The owner shall have up to six (6) months, as determined by the Zoning Administrator to install the required landscaping. If, after the established time frame, the landscaping is not installed, the legislative body will contract the landscaping using the posted bond. Two one month extensions of the bond may be allowed beyond the established time if it is determined that planting will be detrimental to the plant material.
J. PLANTING ADJUSTMENTS
1. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant a waiver of any of the requirements in this section upon receipt of a written request which outlines the rationale for the planting adjustment. The Zoning Administrator shall review each written request and grant a waiver only: (1) under unusual or extreme circumstances which cause an unreasonable hardship such as the size of the lot; (2) when an innovative or alternative approach can be made which still meets the intent and purpose of this section; or (3) when the requirements of this section are impractical or unreasonable because of the existence of conditions specified in subsection J., 4. Of this section. All decisions made by the Zoning
Article IX General Regulations 9-23
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to this ordinance and Kentucky Revised Statutes.
2. PLANNING COMMISSION - TO HEAR AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR PLANTING ADJUSTMENTS
a. An applicant, at the time of filing of the application for a map amendment, Stage I Development Plan review, or Stage II Development Plan review, may elect to have any planting adjustments for the same development to be heard and finally decided by the planning commission at the same public hearing set for the map amendment, Stage I Development Plan review, or Stage II Development Plan review, or by the Zoning Administrator as otherwise provided for in this section.
b. The planning commission shall review each adjustment request per the requirements of this ordinance and shall forward its findings to the Zoning Administrator. The ruling on the planting adjustment request shall be binding on the Zoning Administrator.
3. PLANTING ADJUSTMENTS: If the property owner wishes to request a planting adjustment of the Landscape Requirements of this article, an application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
4. REVIEWING ADJUSTMENT REQUESTS: The Zoning Administrator or the planning commission, in its review of requests for adjustments, shall in making its decision consider all of the following criteria:
a. The need for the adjustment is due to circumstances typical of the land in the general vicinity of the site or in the same zone.
b. The strict application of the Landscape Ordinance would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land or create an unnecessary hardship.
c. Circumstances necessitating an adjustment are not the result of an action by the applicant subsequent to the passage of the Landscape Ordinance.
d. Adherence to the Landscape Ordinance will adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the public or will adversely alter the general character of the general vicinity.
e. When an innovative or alternative approach can be made which still meets the intent and purpose of this section.
Article IX General Regulations 9-24
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
f. The existence of significant grade separations between adjoining developments or properties.
g. The horizontal distance between the proposed development and the adjoining property.
h. The existence of natural features (water bodies, tree lines, creeks or streams) that are proposed to be maintained.
i. The different land use intensities that can be found within the same land use categories (i.e., a small single tenant office use or a 24 hour gasoline/convenience store can both be developed in a commercial zone).
Article IX General Regulations 9-25
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Any commercial, professional office, or institutional zone or land use, or any conditional use
Article IX General Regulations 9-26
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-27
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Any commercial, professional office, institutional, or industrial zone or land use
Article IX General Regulations 9-28
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-29
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-30
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-31
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-32
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-33
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article IX General Regulations 9-34
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 9.18 OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS
A. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS: All private swimming pools shall be regulated according to the following requirements:
1. Except as herein provided, no swimming pool or associated equipment shall be permitted within any required yards, nor within any public utility right-of-way easement..
2. Swimming pools which are constructed in-ground shall be required to have a fence or wall, including a self-closing or self-latching door or gate around the pool or the property on which the pool is located. Such fence or wall shall be at least four (4) feet, but not more than six (6) feet in height (only classes 1, 3, or 5 fences are permitted, as regulated in Article XIII of this ordinance); such fences or walls shall be constructed in such a manner that a small child may not reach the pool from the street or any property without climbing the fence or wall or opening the gate or door.
3. Swimming pools which are located above-ground shall be required to have a fence or wall, including a self-closing or self-latching door or gate around the pool or property upon which the pool is located. Such fence or wall shall be at least four (4) feet, but not more than seven (7) feet in height (only classes 1, 3, or 5 are permitted, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance). Such fence or wall shall be constructed in such a manner that a small child may not reach the pool from the street or any adjacent property without scaling a fence or wall or opening the gate or door. Said wall may be the wall of the above-ground pool, providing that said wall is at least four (4) feet in height above the surrounding ground level.
Any access to above ground pools by means of a ladder or stairway shall be provided with a self-closing or self-latching door or gate, or some other device that would prevent a small child from gaining access to the pool by means of a ladder.
4. Glare from lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
5. All swimming pools and associated equipment shall be constructed and erected in accordance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations of the city (county). Water used in the swimming pool, which is obtained from other than a public source, shall be approved by the Northern Kentucky District Health Department.
6. All swimming pools existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, which are unprotected by a surrounding fence or wall, including gates or
Article IX General Regulations 9-35
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
doors, as regulated herein, shall be required to comply with the provisions of this ordinance section within sixty (60) days after its adoption.
B. PUBLIC, SEMI-PUBLIC, AND COMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOLS: All public, semi-public, and commercial swimming pools shall be regulated according to the following requirements:
1. Except as herein provided, no swimming pool and associated equipment shall be permitted within any required yards or within the limits of any public utility right-of-way easement.
2. The swimming pool, or the property on which the pool is located, shall be surrounded by a fence or wall, including a self-closing and self-locking door or gate (only classes 1, 3, 4, and 5 fences are permitted, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance). Such fence or wall shall be at least five (5) feet in height, but not exceeding the height as permitted herein, and of such construction that a small child may not reach the pool from the street or from adjacent property without climbing the wall or fence or opening a gate or door.
3. Glare from lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
4. All swimming pools and associated equipment of the swimming pool shall be constructed and erected in accordance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations of the city (county). Water used in the operation of the swimming pool, which is obtained from other than a public source, shall be approved by the Northern Kentucky District Health Department.
5. No mechanical device for the reproduction or amplification of sounds used in connection with swimming pools shall create a nuisance to adjacent residential properties.
SECTION 9.19 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel in zones where a site plan is required, except in accordance with the regulations of this section and an approved site plan as hereinafter required. Before a permit is issued for construction, two (2) copies of the site plan of the area at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet, shall be filed with the building inspector and three (3) copies with the zoning administrator. The site plan shall identify and locate, where applicable, the information as listed in Section 9.20, B. -- Stage II Plan Requirements.
All such site plans shall be reviewed by the city's zoning administrator and the factual determination approving or rejecting such plans shall be made in accordance with
Article IX General Regulations 9-36
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
requirements of this and other applicable sections of this ordinance, and the comprehensive plan for the city.
All site plans approved shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns and shall limit the development to all conditions and limitations established in such plans.
Amendments to plans may be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
After final approval, the subject area may be developed in phases, provided all of the procedures required by the city's zoning administrator have been complied with.
SECTION 9.20 PLAN REQUIREMENTS - STAGES I, II, AND RECORD PLAT:
A. STAGE I -- PLAN REQUIREMENTS: The Stage I Plan shall identify and provide the following information:
1. Plan(s) of the subject property, drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing:
a. The total area in the project;
b. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
c. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued, created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned;
d. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any topographical changes shown by contour with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet;
e. Delineation of all existing and proposed residential areas in the project with a statement indicating net density of the total project:
(1) Detached housing - location and approximate number of lots, including a typical section(s) identifying approximate lot sizes and dimensions, and setback and height of buildings;
(2) Attached housing - location and description of the various housing types (i.e., townhouse, fourplex, garden apartment,
Article IX General Regulations 9-37
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
etc.) including approximate heights of typical structures, and the approximate number of units by housing type;
f. Delineation of all existing and proposed nonresidential uses in the project:
(1) Commercial uses - location and type of all uses including approximate number of acres, gross floor area and heights of buildings;
(2) Open Space/Recreation - the approximate amount of area proposed for common open space, including the location of recreational facilities, and identification of unique natural features to be retained;
(3) Other public and semi-public uses - location and type of all uses, including approximate number of acreage, and height of buildings;
g. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying approximate dimensions;
h. Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions of pavement, right-of-way widths, and grades;
i. Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes. Indication should also be given regarding the provision of electric and telephone service.
j. Certification from appropriate water and sewer agencies that services will be available.
k. Identification of the soil types and geologic formations on the subject property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed methods of handling said problems.
l. Other information that may be determined necessary for description and/or to insure proper integration of the proposed project in the area.
The aforementioned information required may be combined in any suitable and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly indicated. A separate plan or drawing for each element is not necessary, but may be provided at the option of the applicant.
Article IX General Regulations 9-38
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
B. STAGE II -- PLAN REQUIREMENTS: The Stage II Plan shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Plan(s) of the subject property drawn to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that identifies and provides the following information:
a. The existing and proposed finished topography of the subject property shown by contours with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet. Where conditions exist that may require more detailed information on the proposed topography, contours with intervals of less than five (5) feet may be required by the planning commission;
b. All housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing - Location, arrangement, and number of all lots, including lot dimensions and setbacks, and maximum height of buildings;
(2) Attached housing - Location, height, and arrangement of all buildings, indicating the number of units in each building, and, where applicable, location, arrangement and dimensions of all lots;
c. Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all nonresidential buildings and uses on the subject property and, where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions;
d. Location and arrangement of all common open space areas, and recreational facilities, including lot dimensions. Methods of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be identified;
e. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the location, type, and height of walls and fences;
f. Location of signs indicating their orientation and size and height;
g. All utility lines and easements:
(1) Water distribution systems, including line sizes, width of easements, type of pipe, location of hydrants and valves, and other appurtenances;
Article IX General Regulations 9-39
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
(2) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width of easements, gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations, capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and other appurtenances;
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins, and data indicating the quantity of storm water entering the subject property naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at each pickup point (inlet), the quantity of storm water generated by development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm water to be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject property;
(4) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of service and the width of easements;
h. Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions, and the number and arrangement of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading spaces;
i. Circulation System:
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, and width;
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross sections;
j. Provisions for control of erosion, hillside slippage and sedimentation, indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction;
k. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential area, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit;
Article IX General Regulations 9-40
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority;
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership; and
(4) Non-residential buildings and uses, in order of priority.
The aforementioned information required may be combined in any suitable and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly indicated.
C. SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT, IMPROVEMENT DRAWINGS, EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION PLANS AND FINAL PLAT: Plan requirements developed under the Stage I and Stage II Plan requirements of this section, involving the subdivision of land shall also be submitted and developed in accordance with the applicable requirements of the adopted subdivision regulations of the Kenton County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission.
SECTION 9.21 REGULATIONS CONCERNING AIR RIGHTS: Any proposed use of air rights, as defined herein, shall be in the form of a site plan (as regulated in Section 9.19 of this ordinance) submitted to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review.
SECTION 9.22 REGULATIONS CONCERNING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS: Any proposed development which does not constitute a subdivision, shall be required to provide streets (including curb and gutters), sidewalks, sewers (sanitary and storm), and water lines. Improvements to be provided shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable articles and sections of the Subdivision Regulations, unless specifically waived.
SECTION 9.23 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO PARKING OR STORING OF TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, CAMPERS, INOPERABLE VEHICLES, AND OTHER SUCH TYPE EQUIPMENT
A. No vehicle which is abandoned, non-functional, in a state of disrepair, or lacking a valid license, shall be stored in excess of seventy-two (72) hours in any residential zone, unless it is in a completely enclosed building.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to live in any boat, automobile, camper, recreational vehicle, or truck, within the jurisdiction of the legislative body.
C. Outside storage in excess of seventy-two (72) hours, of any trailer, recreational vehicle, camper, boat, or similar type equipment, shall be restricted to the rear yard, excluding required side yards, of all lots within the jurisdiction of the
Article IX General Regulations 9-41
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
legislative body, except as herein provided, and in cases where, due to unique conditions, topographic or other, which do not allow use of the rear yard, the board of adjustment may permit such storage to be located in the side yard of the lot following review and approval by said board. The board may impose certain requirements (such as provided in Section 9.17 of this ordinance) to insure that said vehicle and related equipment is properly screened from view of adjacent property. In no case shall more than one of the aforementioned vehicles or similar type equipment be permitted outside of an enclosed building on any lot or parcel of land.
D. It shall be unlawful to park or to keep any truck with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 6,000 pounds, or any trailer, recreational vehicle, camper, boat, or similar type of equipment with a length in excess of fifteen (15) feet, at any place on property located in a residential district zone, except in a completely enclosed garage.
E. Any property which does not comply with the provisions of Section 9.23, A., at the time of adoption of this ordinance, shall be given a period of sixty (60) days from the date of adoption of this ordinance to comply with all of the provisions of this section. Further, any property which does not comply with the provisions of Section 9.23, C., and 9.23, D., of this ordinance at the time of its adoption shall be given a period of six (6) months from the date of adoption of this ordinance to comply with all of the provisions of these sections.
SECTION 9.24 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
A. This section is designed to ensure, when development is proposed in those areas of the community which have physical characteristics limiting development (hillside slopes of 20 percent or greater), that said development shall occur in a manner harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of drainage, erosion, earth movement, and other natural hazards.
B. Areas of land on which development is physically restricted due to excessive hillside slopes shall be limited according to the following requirements:
1. Development proposed on land areas identified on the Comprehensive Plan as "Developmentally Sensitive Areas", and any other areas which have slopes of 20 percent or greater, shall require approval before development may occur. In those areas which are identified in the Comprehensive Plan as "Developmentally Sensitive Areas" and containing slopes less than 20 percent, the requirements contained herein may be waived; if, after review of the proposed site plan by the engineer, it is determined that said development will not result in any significant hillside slippage or soil erosion.
Article IX General Regulations 9-42
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
2. No excavation, removal, or placement of any soil, foundation placement, or construction of buildings or structures of any nature within the area identified as a Developmentally Sensitive Area in (1) above, may occur until plans and specifications for such work have been submitted in the form of a site plan as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance. In addition to site plan requirements, the following shall also be submitted:
a. Plan(s) which show existing topography and the proposed physical changes necessary for construction, indicating grading (cutting and filling), compaction, erosion, sedimentation basins, areas to be defoliated, and any other pertinent information which will change the natural physical features of the site or general area.
b. Information defining results of subsurface investigation of the area under consideration, including test borings, laboratory tests, engineering tests, and a geological analysis. Such investigation shall be made by a qualified, registered civil engineer and a geologist, indicating that any structural or physical changes proposed in the area will be completed in a manner which will minimize hillside slippage and/or soil erosion.
3. The site plan and other information required in this Section shall be reviewed by the city engineer and the engineer of Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff, who will recommend to the city's zoning administrator, what effect the proposed development will have on hillside slippage and/or soil erosion.
After consideration of the recommendations, the city's zoning administrator may authorize use of the site in accordance with the submitted plans.
4. If, after review of the plans required by this section of the ordinance, the city's zoning administrator, determines that said proposed plans will not minimize hillside slippage, the zoning administrator shall deny a permit for the development of said land.
SECTION 9.25 FLOOD PROTECTION DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in Kentucky Revised Statutes 151.230 delegated to local government units the
Article IX General Regulations 9-43
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the legislative body of Fort Wright, Kentucky, hereby adopts the following floodplain management ordinance, as follows:
2. FINDINGS OF FACT
a. The flood hazard areas of Fort Wright are subject to periodic inundation which result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
3. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding by provisions designed to:
a. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;
b. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
c. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood waters;
d. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage, and
e. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other areas.
4. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this ordinance are to:
Article IX General Regulations 9-44
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding;
g. Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area; and,
h. Ensure that those who occupy a Special Flood Hazard Area assume responsibility for their actions.
B. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
1. A Zone - Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are not determined.
2. Accessory structure (Appurtenant structure) - A structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
3. Accessory use - A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
4. Addition (to an existing structure) - Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a structure.
Article IX General Regulations 9-45
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
5. AE zones - Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
6. AH zone - An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are determined.
7. AO zone - An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are determined.
8. Appeal - A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or from the floodplain administrator's ruling on a request for a variance.
9. AR/A1 – A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A zones - Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete these areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
10. A99 zone - That part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to be protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
11. Area of shallow flooding - A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
12. Base flood - A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this ordinance.
13. Base Flood Elevation (BFE) - The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
14. Basement - any area of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Article IX General Regulations 9-46
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
15. Building - See definition for structure.
16. Community - A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
17. Community Rating System (CRS) - A program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the Regular Program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.
18. Community Flood Hazard Area (CFHA) - An area that has been determined by the Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams.
19. Critical facility - Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the health and safety of the public. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities important to maintaining or restoring normal services before, during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
20. D zone - An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
21. Development - Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
22. Elevated structure – For insurance proposes, a non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
Article IX General Regulations 9-47
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
23. Elevation Certificate - A statement certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related information to verify compliance with this ordinance.
24. Emergency Program - The initial phase under which a community participates in the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
25. Enclosure - That portion of a structure below the lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage, or access to the structure.
26. Encroachment - The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
27. Existing construction - Any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
28. Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by a community.
29. Expansion to an existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
30. Five-Hundred Year Flood - The flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-year flood have a moderate risk of flooding.
31. Flood or Flooding - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
Article IX General Regulations 9-48
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
c. Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
d. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
32. Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) -A map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
33. Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) -A map on which the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e. mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
34. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - A map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.
35. Flood Insurance Study - The report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) containing flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and/or the Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
36. Floodplain or flood-prone area - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from any source.
37. Floodplain Administrator - The individual appointed by the community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
38. Floodplain Management - The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain, including but
Article IX General Regulations 9-49
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management ordinances, and open space plans.
39. Floodplain Management Regulations - This ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
40. Floodproofing - Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents.
41. Floodproofing Certificate - A certification by a registered professional engineer or architect, the FEMA form in effect at the time of certification stating that a non-residential structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact forces.
42. Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as the “regulatory floodway”.
43. Floodway fringe - That area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway.
44. Freeboard - A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. Freeboard must be applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level, but also to the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components, etc.
45. Fraud and victimization - As related in Article 6, Appeals and Variance Procedures, of this ordinance, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly
Article IX General Regulations 9-50
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
constructed structure adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
46. Functionally dependent use facility - A facility, structure, or other development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
47. Governing body - The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
48. Hazard potential - The possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g. safety, structural integrity, flood routing capacity).
49. Highest adjacent grade - The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
50. Historic Structure - Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Article IX General Regulations 9-51
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
51. Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) – Increased cost of compliance coverage means under the standard flood insurance policy the cost to repair a substantially flood damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged building into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are floodproofing (nonresidential), relocation, elevation, demolition, or any combination thereof.
52. ICC coverage is available on residential and non-residential buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
53. Letter of Map Change (LOMC) – An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC’s include the following categories:
a. Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) – A revision based on technical data showing that a property was inadvertently included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.
b. Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) - A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features.
c. Letter of Map Revision – Based on Fill (LOMR-F) – A determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
54. Levee - A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
55. Levee System - A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
Article IX General Regulations 9-52
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
56. Limited storage - An area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant material, void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature controlled.
57. Lowest adjacent grade – The lowest elevation of the sidewalk, patio, attached garage, deck support, basement entryway or grade immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction.
58. Lowest Floor - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, structure access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a structure’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
59. Manufactured Home - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle” (see Recreational Vehicle).
60. Manufactured home park or subdivision - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
61. Map - The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
62. Map Panel Number - The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first revision.)
63. Market value - The property value (as agreed between a willing buyer and seller), excluding the value of the land as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value of the structure can be
Article IX General Regulations 9-53
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (Actual Cash Value) or adjusted assessed values.
64. Mean Sea Level (MSL) - The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as shown on the community’s FIRM. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
65. Mitigation - Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of disaster response and recovery.
66. Mudslide (i.e. mudflow) - Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e. mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
67. Mudslide (i.e. mudflow) area management - The operation of and overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e. mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
68. Mudslide (i.e. mudflow) prone area - An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
69. National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) - The federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry.
70. National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRM’s. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
Article IX General Regulations 9-54
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
71. New Construction - Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
72. New manufactured home park or subdivision - A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
73. Non-Residential – Structures that are not designed for human habitation, including but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses, recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than 6 months duration.
74. North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) – As corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRM’s and Digitally Referenced FIRM’s (DFIRM’s). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM panel legend for correct datum.)
75. Obstruction - Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
76. One-Hundred Year Flood (100-Year Flood) (see Base Flood) - The flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to inundation by the 100-year flood. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26-percent chance of experiencing such a flood with the SFHA.
77. Participating Community - A community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
Article IX General Regulations 9-55
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
78. Pre-FIRM Construction - New construction or substantial improvements for which start of construction occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
79. Post-FIRM Construction – New construction or substantial improvements for which start of construction occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
80. Probation – A FEMA imposed change in community’s status resulting from violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations.
81. Program Deficiency - A defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management standards.
82. Public Safety and Nuisance - Anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
83. Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle that is:
a. Built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light duty truck; and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
84. Regular Program - The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and flood elevations determined in the FIS.
85. Regulatory floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. See Base Flood.
Article IX General Regulations 9-56
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
86. Remedy a violation - The process by which a community brings a structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
87. Repair - The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
88. Repetitive Loss - Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
89. Repetitive Loss Property - Any insurable building for which two or more claims of more than $1,000 were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling 10-year period, since 1978. At least two of the claims must be more than ten days apart but, within ten years of each other. A RL property may or may not be currently insured by the NFIP.
90. Riverine - Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
91. Section 1316 - That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
92. Severe Repetitive Loss Structure - Any insured property that has met at least one of the following paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership:
a. Four or more separate claim payments of more than $5,000 each (including building and contents payments); or
b. Two or more separate claim payments (building payments only) where the total of the payments exceeds the current market value of the property.
Article IX General Regulations 9-57
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
In either case, two of the claim payments must have occurred within ten years of each other. Multiple losses at the same location within ten days of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment amounts added together.
93. Sheet flow area - see "Area of shallow flooding”.
94. Special flood hazard area (SFHA) - That portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1 – A30, AH, AO, or AR.
95. Start of Construction (includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development) - The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
96. Structure - A walled and roofed building, including gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
97. Subdivision - Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels.
98. Subrogation – A legal action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party.
99. Substantial Damage - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged
Article IX General Regulations 9-58
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
100. Substantial Improvement - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 1-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
b. Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
101. Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions - Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equaling or exceeding 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced.
102. Suspension - Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
103. Utilities – Include, but not limited to, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment that service the structure and the site.
104. Variance - Relief from some or all of the requirements of this ordinance.
105. Violation - Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
106. Watercourse - A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
Article IX General Regulations 9-59
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
107. Water surface elevation - The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
108. Watershed - All the area within a geographic boundary from which water, sediments, dissolved materials, and other transportable materials drain or are carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake, or underlying aquifer.
109. X (shaded) and B zones - Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood that are outside of the SFHA, areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood
110. X (unshaded) and C zones - Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
111. Zone - A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
C. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES
This ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), areas applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official as determined by the legislative body of Fort Wright from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the legislative body of Fort Wright which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Fort Wright.
2. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Kenton County, dated May 16, 2013, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS), other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by Fort Wright, and for those land areas
Article IX General Regulations 9-60
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
acquired by Fort Wright through annexation. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by City Council pursuant to statutes governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of Fort Wright and are on file and available for review by the public during regular business hours at PDS offices at 2332 Royal Drive, Fort Mitchell, Kentucky, 41091.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See Section 9.25.D.2 for instructions and explanation.
Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.
4. COMPLIANCE
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the legislative body from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
5. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
6. INTERPRETATION
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
a. Considered minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
Article IX General Regulations 9-61
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
7. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Local Floodplain Administrator of Fort Wright, any officer or employee, thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
8. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION NOTICE AND PENALTIES
a. Civil Offense: If, at any time, development occurs which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit and any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
b. Notice of Violation: If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this ordnance and/or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this ordinance or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See below.
c. Notice of Citation: If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to
Article IX General Regulations 9-62
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this ordinance or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven (7) days of the date the citation is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued does not respond to the citation within seven (7) days, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation occurred shall be considered final.
d. Penalties: Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor offense. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 and/or imprisoned for not more than 12 months, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. ADMINISTRATION
1. DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
The legislative body of the City of Fort Wright hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions, and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
2. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
A Development Permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any special flood hazard area established in
Article IX General Regulations 9-63
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Section 9.25.C.2. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of floodplain administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can be processed. Specifically, the following information is required.
a. Application Stage
(1) Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and elevation of highest adjacent grade; or
(2) Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;
(3) All appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 9.25.E.2.b and Section 9.25.E.4.b;
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
b. Construction Stage
Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction continues, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the State a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed elevation, as built, in relation to Mean Sea Level. In AE, A1-30, AH, and A zones where the Community has adopted a regulatory Base Flood Elevation, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work
Article IX General Regulations 9-64
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR
The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed, authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this ordinance, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a. Permit Review: Review all development permits to ensure that:
(1) Permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied;
(2) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained: review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334.;
(3) Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner;
(4) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this ordinance, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
b. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Article 3, Section B, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the legislative body for adoption.
c. Notification of Other Agencies:
Article IX General Regulations 9-65
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
(1) Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division of Water, and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and
(2) Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
(3) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
d. Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:
(1) Certification required by Section 9.25.E.2.a (lowest floor elevations) as shown on an accurately completed and certified Elevation Certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 9.25.D.2.b;
(2) Certification required by Section 9.25.E.2.b (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on an accurately completed and certified FEMA floodprooofing certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level) to which the new and substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 9.25.D.2.a;
(3) Certification required by Section 9.25.E.2.c (elevated structures),
(4) Certification of elevation required by Section 9.25.E.5.a (subdivision standards),
(5) Certification required by Section 9.25.E.2.e (floodway encroachments),
(6) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
(7) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance; and
(8) Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this ordinance as specified in Section 9.25.C.8.
e. Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
(1) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
Article IX General Regulations 9-66
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 9.25.F.3.a;
(2) When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 9.25.C.2, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 9.25.E;
(3) When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Section 9.25.E.2.b a floodproofing certificate;
(4) All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open for public inspection.
f. Right of Entry
(1) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this ordinance, or whenever the floodplain administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the floodplain administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the floodplain administrator by this ordinance.
(2) If such structure or premises are occupied, the floodplain administrator shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request entry.
(3) If entry is refused, the floodplain administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(4) When the floodplain administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made
Article IX General Regulations 9-67
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the floodplain administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this ordinance.
g. Stop Work Orders
(1) Upon notice from the floodplain administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
h. Revocation of Permits
(1) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this ordinance, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(2) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this ordinance.
i. Liability
(1) Any officer, employee, or member of the floodplain administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee, or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of this ordinance shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings.
j. Expiration of Floodplain Construction Permit
Article IX General Regulations 9-68
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
(1) A floodplain development permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the “start of construction” has not occurred within one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days from the date of its issuance.
E. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
1. GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
b. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
c. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
d. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
e. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if
f. Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
g. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
Article IX General Regulations 9-69
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
h. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
i. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
j. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance;
k. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced.
2. SPECIFIC STANDARDS
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in Section 9.25.C.2, the following provisions are required:
a. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork elevated no lower than 2 feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.25.E.2.c.
(1) In an AO zone, the lowest floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or higher than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(2) In an A zone, where no technical data has been produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Floodplain Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, use of existing data available from other sources, approximate methods, use of historical data, best supportable and
Article IX General Regulations 9-70
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
reasonable judgement in the event no data can be produced. The lowest floor shall be elevated no lower than 2 feet above such base flood elevation. Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Chapter 4, Regulation 060, Section 5(5)a, states as a part of the technical requirements for a State Floodplain Permit: The applicant shall provide cross sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby Base Flood Elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross sections shall be referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than + five-tenths (0.5) foot. Cross sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross section shall extend across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require additional cross sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.
(3) In all other Zones, elevated 2 feet above the base flood elevation.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspection department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
b. Non-residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes) shall be elevated to conform with Section 9.25.E.2.a or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
(1) Be floodproofed to an elevation 2 feet above the level of the base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy and debris;
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
Article IX General Regulations 9-71
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
certification along with the design and operational maintenance plans shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
(4) Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Section 9.25.E.2.d.
(5) All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials to an elevation 2 feet above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Openings for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the standards of Section 9.25.E.2.c.
c. Elevated Structures. New construction and substantial improvements of elevated structures on columns, posts, or pilings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(1) Openings for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
(i) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
(3) The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms.
Article IX General Regulations 9-72
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
d. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles.
(1) All new and substantially improved manufactured homes placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
i) On individual lots or parcels,
ii) In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
iii) In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or
iv) In substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
v) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, and
vi) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood,
All such manufactured homes must be:
(i) Elevated on a permanent foundation, and
(ii) Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than 2 feet above the level of the base flood elevation, and
(iii) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(2) Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that:
(i) The manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
o The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than 2 feet above the base flood elevation, or
o The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
Article IX General Regulations 9-73
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
(3) All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must either:
(i) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(iii) Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this ordinance, including anchoring and elevation requirements for “manufactured homes”.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the State of Kentucky motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
e. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 9.25.C.2, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood discharge;
(2) If Section 9.25.E.2.e is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 9.25.E.
3. STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR FLOODWAYS
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 9.25.C.2, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply:
a. No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a
Article IX General Regulations 9-74
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
b. New construction and substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or flood proofed to elevations established in accordance with Section 9.25.C.2.
4. STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 9.25.E.C.2, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (1 – 3’), where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so that any space below that
Article IX General Regulations 9-75
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in Section 9.25.E.2.b.
5. STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS
a. All subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and,
d. In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available, base flood elevation and floodway data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall be provided.
e. All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
6. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE LETTER ‘A’
For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated ‘A’ the following provisions shall apply:
a. Must be non-habitable;
b. Must be anchored to resist floatation and lateral movement;
c. Must be provided with flood openings in accordance with the standards of Section 9.25.E.2.c;
d. Must be built of flood resistant materials to 2 feet above the base flood elevation;
e. Must elevate utilities 2 feet above the base flood elevation;
f. Can only be used for storage or parking; and
g. Must not be modified for a different use after permitting.
7. CRITICAL FACILITIES
Article IX General Regulations 9-76
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the floodway; however, they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
F. APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES
1. Nature Of Variances
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the legislative body to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
2. Designation of Variance and Appeal Board
a. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of these regulations.
3. Duties of Board of Adjustment
Article IX General Regulations 9-77
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
a. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance and appeals of decisions or determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
b. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
4. Variance Procedures
In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and the:
a. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
d. Importance to the community of the services provided by the existing or proposed facility;
e. Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case of functionally dependent use;
f. Availability of alternative locations, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets, and bridges and culverts.
5. Conditions for Variances
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
Article IX General Regulations 9-78
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
a. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" to afford relief considering the flood hazard. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this ordinance. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the legislative body need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the legislative body believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in the definition section under "Public safety and nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization of the public (as defined in the definition section) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
d. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor being situated below the base flood elevation.
e. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request
f. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Article 6 (4) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
6. Variance Notification
Article IX General Regulations 9-79
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Kenton County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
c. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance or denial, and report such variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7. Historic Structures
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see definition) upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
G. SEVERABILITY
This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
If any clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
This ordinance was adopted at a public meeting of the legislative body of the City of Fort Wright on May 1, 2013.
Article IX General Regulations 9-80
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 9.26 GENERAL MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS
The following regulations shall apply to all mobile homes located individually or in a mobile home park, where permitted herein. Requirements of the zone in which said mobile homes are permitted shall also apply:
A. The mobile home shall, at a minimum, be equipped with plumbing and electrical connections designed for attachment to appropriate external systems.
B. All health, sanitation (including sewers and/or private secondary sewage treatment plants approved by the Northern Kentucky District Health Department and the Sanitation District No. 1 of Campbell and Kenton Counties), and safety requirements applicable to a conventional dwelling, shall be equally applicable to a mobile home.
C. The mobile home shall be set and adequately anchored on a concrete or hard surfaced slab in accordance with the Kentucky Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Park regulations, and the open space between the ground and the floor of the mobile home shall be enclosed with some material such as concrete block, corrugated metal, or other durable and suitable material.
D. Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to locate a mobile home shall apply for a zoning/building permit and an occupancy permit. Applicable permits must be approved prior to the installation and occupancy of any mobile home. The proper permits must be displayed in a conspicuous location in each mobile home, signifying that all permits have been approved by the building inspector and zoning administrator.
SECTION 9.27 LAND USED FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: Pursuant to KRS 100, any land which is used solely for agricultural purposes shall have no regulations imposed, except that:
A. Setback lines shall be required for the protection of existing and proposed streets and highways;
B. All buildings or structures in a designated floodway or floodplain or which tend to increase flood heights or obstruct the flow of flood waters shall be in accordance with this ordinance: and
C. Mobile homes and other dwellings may be permitted but shall have regulations imposed which are applicable, such as zoning, building, and certificates of occupancy.
SECTION 9.28 FILING OF CERTIFICATE OF LAND USE RESTRICTIONS
Article IX General Regulations 9-81
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
A. FILING OF CERTIFICATES OF LAND USE RESTRICTIONS:
1. Effective October 1, 1988, the county clerk of every county containing a planning unit which has enacted land use regulations pursuant to this chapter shall, upon receipt of a recording fee of ten dollars and fifty cents ($10.50), file and maintain among the official records of his office certificates of land use restriction completed according to this section and KRS 100.3682 to 100.3684. The certificates shall be in the form designated in KRS 100.3683; shall be completed and filed by the secretary of the planning commission, board of adjustment, legislative body or fiscal court which finally adopts or imposes the land use restriction described in the certificate; and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the body takes final action to impose or adopt the restriction. The certificate shall set forth the name and address of the property owner; the address of the property; the name of the subdivision or development, if there is one; the name and address of the body which maintains the original records containing the restriction; and shall indicate the type of land use restriction adopted or imposed upon the subject property on or after October 1, 1988, including variances, conditional use permits, conditional zoning conditions, subdivision plats and development plans; but not including zoning map amendments which impose no limitations or restrictions upon the use of the subject property other than those generally applicable to properties within the same zone. The county clerk shall index the certificates by property owner and, if applicable, name of subdivision or development. The county clerk shall maintain in his office a record of the name and address of the agency having custody of the official map for each planning unit within the county. All zoning map amendments shall be reflected on the official zoning map within thirty (30) days of the date upon which final action approving such amendments is taken by the planning unit.
2. The planning unit shall collect the county clerk's filing fee for the certificate from the applicant at the time any proceeding is initiated which may result in the imposition, adoption, amendment or release of any land use restriction provided for in this chapter; and the planning unit may also charge the applicant a fee for the reasonable cost of completing and filing the certificate, not to exceed ten dollars and fifty cents ($10.50), in addition to any other applicable filing or administrative fee, to compensate the planning unit for completing and filing the certificate. The fees permitted by this subsection shall be refunded to the applicant in the event no land use restriction is imposed or adopted as a result of the proceeding.
3. When a restriction reflected on the certificate is amended, a new certificate shall be filed. In the case of such amendment or in the event the original restriction is released, the previous certificate shall be
Article IX General Regulations 9-82
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
released by the secretary of the body which amended or released the restriction in the same manner as releases of encumbrances upon real estate.
4. The failure to file, to file on time, or to complete the certificate properly or accurately shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any land use restriction or regulation. Any improper filing may be cured by a subsequent proper filing. Nothing herein shall affect the running of time for any appeal or other act for which a time limit is prescribed by this chapter.
B. CERTIFICATE FOR CONTIGUOUS PROPERTIES AND PROPERTIES PART OF SAME PROCEEDING: In the event a planning commission, fiscal court or legislative body originates a zoning map amendment for more than five (5) contiguous properties, upon approval of such map amendment, there shall be filed a single certificate setting forth the required information for all the properties, and the originating body shall pay a single filing fee for such certificate. Whenever a land use restriction is imposed upon two (2) or more properties or lots in the same proceeding, including but not limited to the approval of a subdivision plat or development plan for multiple lots, a single certificate shall be filed for all such properties or lots collectively and a single filing fee shall be paid therefore.
Article IX General Regulations 9-83
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
C. FORM OF CERTIFICATE: The form for the certificate of land use restriction required by KRS 100.3681 shall be as follows:
CERTIFICATE OF LAND USE RESTRICTION
1. NAME AND ADDRESS OF PROPERTY OWNER(S)
______________________ ______________________
______________________ ______________________
______________________ ______________________
______________________ ______________________
2. ADDRESS OF PROPERTY 3. NAME OF SUBDIVISION
OR DEVELOPMENT
(if applicable)
______________________ ______________________
______________________ ______________________
______________________ ______________________
4. TYPE OF RESTRICTION(S) (Check all that apply):
____ Zoning Map ____ Conditional Zoning
Amendment Condition
to Zone ____ Other (specify)
____ Development Plan
____ Subdivision Plat
____ Variance
____ Conditional Use Permit
5. NAME AND ADDRESS OF PLANNING COMMISSION, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, LEGISLATIVE BODY OR FISCAL COURT WHICH MAINTAINS THE ORIGINAL RECORDS CONTAINING THE RESTRICTION
_______________________________________
_____________________________
Signature of Completing Official
_____________________________
_____________________________
Name and Title of Completing Official
(type or print)
Article IX General Regulations 9-84
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 9.29 REGULATIONS CONCERNING TELEVISION AND RADIO STATIONS
A. TELEVISION: Earth stations for the reception and/or transmittal of TV signals, programs, messages, etc., may be installed as accessory structures in any zone, in compliance with the following regulations:
1. Such structures, including support equipment, shall not be permitted within any front yard or side yard (on each side of the lot) in any zone. Such structures may be permitted to extend into the minimum rear yard depth, as defined herein, in all zones, provided that such structures are set back from the rear lot line a minimum of ten (10) feet, and side yard clearances are maintained.
2. Structures may be ground mounted or roof mounted, provided that maximum height limitations are maintained. If the structure is roof mounted, it shall be located in a manner so as to detract as little as possible from the architectural character of the building.
3. Structures shall be constructed to withstand a wind load of eighty (80) miles per hour.
4. Structures shall be grounded electrically and shall not cause to disturb, restrict, or impede the reception of equipment on adjoining properties.
B. RADIO: Earth stations for the reception and/or transmittal of radio signals, programs, messages, etc., may be installed as accessory structures in any zone, in compliance with the following regulations:
1. Such structures, including tower, mast, antenna, guy wires, support equipment, etc., shall not be permitted within any front yard or side yard (on each side of the lot) in any zone. Such structures may be permitted to extend into the minimum rear yard depth, as defined herein, in all zones, provided that such structures are set back from the rear lot line a minimum of ten (10) feet, and side yard clearances are maintained.
2. Such structures, including tower, mast, antenna, guy wires, support equipment, etc., shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height, as measured from ground level to the highest point of the structure.
3. Structures shall be constructed to withstand a wind load of eighty (80) miles per hour.
4. Structures shall be grounded electrically and shall not cause to disturb, restrict, or impede the reception of equipment on adjoining properties.
Article IX General Regulations 9-85
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 9.30 PHASED ZONING REGULATIONS
A. Phased zoning is an overlay type regulation to be used in cases where the timing and/or phasing of the zoning of an area is especially critical to the implementation of the adopted comprehensive plan. The intent of the phased zoning regulations is to encourage redevelopment of a specified area for the use and/or density designated within the comprehensive plan when the necessary conditions for such development are realized (e.g., demolition of existing buildings). Implicit in such a phased zoning approach is the premise that until such conditions are realized, the type of development designated within the comprehensive plan is premature; such development would be prevented by temporarily zoning the area to generally conform with the predominant existing land use, with a clear stipulation of an intended future rezoning, which would be in compliance with the adopted comprehensive plan.
B. The phased zoning regulations may be overlaid over any zoning classification by means of a zone change process. The use of the phased zoning regulations would indicate that the regulations of the overlaid zone are currently being enforced, based upon the general existing land use, but upon attainment of all the requirements of the zone which corresponds to the adopted comprehensive plan for the type of use and/or density, the area could be rezoned in direct compliance with the plan.
C. Phased zones are indicated on the official zoning map by adding to the overlaid zone, the letter "P", as a suffix enclosed in parentheses. For example, in order to properly phase its change, an area zoned R-1C, which is identified for future use on the adopted comprehensive plan for "industrial" could be temporarily zoned R-1C(P), indicating that present development on the site would be in conformance with the regulations of the overlaid R-1C Zone, but that, upon the attainment of certain conditions (e.g., provision of an adequate access road, demolition of existing buildings), the area could be rezoned through a zone change procedure to an industrial zone. At the time of the zone change, the temporary R-1C(P) Zone is removed and the area is developed according to the regulations of the new zone, which is in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan.
D. The minimum size of any area to be rezoned, as regulated by this section of the ordinance, is one (1) acre, provided that all other provisions of this ordinance and the subdivision regulations are adhered to. Development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing zone being requested may be permitted if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development and provided further that the zone is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.
SECTION 9.31 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Article IX General Regulations 9-86
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
A. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
1. Person With A Disability: A person with a physical, emotional, or mental disability including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, deafness or hard of hearing, sight impairments, and orthopedic impairments, but not including convicted felons or misdemeanants on probation or parole or receiving supervision or rehabilitation services as a result of their prior convictions, or mentally ill persons who have pled guilty but mentally ill to a crime or not guilty by reason of insanity to a crime. Person with a disability does not include persons with current illegal use of or addiction to alcohol or any controlled substance as regulated by KRS Chapter 218A.
2. Residential Care Facility: A residence operated and maintained by a sponsoring private or governmental agency to provide services in a homelike setting for persons with disabilities.
3. Services: Means, but is not limited to, supervision, protection, rehabilitation, personal development, and attendant care.
B. Any sponsoring private or governmental agency shall be permitted to operate a care facility in any residential district, zone, or subdivision subject only to compliance with the same limitations upon area, height, yard, screening, parking, number of dwelling units, and number of occupants per dwelling unit as apply to other residences in the district, zone, or subdivision. For purposes of determining the number of units which comprise the facility, employees of the sponsoring agency providing services to persons with disabilities shall be counted only if their permanent residence is maintained at the facility. No conditional use permit not otherwise required for the other residences within a zone or land use category shall be required for the operation of a residential care facility.
SECTION 9.32 COMPATABILITY STANDARDS FOR QUALIFIED MANUFACTURED HOUSING
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of compatibility standards for manufactured housing is:
1. To permit local governments to adopt and enforce, as part of its zoning regulations, compatibility standards governing the placement of qualified manufactured homes in residential zones, within the local government’s jurisdiction, designed to ensure that when a qualified manufactured home is placed in a residential zone, it is compatible, in terms of assessed value, with existing housing located immediately adjacent to (1) either side of the
Article IX General Regulations 9-87
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
proposed site within the same block front; (2) adjacent to the rear, or (3) within a one-eighth (1/8) mile radius or less from the proposed location of the qualified manufactured home.
B. A qualified manufactured home that meets the compatibility standards as set forth in Subsections D. 5., and D. 6., of this section, as well as the regulations of the zone in which it is proposed, shall be allowed as a permitted use and as a primary family residence in any residential zone permitting detached single-family residential uses.
C. Applications must be submitted to the zoning administrator demonstrating that the compatibility standards as set forth in Subsections D., 5. and D. 6., have been met and contending that the proposed construction, installation, or relocation of the qualified manufactured home is similar and comparable in exterior appearance, building materials, and living area to other dwelling units that have been constructed on adjacent tracts, lots, and parcels.
D. The procedures for approval shall be in accordance with the requirements of Article XVI and the following:
1. Applications for the placement of qualified manufactured homes shall be submitted with a nonrefundable application fee on a form or forms developed for that purpose to the city zoning administrator. Qualified manufactured homes may not be constructed until after an application has been accepted and approved in accordance with these regulations.
2. The application shall include (1) only information reasonably necessary to make determination as to conformity with the provisions of this Section of this ordinance; (2) recent photographs of the front, side and rear of the qualified manufactured home exterior finish (whichever is applicable); (3) pictures taken from the proposed site of the dwelling unit in the northerly, easterly, southerly, and westerly directions, and pictures of any adjacent dwelling units. The photographs shall be taken within 30 days prior to the submittal of the application. In addition, each application shall be accompanied by a site plan or plot plan containing appropriate information including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Location of all existing buildings, structures, easements, and boundary lines;
b. North arrow, scale, city and land lot;
c. Existing use of adjacent property;
d. Location of all proposed buildings, structures, and land uses.
3. Applications shall be first reviewed for completeness. If the application is rejected for not being complete, the applicant shall be notified of the
Article IX General Regulations 9-88
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
reasons for the rejection. The applicant shall be responsible for the satisfaction of all of the comments prior to the resubmission of the revised application.
4. The application shall be reviewed for compatibility with architectural appearance and similarity with:
a. adjacent development or surrounding developments;
b. development within the same zone or general area;
c. proposed development permitted in the same zone or general area; and,
5. Compatibility with architectural appearance shall be based on the following:
a. floor living space and setbacks;
b. siding and exterior materials;
c. roof pitch;
d. square footage;
e. general aesthetic appearance.
6. Compatibility with the orientation and location of existing structures shall be based on the following:
a. building height;
b. building width;
c. building depth;
d. building setbacks.
7. A decision of approval, conditional approval or disapproval of a complete application shall be made and the applicant shall be notified in writing. Conditional approval shall require that the specific conditions and the reasons therefore be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant upon agreement. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be specifically stated in writing by designating each specific provision of this section or other applicable ordinance that is not met and an explanation as to the reason or reasons why each such provision is not met.
SECTION 9.33 REGULATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
A. The city of Fort Wright, together with the other cities in Kenton County together with the Kenton County Fiscal Court, after consultation among the mayors, councils, commissioners and staffs of the municipalities and the county within the
Article IX General Regulations 9-89
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
County, found that a substantial need exists to revise significantly the ordinances regarding sexually oriented businesses within Kenton County.
B. The city of Fort Wright, in association with Planning and Development Services of Kenton County and the Fiscal Court of adjacent Campbell County its cities in the Northern Kentucky Community, retained Duncan Associates to conduct a study of existing sexually oriented uses and related businesses in Kenton and Campbell Counties, which is part of a single, larger community.
C. Duncan Associates assigned two nationally-known planners, Eric Damian Kelly, FAICP and Connie B. Cooper, FAICP, to conduct that study
D. Kelly and Cooper have completed that study, including the following elements:
1. Field study, involving visits to all identified existing sexually oriented businesses in Kenton and Campbell Counties;
2. Meetings with stakeholder groups involved in these businesses;
3. Consultation with the Kenton County, Campbell County Attorney, and the city attorneys for certain cities, and the community at large on this issue;
4. Consultation with the professional staff of Planning and Development Services of Kenton County on this issue;
5. Review of studies and litigation concerning sexually oriented businesses in other communities;
6. Investigation of regulatory approaches to massage therapy;
7. Review of existing ordinances in Kenton and Campbell Counties;
8. Review of similar ordinances in a number of communities outside the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
9. Review of Kentucky statutes related to regulating sexually oriented businesses.
E. Duncan Associates has summarized this work and presented recommendations to Planning and Development Services of Kenton County and Kenton and Campbell Counties and their cities in an August 2003 report entitled “Site Visit Analysis: Sexually Oriented and Related Businesses in Kenton and Campbell Counties” (hereinafter called simply the “Kelly and Cooper Study”).
F. That study has also been made available to the legislative bodies of Kenton and Campbell Counties for their consideration and use.
G. That study has been accepted and used by the Fiscal Court of Kenton County in adopting the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, as amended, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus in 2004.
Article IX General Regulations 9-90
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
H. The United States Supreme Court in City of Renton v. Playtime Theater, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), held that local governments may rely upon the experiences of other cities as well as on its own studies in enacting local legislation to regulate sexually oriented businesses;
I. The United States Supreme Court in Renton and other cases has held that a local government may regulate such uses through content-neutral, time, place, and manner restrictions, so long as said regulations are designed to serve the government interest and do not unreasonably omit avenues of communication, and are aimed not at the content of protected speech within said establishments but rather at the secondary effects of said establishments on the surrounding communities.
J. The study by Kelly and Cooper found extensive physical interaction between patrons and dancers at many of the establishments in both Kenton and Campbell Counties.
K. Covington, the only municipality in Kenton County that has had sexually oriented businesses within its border, from January 1, 2002, to February 11, 2004, the police made a total of 469 calls to sexually oriented businesses in the city. The crimes committed at these establishments during this time period included robbery, assault, fraud, malicious mischief, public intoxication, and possession of illegal drugs. In addition, on June 13, 2003, Covington police arrested three individuals for prostitution-related charges at Liberty's Show Lounge, a sexually oriented cabaret in the city.
L. As the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals noted in a decision addressing issues related to the Adult Entertainment ordinance in the City of Newport (Campbell County), there is a long history underlying efforts to regulate sex businesses in Northern Kentucky:
Defendant City of Newport ("City" or "Newport") long ago gained a reputation as home to a veritable smorgasbord of vice, attracting patrons from across the nation. For decades, the small city was considered the Midwest's answer to Las Vegas, and leaders of organized crime were said to operate its gambling casinos and nightclubs.
In the 1960's, public pressure began to demand that Newport be cleaned up. This pressure has continued until the present, with varying degrees of success.
A 1986 report generated by the Newport Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator indicated that of 28 adult bars opened since 1978 (including successive bars at the same site), 21 had had at least one prostitution-related conviction, and 18 had had multiple convictions. Def. Ex. K, p. 2. The report explained that "all of the prostitution in businesses with adult entertainment
Article IX General Regulations 9-91
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
involved an alcoholic beverage as the median [sic] of exchange and the solicitation of such drinks by 'mixers.'" Id. In all, 98% of prostitution arrests in Newport occurred in the vicinity of these bars. Id. Adult entertainment establishments, which constituted 12% of all businesses serving alcohol, accounted for 17% of all police runs. Def. Ex. K, p. 21.
A later review, conducted in 1990 by the Newport License Inspector, documented the continued prostitution arrests occurring at several adult dancing establishments. Def. Ex. G. Moreover, the City determined that over $ 70,000 was expended in 1990 to target, patrol and prosecute the illicit behavior occurring in and around the bars. Def. Ex. H.
Several of Newport's citizens, merchants and church groups also opposed the presence of the semi-nude dancing clubs. These groups generally believed that the adult entertainment clubs were "clouds over [the] neighborhood that keep [it] from growing in the [right] direction." See Def. Ex. I (letter to Mayor from Taylors Landing Business District). Complaints commonly expressed were that the seamy establishments deterred other merchants from locating in Newport's business district, deterred shoppers, served a poor example for the City's youth, and generally tarnished the City's image. Id.
Bright Lights, Inc., v. City of Newport, 830 F. Supp. 378, 380-81 (E. D. Ky. 1993).
Based on those findings, the court went on to hold in relevant part:
Having considered the matter carefully, the court concludes that some leeway must be afforded the reform efforts of the City Council of Newport. This body has been elected by the citizens to attempt to "clean up the image" of the City.
To do this, it must overcome the sleazy impression of Newport and Northern Kentucky that survives from "the heyday" when things ran wide open; reform candidates were literally drugged and framed for morals offenses by public officials and police officers; the members of reform citizens groups were vilified and harassed; and a "liberal" in local parlance was a person favoring the continued open and notorious violation of the gambling and morals laws.
To illustrate that the Council's perception of a need to clean up the image of the City is not paranoid, the court notes the following statements in a national magazine's satirical Chapter on Newport's big sister, the city of Cincinnati.
"The city's streets fairly shine; the odd litterer draws a scornful stare. Wide avenues, bosky side streets, the most inviting of thoroughfares. And clean. So clean. No X-rated movie theaters, no adult-book stores, no bare-breasted night joints soil these streets, all of them long ago jettisoned over to the Kentucky side of the river."
Article IX General Regulations 9-92
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Peter Richmond, “Town Without Pity,” Gentlemen's Quarterly, July 1993, at 102, 104.
This court holds that the City of Newport has the right to secede as Cincinnati's combat zone.
The court holds that the City has "an important and substantial governmental interest" in advancing these reform goals, which interest is furthered by the ordinances in question. Barnes, 111 S. Ct. at 2461. The court further finds and holds that in the case of the City of Newport, given its unique history, the ordinances' "incidental restriction on alleged First Amendment freedoms is no greater than is essential to the furtherance of that interest." Id. (quoting O'Brien, 391 U.S. at 376-77, 88 S. Ct. at 1678-79).
Newport's image affects that of all of Northern Kentucky, a community of nearly 300,000 people. That City and its community have the right to project a progressive and decent image. The nudity ordinances contribute to the enhancement of this interest and will be upheld. 830 F.Supp. at 384;
M. The Supreme Court had earlier noted in upholding another regulation in Newport, “it is plain that, as in Bellanca, the interest in maintaining order outweighs the interest in free expression by dancing nude.” Newport v. Iacobucci, 479 U.S. 92, 97, 93 L. Ed. 2d 334, 340, 107 S. Ct. 383, 386 (1986). Although the significance of the opinion itself is now questionable (see J&B Social Club # 1 v. City of Mobile, 966 F. Supp. 1131, 1135 (S.D. Ala. 1996)), the quoted part of the opinion stands unchallenged.
N. The cities of Covington and Newport continue their efforts to improve their image. Since 1985, Covington has redeveloped its riverfront, creating several new office towers, high-end condominiums, hotels, and a convention center. In Newport, in conjunction with private development and Southbank Partners, Inc., the City has built a major entertainment center along the river. This initiative has promoted improved pedestrian and transit connections in Northern Kentucky’s river cities to and from the stadiums and other attractions along the Cincinnati riverfront.
O. Despite these efforts, the areas of downtown Covington and Newport away from the riverfront continue to suffer in many ways. The study by Kelly and Cooper found in the area near to existing sexually oriented uses a number of building vacancies and building maintenance falling far short of that found in the revitalized areas near the river.
P. The city of Fort Wright respects the Constitutional rights of its citizens, including the right to present certain types of entertainment that may not appeal to the entire population. Through this ordinance, it is the desire of the city of Fort
Article IX General Regulations 9-93
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Wright to balance the Constitutional rights of businesses that present sexually oriented entertainment with the city of Fort Wright interests in ensuring that this community not suffer from the same sorts of adverse effects that Covington and Newport have long suffered.
Q. From long experience in Covington and Newport, as well as from the following studies and others not listed, the city of Fort Wright also finds that such businesses may have primary and secondary effects involving crimes related to the activities in the establishments, of which prostitution and crimes of violence are those of greatest concern. See for example:
1. “Final Report to the City of Garden Grove: The Relationship between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard,” Richard W. McCleary, Ph.D., James W. Meeker, J.D., Ph.D., October 23, 1991.
2. “Survey of Appraisers: Fort Worth and Dallas – Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property Values,” Duncan Associates, Eric Damian Kelly, FAICP, and Connie B. Cooper, FAICP, September 2004.
3. “Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis, An Analysis,” 1984.
4. “Adult Business Study,” by City of Phoenix Planning Department, May 25, 1979.
5. “Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul,” June 1978, City of Saint Paul Division of Planning, Department of Planning and Management; and Community Crime Prevention Project, Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board.
6. “Staff Report, Whittier City Planning Commission; Subject: Adult Business Regulations,” July 11, 1994.
7. “Adult Entertainment Study,” Department of City Planning, City of New York, Second Printing, November 1994.
8. “Adult Use Study,” Newport News Department of Planning and Development, March 1996.
9. “A Report on the Secondary Impact of Adult Use Businesses in the City of Denver,” prepared by multiple city departments for Denver City Council, January 1998.
10. “Survey of Appraisers in Monroe County, New York,” Summer 2000. For detailed results of the survey, see Kelly and Cooper, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Regulating Sex Businesses, Planning Advisory Service Report No. 495-96. Chicago: American Planning Association, 2000; pages 51-57.
11. The Tucson “study” consisting of two memos: one from the Citizens Advisory Planning Committee, addressed to the Mayor and City Council, and dated May 14, 1990; and the other from an Assistant Chief of Police to the City Prosecutor, regarding “Adult Entertainment Ordinance,” dated May 1, 1990.
Article IX General Regulations 9-94
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
R. The city of Fort Wright recognizes that some of the cited studies included bars without sexually oriented entertainment among the businesses studied; the city of Fort Wright finds, nevertheless, that addressing the establishments that have live, sexually oriented entertainment is a more critical local issue than that of bars without such entertainment, for three reasons:
1. Bars in Kentucky are already regulated by the Commonwealth, and those state regulations directly address many of the concerns that arise with the service of alcohol;
2. The local history of prostitution and sex-related crimes has largely been related to businesses with live, sexually oriented entertainment, and not with other establishments that serve alcohol; and
3. The interaction between dancers who are paid to work with very limited clothing and the customers who pay to see them work in the establishments with live entertainment creates a sexually charged environment and the opportunity to negotiate for the provision of additional services that do not involve dancing or other protected expression and that are simply unacceptable under the standards of the County and its citizens.
S. As noted earlier in these findings, there is a long local history of prostitution and sex-related crimes at or incident to the operation of establishments with live, sexually oriented entertainment. Further, the studies shown herein provide further evidence of the potential crime-related secondary effects from such businesses. Although the methodologies and quality of these studies vary somewhat, local experience has demonstrated to the city of Fort Wright that the relationship between crime and such establishments is a fact in Northern Kentucky and not just a theory published in a study.
T. The city of Fort Wright has reviewed evidence and testimony presented at public meetings before the County, and information based on the past experiences of the Kenton and Campbell Counties and the cities of Covington and Newport, the experiences of the County Attorneys’ offices prosecuting numerous and varied offenses that have occurred in and around the sexually oriented entertainment establishments, and based upon the documented experiences of other governmental units within Kentucky and elsewhere in dealing with the impact of sexually oriented entertainment, that such businesses can, if not properly regulated, be deleterious to said community.
U. The city of Fort Wright finds that the countywide licensing ordinance related to sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus adopted by the Fiscal Court of Kenton County is an effective tool for addressing the many operational issues that can arise with such businesses.
Article IX General Regulations 9-95
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
V. The city of Fort Wright finds that amendments to the city’s Zoning Ordinance regarding the location and design of such businesses are important variables in the nature and extent of adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community, and further finds that location and design are among the types of issues that are typically addressed through zoning.
W. Based on the recommendations of Kelly and Cooper, which are based on their experience in other communities and their review of the studies cited above and other local efforts to address such secondary effects, the city of Fort Wright finds that the following principles are essential to effective zoning controls of sexually oriented businesses:
1. Sexually oriented businesses should, to the maximum extent practicable, be separated from one another by a distance that is greater than a convenient walking distance, because experience elsewhere has shown that the location of such businesses near one another may increase the adverse secondary effects, particularly those related to crime, by a greater than arithmetic factor;
2. Sexually oriented businesses have the greatest adverse effect on residential neighbourhoods and should thus be separated to the maximum extent practicable from residential neighbourhoods;
3. Sexually oriented businesses are likely to attract criminal elements that prey on “soft targets,” including children, and it is thus important to separate sexually oriented businesses from schools, parks, recreation centers, and religious institutions, all of which are places where children are likely to congregate, often without parental protection;
4. Also because of the tendency of sexually oriented businesses to attract criminal elements that prey on soft targets, it is important to seek locations for such businesses that are not located along pedestrian routes, where young people, old people and others who are vulnerable, are likely to walk in going about their day-to-day business. Thus, locations to which the primary access is by automobile minimize the risk of persons going about their daily business encountering persons who are visiting or even loitering around the sexually oriented businesss.
X. In examining Kenton County for available sites that would be suitable for sexually oriented businesses that meet the above criteria, Kelly and Cooper identified a number of such sites in the County, none of which were located in city of Fort Wright.
Y. Fort Wright currently has no sexually oriented businesses in the community.
Z. Fort Wright currently has no area zoned for any type of commercial use.
Article IX General Regulations 9-96
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
AA. Fort Wright currently has only limited areas zoned for commercial use, and those areas are small and adjacent to residential areas.
AB. Fort Wright has within its limited commercial areas only small, local businesses generally serving the convenience needs of residents.
AC. Fort Wright residents in these jurisdiction with limited commercial areas must go to larger, nearby cities for most of their retail purchases and entertainment.
AD. Staff of Fort Wright can not recall ever receiving any applications for or inquiries about the establishment of any sexually oriented business in the city of Fort Wright.
AE. Fort Wright thus finds that the physical context and experience of the City of Fort Wright support the findings by Kelly and Cooper.
AF. Fort Wright finds that, in reliance on the Kelly and Cooper study, other municipalities in the County, including specifically Covington, Erlanger and Taylor Mill, all of which have large and diverse commercial or industrial areas with suitable sites that would be potentially available locations where sexually oriented businesses could legally locate.
AG. Fort Wright acknowledges that it can re-evaluate these findings if, in the future, there is a substantial change in the character of the community and the potential for suitable sites for sexually oriented businesses within the community.
AH. Fort Wright therefore finds that there are no suitable locations for sexually oriented businesses in the city of Fort Wright and such businesses should therefore be prohibited.
AI. FINDINGS: The facts and other matters set forth in the previous clauses that form the preamble to this ordinance are hereby adopted as findings of fact in support of the legislative action of the city of Fort Wright in adopting this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. Upon adoption of this zoning amendment, these shall be incorporated into the Zoning Code by reference as if fully set forth therein to the adopting Resolution.
AJ. DEFINITIONS:
1. CABARET OR THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to “adult
Article IX General Regulations 9-97
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
entertainment,” “strippers,” “showgirls,” “exotic dancers,” “gentleman’s club,” “XXX” or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that an establishment holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available.
2. CUSTOMER – any person who:
a. Is allowed to enter a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or
b. Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or
c. Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person.
3. DAY CARE CENTER – a licensed facility providing care, protection and supervision for children 12 years old or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged.
4. DISPLAY PUBLICLY – the act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and material other than sexually oriented media are offered for sale or rent to the public.
5. ENCOUNTER CENTER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a business or enterprise that, as one of its principal purposes, offers: physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
6. ENTERTAINER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – any person paid as an employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the operator of a cabaret who frequently appears in a state of semi-nudity at any establishment regulated by this chapter.
7. ENTERTAINMENT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business that is required to be licensed: dancing, singing, talking, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers for which some type of remuneration is received.
Article IX General Regulations 9-98
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
8. ESCORT – a person who is held out to the public to be available for hire for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission, or salary, and who for said consideration consorts with or accompanies or offers to consort with or accompany, another or others to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or within any private quarters, and shall include a “service oriented escort;” for purposes of this ordinance, the term “escort” shall not include any person who would be understood by a reasonably prudent person as providing “babysitting” services or working as an assisted living companion to the elderly, infirm, disabled, or handicapped, and shall further not include licensed health professionals.
9. ESCORT, SERVICE ORIENTED – an escort that:
a. operates from an open office;
b. does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau that so advertises; and
c. does not offer to provide sexual conduct.
10. ESCORT BUREAU, SERVICE ORIENTED – an escort bureau that
a. maintains an open office at an established place of business;
b. otherwise operates in full accordance with the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus, as such ordinance may be amended from time to time.
11. ESCORT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an escort who:
a. works for (either as an agent, employee, or independent contractor), or is referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort bureau; or,
b. either advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for (either as an employee, agent, or independent contractor), or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau that so advertises; or,
c. offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee from an escort patron or a prospective escort patron.
12. ESCORT BUREAU, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an escort bureau that operates in any of the following manners:
Article IX General Regulations 9-99
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
a. engages in fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive advertising that is designed to make the prospective client believe that acts of prostitution (as defined under Kentucky law) will be provided; or,
b. collects money (whether paid in advance or paid after the promised proscribed act) for the promise of acts of prostitution by its escorts; or,
c. uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution, and refuses to cease the use of such a person; or,
d. operates an escort bureau as a “call girl” prostitution operation; or,
e. advertises that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron or customer, or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred, or introduced to a patron or customer; or,
f. solicits, offers to provide, or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron or customer; or,
g. employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort.
13. ESTABLISHMENT – any business regulated by this Section.
14. EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL – any pictorial or three dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or material of anthropological significance shall not be deemed to fall within the foregoing definition.
15. FLOOR AREA, GROSS PUBLIC – the total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled “public”), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
16. FREQUENTLY – two or more times per month.
17. MASSAGE – touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body (excluding an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment).
18. MASSAGE PARLOR – any business offering massages that is operated by a person who is not a state licensed “massage therapist” or that provides massages by persons who are not state licensed massage therapists.
Article IX General Regulations 9-100
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
19. MASSAGE THERAPY – the profession in which a certified massage therapist applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well being of the client.
20. MASSAGE THERAPIST –a person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of Kentucky Rev. Statues §309.350 et seq.
21. MEDIA – anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures.
22. MEDIA, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CDs, DVDs or other devices used to record computer images, or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
23. MEDIA STORE WITH SOME SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA – a retail book, video or other media store that has sexually explicit media that constitutes more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its inventory or that occupies more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its gross public floor area.
24. MEDIA STORE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an establishment that rents and/or sells sexually oriented media, and that meets any of the following three tests:
a. More than forty percent (40%) of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually oriented media; or
b. More than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media; or
c. It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX,” “adult” or “sex” business, or otherwise as a sexually oriented business, other than sexually oriented media outlet, sexually oriented motion picture theater, or sexually oriented cabaret.
25. MODELING STUDIO, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – an establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups in a space smaller than 600 feet.
Article IX General Regulations 9-101
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
26. MOTEL, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that meets any of the following criteria:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with sexually oriented entertainment or transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;”
b. Marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” “couples,” or “sexually oriented.”
27. MOTION PICTURE ARCADE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a building or portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
28. MOTION PICTURE ARCADE BOOTH, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by customers therein. The term “booth,” “arcade booth,” “preview booth,” and “video arcade booth” shall be synonymous with the term “motion picture arcade booth.”
29. MOTION PICTURE THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED – a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” or that are marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” or sexually oriented. Frequently shown films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression.
30. NUDE MODELING STUDIO – any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons
Article IX General Regulations 9-102
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
who pay money or any form of consideration. “Nude model studio” shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of Kentucky or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
31. NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY – the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola or nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, Semi-nude.
32. OPERATOR – any person operating, conducting, or maintaining a business regulated under this Chapter.
33. OWNER(S) – the individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent (10%) or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten percent (10%) or more. “Owner” includes the spouse(s) of any of the above individuals.
34. PERSON – an individual, firm, partnership, joint-venture, association, independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), limited liability company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
35. PREMISES – the physical location at which a business operates; as used in this Chapter, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement.
36. PRIMARY ENTERTAINMENT – entertainment that characterizes the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances.
37. PROTECTED LAND USE – residential zoning district, school, religious institution, park, library, public recreation area, or day care center.
Article IX General Regulations 9-103
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
38. PUBLIC AREA – a portion of a sexually oriented business, excluding sexually oriented motels, that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business.
39. SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES – flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
40. SEMI-NUDE OR IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION – the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
41. SEX SHOP – an establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests:
a. It offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following categories: sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually oriented novelties; and the combination of such items constitute more than ten percent (10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than 10 percent (10%) of its floor area;
b. More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented toys or novelties; or
c. More than five percent (5%) of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
42. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS – an inclusive term used to describe collectively the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or theater; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented motion picture arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented escort bureau; bathhouse; massage parlor; sex shop; sexually oriented modeling studio; or any other such business establishment whose primary purpose is to offer sexually oriented entertainment or materials. This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of the County or any applicable municipal zoning code or other applicable ordinances.
43. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE – any license applied for under the countywide licensing ordinance, Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9 as amended, establishing licensing requirements for sexually
Article IX General Regulations 9-104
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
oriented businesses and service oriented escort bureaus, adopted in
2004.
44. SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES – instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs.
45. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS – include:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; and
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; and
c. Areas of the human anatomy included in the definitions of “nude” or
“nudity.”
46. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES – Acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the
following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or
mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio,
flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of
the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This
definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person’s
genitals whether clothed or unclothed.
AK. PROHIBITED USES: The following uses are prohibited in the city of Fort Wright
and county-wide under Kenton County Ordinance No. 451.9, establishing
licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses and service oriented
escort bureaus. No Zoning Permit shall be issued for the following prohibited
businesses:
1. Sexually oriented motion picture arcade or booth;
2. Sexually oriented encounter center;
3. Sexually oriented motel;
4. Sexually oriented massage parlor or any business offering massages that
is operated by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist in
accordance with the provisions of Kentucky Rev. Statues §309.350 et
seq.;
5. Sexually oriented modeling studio;
6. Sexually oriented nude modeling studio; and
7. Sexually oriented escort bureau.
Article IX General Regulations 9-105
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
AL. OTHER USES PROHIBITED: Because there are no suitable sites for such sexually oriented businesses or, in accordance with the recommendations of the consultants to Kenton County, the following additional uses are prohibited:
1. Sexually oriented media store;
2. Sex shop;
3. Service oriented escort bureau;
4. Sexually oriented motion picture theatre; and
5. Sexually oriented cabaret or theatre.
AM. STANDARDS FOR A MEDIA STORE WITH SOME SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA: A retail book, video or other media store that has sexually explicit media that constitutes more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its inventory or that occupies more than 10 percent but not more than 40 percent of its gross public floor area shall not be classified as a sexually oriented business but shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Separate room. The sexually explicit media shall be kept in a separate room from the rest of the inventory of the store and shall not visible outside the room;
2. Age limit. Sexually explicit media shall be available only to persons 18 years or older;
3. Access. Access to the room shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic control device monitored by the clerk or manager on duty through direct visual control;
4. Visibility. Customers and activities in the room shall be visible at all times to the clerk or manager on duty through a video system located at the clerk’s or manager’s counter; and
5. Lighting. The area occupied by customers shall be well lit at a lighting level of least 30 footcandles measured 3 feet from the floor.
AN. SEVERABILITY: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city of Fort Wright that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Chapter are severable, and if any phrase clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the city of Fort Wright without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Article X Zones 10-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
ARTICLE X
ZONES
SECTION 10.0 CO (CONSERVATION) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Agricultural uses
2. Private recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated such as golf courses, country clubs, and camping areas
3. Publicly owned and/or operated parks and/or recreation areas
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses and their customary accessory buildings or uses subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Riding academies and stables;
2. The following uses are permitted providing that the development of all facilities in or adjacent to navigable waters shall be approved by the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, and the Division of Water, Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection. Such statements of approval or denial shall be submitted to the board of adjustment at the time of submittal for a conditional zoning certificate:
a. Boat harbors and marinas;
The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in connection with any boat harbor or marina provided they are primarily intended to serve only persons using the boat harbor or marina:
(1) Boat fueling, service, and repairs;
(2) Sale of boat supplies;
(3) Grocery store;
(4) Restaurant;
Article X Zones 10-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. Boat landing, docking, and launching facilities;
c. Off-street parking facilities including facilities for temporary parking of boat trailers.
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum lot area - One (1) acre
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum building height - Twenty-five (25) feet
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be required for any permitted use or conditional use in this zone.
2. Any activity that may be located in the floodplain of any water course shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.25
3. Dwellings, including cabins, rooming houses, and mobile homes are not permitted in this zone.
4. Temporary camping units, tents, and recreational vehicles, as defined in KRS 219.320 (8) shall be permitted; however, no such units shall be used for year-round habitation.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided for any use within this zone, according to the provisions of Article XI.
6. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
7. No motor vehicle which is inoperable, or mobile home or trailer shall be stored or used for storage in this zone.
8. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
9. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.1 R-RE (RESIDENTIAL RURAL ESTATE) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Agricultural uses;
3. Sale of products that are raised, produced, and processed on the premises, provided that no roadside stands of any type for the sale or display of agricultural products shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any street;
4. Greenhouses and nurseries, including both wholesale and retail sales of products grown on the premises provided that the storage of manure shall not be permitted nearer than one hundred (100) feet from the front of a street, road, highway, or right-of-way line, or not nearer than fifty (50) feet from a side lot line;
5. Stables and riding academies, both public and private.
6. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations regulated in Section 9.11
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings and uses, subject to the approval by the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Governmental offices
5. Nursery schools;
6. Police and fire stations
7. Public and parochial schools;
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
9. Recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. Golf courses;
Article X Zones 10-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
d. Tennis courts/clubs;
e. Fishing lakes and clubs;
f. Gun clubs and ranges;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
1. Minimum lot area - Three (3) acres
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Three hundred (300) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Seventy-five (75) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Seventy-five (75) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any residential zone.
3. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
Article X Zones 10-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.02 R-1C (RESIDENTIAL ONE-C) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools;
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreation centers, swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet
Article X Zones 10-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Eighty (80) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Twenty (20) feet; One Side: Seven (7) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.3 R-1CC (RESIDENTIAL ONE-CC) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Two-family residential dwellings
3. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area -
Single-family: Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet
Two-family: Eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty (18,750) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line -
Single-family: Eighty (80) feet
Two-family: Ninety (90) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty-five (35) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Twenty (20) feet; One Side: Seven (7) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.4 R-1D (RESIDENTIAL ONE-D) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-10
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Nine thousand (9,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Seventy (70) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Eighteen (18) feet; One Side: Six (6) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-11
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.5 R-1DD (RESIDENTIAL ONE-DD) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Two-family residential dwellings
3. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-12
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area -
Single-family: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet
Two-family: Thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line -
Single-family: Seventy (70) feet
Two-family: Eighty (80) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Eighteen (18) feet; One Side: Six (6) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-13
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.6 R-1E (RESIDENTIAL ONE-E) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-14
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Sixty (60) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Fifteen (15) feet; One Side: Five (5) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-15
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.7 R-1EE (RESIDENTIAL ONE-EE) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Two-family residential dwellings
3. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-16
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area -
Single-family: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet
Two-family: Eleven thousand five hundred (11,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line -
Single-family: Sixty (60) feet
Two-family: Eighty (80) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Fifteen (15) feet; One Side: Five (5) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-17
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.8 R-1F (RESIDENTIAL ONE-F) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-18
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Ten (10) feet; One Side: Five (5) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-19
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.9 R-1FF (RESIDENTIAL ONE-FF) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Two-family residential dwellings
3. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-20
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area -
Single-family: Six thousand (6,000) square feet
Two-family: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line -
Single-family: Fifty (50) feet
Two-family: Sixty (60) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Total: Ten (10) feet; One Side: Five (5) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-21
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.10 R-1G (RESIDENTIAL ONE-G) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Single-family residential dwellings (detached)
2. Qualified manufactured homes, subject to the compatibility standards established in Section 9.32 of this ordinance
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental services
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES
Article X Zones 10-22
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Five thousand (5,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Five (5) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Thirty-five (35) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-23
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.11 R-2 (RESIDENTIAL TWO) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Two-family residential dwellings
2. Multi-family residential dwellings;
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-24
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
2. Maximum density - Ten (10.0) dwelling units per net acre
3. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
4. Minimum front yard depth - Forty (40) feet
5. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - Fifteen (15) feet
6. Minimum rear yard depth - Thirty (30) feet
7. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
8. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted on one lot
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
6. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
7. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-25
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.12 R-3 (RESIDENTIAL THREE) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Two-family residential dwellings;
2. Multi-family residential dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII
3. Home occupations, subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section 9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance:
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations
4. Funeral homes, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Governmental offices
6. Institutions for higher education, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
7. Institutions for human medical care - hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
8. Nursery schools
9. Public and parochial schools;
10. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries;
11. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated, as follows:
a. Golf courses;
b. Country clubs;
c. Swimming pools;
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Article X Zones 10-26
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum tract for development - Five (5) acres, except where area restrictions are less, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan; however, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved site may be permitted providing the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new site has been a part of the originally approved site plan layout.
2. Minimum lot area within minimum tract - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
3. Maximum density - Twenty (20.0) dwelling units per net acre
4. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
5. Minimum front yard width for internal development - Fifty (50) feet
6. Minimum front yard depth-
a. When abutting a major arterial as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan - Seventy-five (75) feet
b. On internal road - Forty (40) feet
7. Minimum side yard width -
a. In internal parts of the development - Twenty-five (25) feet
b. Where the side yard is adjacent to a major arterial as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan - Seventy-five (75) feet
8. Minimum rear yard depth - In internal parts of the development - Thirty (30) feet
9. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
10. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted on one lot
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum front, side (on each side of lot), and rear yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
Article X Zones 10-27
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
6. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
7. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
Article X Zones 10-28
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.13 PUD (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) OVERLAY ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay Zone are to: promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the relationships between location of and types of uses and structures; promote the advantages of modern large scale site planning for community development through the efficient use of land, facilitating a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses, and utilities; preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the existing landscape features and amenities, and to utilize such features in an harmonious fashion; provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities, other public and common facilities, than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures, but always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. GENERAL: A Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay Zone may only be permitted to be superimposed over any of the Residential (R) Zones, provided that all conditions or provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and any additional requirements, as may be determined necessary to provide for the most efficient layout of the PUD and its proper integration with the surrounding development, are met; and a public hearing is held on the PUD application.
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for a Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone shall be processed as follows in two stages:
1. Stage I -- Development Plan and Zoning Map Amendment - Application for amendment to PUD Overlay Zone shall include a development plan in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, A., Stage I Plan Requirements.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said application with regard to its compliance with the stated purposes of the PUD Overlay Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically
Article X Zones 10-29
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body shall, within ninety (90) days after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove said PUD application. Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection C., 1., a., above. Approval of the PUD Overlay Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the Stage I approved plan.
Zoning Map Amendment - Upon approval of the PUD Overlay Zone, the official zoning map shall be amended by adding the prefix "PUD" to the existing residential zone (e.g., PUD-R-1B, PUD-R-1C, etc.) for the area as shown on the Stage I approved plan.
2. Stage II - Plan and Record Plat - A Stage II Plan and Record Plat shall be developed in conformance with the Stage I approved plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C., and submitted to the planning commission for its review.
a. The legislative body shall review the submitted Stage II Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B., for Stage II plans, other applicable elements of this ordinance, and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with the Stage I approved plan. In approving the Stage II plan, the city may authorize minor adjustments from the Stage I approved plan, without a public hearing. The legislative body shall determine what is a major change considering the spatial relationship of structures, a change in land uses, a change in density, a change in circulation
Article X Zones 10-30
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
patterns for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or the change in open space and recreational areas and the like.
In the event that the city legislative body determines the changes are a major nature, the proposed revisions shall be reviewed through the public hearing process as provided under 10.12.
Upon city legislative approval of the Stage II Plan, a copy of said plan shall be forwarded to the city's zoning administrator, who shall grant permits only in accordance with the Stage II approved plan and other regulations, as may be required by this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Stage II Plan, the planning commission shall review the submitted Record Plat with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, C., for record plats, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and its conformance with the Stage II approved plan.
Following planning commission approval of the plat as required by KRS 100.277, the record plat shall be submitted to the legislative body for a determination that any offer of dedications (public ways and/or easements) indicated on the plat would be beneficial to the public interest and suitable for the immediate or future "acceptance for maintenance" by the city as required by KRS 82A.
Upon submission of the record plat to the legislative body, said original plat, certified by the planning commission and the mayor of the legislative body, and suitable for recording, shall be forwarded to the offices of the county clerk to be recorded.
D. RESIDENTIAL USES AND DENSITIES: All types of residential housing units (attached or detached) may be permitted within a PUD Overlay Zone, including but not limited to, single-family, two-family, and multi-family residential units. The density of dwelling units in a PUD shall be determined by the density (dwelling units per net acre) as calculated from the existing residential (R) zone superimposed by the PUD Overlay Zone. This density shall be applied to the total project area excluding that land devoted to commercial uses and streets (public and private).
E. COMMERCIAL USES: Commercial uses, intended primarily for the service and convenience of residents of the PUD, may be permitted within the project area, provided a market analysis is made justifying the need for said uses.
These commercial uses shall be grouped in complexes clearly delineated on the Stage I Plan, and may include one or more of the following uses:
Article X Zones 10-31
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Bakery shop
2. Banks
3. Beauty or barber shops
4. Business or professional office
5. Clothing store
6. Delicatessen, grocery, meat, fruit, or vegetable market;
7. Drug store
8. Hardware stores
9. Laundry/dry cleaning pick-up stations, or self-service facilities
10. Restaurants
11. Shoe repair shops
Another use may be substituted on the approved plan for a use previously approved providing it is one of the above listed uses and providing said use will not involve any building expansion beyond the approved plan and further providing that said use is approved by the zoning administrator.
F. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Public and semi-public structures and uses may be permitted in the PUD. These uses shall be delineated on the plan and shall be limited to one or more of the following uses:
1. Churches
2. Community centers, including day care facilities
3. Country clubs
4. Fire or police stations
5. Libraries
6. Open space/recreation areas
7. Schools (nursery, elementary, and secondary);
G. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No PUD Overlay Zone shall be permitted on less than twenty-five (25) acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing PUD Overlay Zone may be permitted, if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
H. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan.
I. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities, shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
J. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and signs, shall be as approved in the plan.
Article X Zones 10-32
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
K. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
L. COMMON OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREA: At least twenty percent (20%) of the total acreage of the proposed PUD shall be retained as common open space/recreation area, and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and maintenance. Such open space/recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily accessible, available to, and usable by all residents of the PUD. Common open space/recreation areas shall be that part of the total project exclusive of dwellings, streets, parking areas, single-family lots, commercial areas, and other non-open space and non-recreationally oriented facilities.
M. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance and any minor amendments may be approved by the city legislative body without a hearing as provided herein and any major changes shall be heard by the city legislative body at a public hearing after due notice.
N. EXPIRATION: Any amendment to the PUD Overlay Zone shall be subject to the time constraints, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said PUD Overlay zone should revert to its original zoning designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions apply:
1. A particular section of the original Stage I Plan has not had a Stage II approval by the city legislative body within twenty-four (24) consecutive months from the date of the approval of the Stage I approved plan for that particular section, provided an extension may be permitted by the legislative body if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Plan by the legislative body of a particular section; provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan obsolete. The amount of construction
Article X Zones 10-33
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
constituting initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the Stage II approved plan.
O. UTILITIES: All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
Article X Zones 10-34
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.14 RCD (RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT) OVERLAY ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay Zone are to: provide a means whereby clusters of attached and detached single-family residential units may be constructed in the Residential (R-1) Zones, and therein, through a development plan, permit a wide flexibility in the design, location, siting of the building, and yard and setback requirements in order to provide for, to the greatest extent possible, the preservation of hillside areas and other natural geographic and topographic features, and to provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and open space than would otherwise be provided under conventional R-1 residential land development procedures.
B. GENERAL: A Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay Zone may only be permitted to be superimposed over any of the Residential (R-1) Zones, provided that all conditions or provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and any additional requirements, as may be determined necessary to provide for the most efficient layout of the RCD Overlay Zone and its proper integration with the surrounding development, are met; and a public hearing is held on the RCD application.
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for Residential Cluster Development Overlay Zone shall be processed as follows in two stages:
1. Stage I -- Development Plan and Zoning Map Amendment - Application for amendment to RCD Overlay Zone shall include a development plan in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, A., Stage I Plan requirements.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said application with regard to its compliance with the stated purposes of the RCD Overlay Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission
Article X Zones 10-35
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body shall, within ninety (90) days after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove said RCD application. Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection C., 1., a., above. Approval of the RCD Overlay Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the Stage I approved plan.
Zoning Map Amendment - Upon approval of the RCD Overlay Zone, the official zoning map shall be amended by adding the prefix "RCD" to the existing residential zone (e.g., RCD-R-1B, RCD-R-1C, etc.) for the area as shown on the Stage I approved plan.
2. Stage II -- Plan and Record Plat - A Stage II Plan and Record Plat shall be developed in conformance with the Stage I approved plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C., and submitted to the planning commission for its review.
a. The legislative body shall review the submitted Stage II Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, for Stage II plans, other applicable elements of this ordinance, and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with the Stage I approved plan. In approving the Stage II Plan, the city may authorize minor adjustments from the Stage I approved plan, without a public hearing. The legislative body shall determine what is a major change considering the spatial relationship of structures, a change in land use, A change in density, a change in circulation patterns for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or a change in open space and recreational areas and the like.
Article X Zones 10-36
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
In the event that the city legislative body determines the changes are of a major nature, the proposed revisions shall be reviewed through the public hearing process as provided under 10.14.
Upon city legislative approval of the Stage II Plan, a copy of said plan shall be forwarded to the city's zoning administrator, who shall grant permits only in accordance with the Stage II approved plan and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Stage II Plan, the planning commission shall review the submitted Record Plat with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, C., for record plats, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and its conformance with the Stage II approved plan.
Following planning commission approval of the plat as required by KRS 100.277, the record plat shall be submitted to the legislative body for a determination that any offer of dedication (public ways and/or easements) indicated on the plat would be beneficial to the public interest and suitable for the immediate or future "acceptance for maintenance" by the city as required by KRS 82A.
Upon submission of the record plat to the legislative body, said original record plat, certified by the planning commission and the mayor of the legislative body, and suitable for recording, shall be forwarded to the offices of the county clerk to be recorded.
D. RESIDENTIAL USES AND DENSITIES: Attached and detached single-family dwellings may be permitted within a RCD Overlay Zone. The density of dwelling units in a RCD shall be determined by the density (dwelling units per net acre) as calculated from the existing residential (R-1) zone superimposed by the RCD Overlay Zone. This density shall be applied to the total project area, excluding that land devoted to streets (public and private).
E. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Public and semi-public structures and uses may be permitted in the RCD. These uses shall be delineated on the plan and shall be limited to one or more of the following uses:
1. Churches
2. Community centers, including day care facilities
3. Country clubs
4. Fire or police stations
5. Libraries
6. Open space/recreation areas
Article X Zones 10-37
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
7. Schools (nursery, elementary, and secondary);
F. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No RCD Overlay Zone shall be permitted on less than four (4) acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing RCD Overlay Zone may be permitted, if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
G. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan.
H. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities, shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
I. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and signs, shall be as approved in the plan.
J. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
K. COMMON OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREA: At least twenty percent (20%) of the total acreage of the proposed RCD shall be retained as common open space/recreation area, and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and maintenance. Such open space/recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily accessible, available to, and usable by all residents of the RCD. Common open space/recreation areas shall be that part of the total project exclusive of dwellings, streets, parking areas, single-family lots, commercial areas, and other non-open space and non-recreationally oriented facilities.
L. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance and any minor amendments may be approved by the city legislative body without a hearing as provided herein and any major changes shall be heard by the city legislative body at a public hearing after due notice.
M. EXPIRATION: Any amendment to the RCD Overlay Zone shall be subject to the time constraints, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said RCD Overlay Zone should revert to its original zoning designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions apply:
Article X Zones 10-38
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. A particular section of the original Stage I Plan has not had Stage II approval by the city legislative body within twenty-four (24) consecutive months from the date of the approval of the Stage I approved plan for that particular section, provided an extension may be permitted by the legislative body if sufficient proof can be demonstration that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Plan by the legislative body of a particular section; provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan obsolete. The amount of construction constituting initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the Stage II approved plan.
N. UTILITIES: All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
Article X Zones 10-39
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.15 MHP (MOBILE HOME PARK) OVERLAY ZONE:
A. GENERAL: A Mobile Home Park (MHP) Overlay Zone may only be permitted to be superimposed over any of the Residential (R) Zones, provided that all conditions or provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and any additional requirements as may be determined necessary to provide for the most efficient layout of the MHP Overlay Zone and its proper integration with the surrounding development, are met; and a public hearing is held on the MHP application.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone shall be processed as follows in two stages:
1. Stage I -- Development Plan and Zoning Map Amendment - Application for amendment to MHP Overlay Zone shall include a development plan in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, A., Stage I Plan Requirements.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said application with regard to its compliance with the stated purposes of the MHP Overlay Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body shall, within ninety (90) days after receiving the
Article X Zones 10-40
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove said MHP application. Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation in accordance with Subsection C., 1., a., above. Approval of the MHP Overlay Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the Stage I approved plan.
The legislative body shall forward a copy of the approved plan to the planning commission for further processing in accordance with the requirement for Stage II Plan and Record Plat.
c. Zoning Map Amendment - Upon approval of the MHP Overlay Zone, the official zoning map shall be amended by adding the prefix "MHP" to the existing residential (R-1) zone (e.g., MHP-R-1B, MHP-R-1C, etc.) for the area as shown on the Stage I approved plan.
2. Stage II -- Plan and Record Plat - A Stage II Plan and Record Plat shall be developed in conformance with the Stage I approved plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C., and submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C., shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission shall review the submitted Stage II Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B., for Stage II plans, other applicable elements of this ordinance, and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with the Stage I approved plan. The planning commission, in approving the Stage II Plan, may authorize minor adjustments from the Stage I approved plan, provided that the adjustments do not: change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), or decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Upon planning commission approval of the Stage II Plan, a copy of said plan shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator, who shall
Article X Zones 10-41
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
grant permits only in accordance with the Stage II approved plan and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Stage II Plan, the planning commission shall review the submitted Record Plat with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, C., for record plats, the applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations, and its conformance with the Stage II approved plan.
Upon planning commission approval of the Record Plat, copies of said plat, certified by the planning commission, and suitable for recording, shall be forwarded by the planning commission to the office of the County Clerk to be recorded.
C. USES AND DENSITIES: Mobile homes including customary accessory buildings and uses may be permitted within a MHP Overlay Zone. The density of dwelling units in a MHP shall be determined by the density (dwelling units per net acre) as calculated from the existing residential (R-1) zone superimposed by the MHP Overlay Zone. This density shall be applied to the total project area, excluding that land devoted to streets (public and private). The following structures and uses related to and for the exclusive use of the residents of the Mobile Home Park (excluding, however, any commercial uses), are also permitted:
1. Community centers
2. Laundry facilities
3. Rental or sales offices for lots and/or mobile homes in the Mobile Home Park;
D. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Public and semi-public structures and uses may be permitted in the MHP. These uses shall be delineated on the plan and shall be limited to one or more of the following uses:
1. Churches
2. Open space/recreation areas
3. Schools (nursery or day care, elementary and secondary)
E. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No MHP Overlay Zone shall be permitted on less than ten (10) acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing MHP Overlay Zone may be permitted, if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
F. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan.
Article X Zones 10-42
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
G. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities, shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
H. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and signs, shall be as approved in the plan.
I. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
J. COMMON OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREA: At least twenty percent (20%) of the total acreage of the proposed MHP shall be retained as common open space/recreation area, and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and maintenance. Such open space/recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily accessible, available to, and usable by all residents of the MHP. Common open space/recreation areas shall be that part of the total project exclusive of dwellings, streets, parking areas, single-family lots, commercial areas, and other non-open space and non-recreationally oriented facilities.
K. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the planning commission, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
L. EXPIRATION: Any amendment to the MHP Overlay Zone shall be subject to the time constraints, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said MHP Overlay Zone should revert to its original zoning designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions apply:
1. Stage II Plan has not been approved by the planning commission within a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months from the date of the Stage I approved plan and MHP Overlay Zone amendment by the legislative body; provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or their duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstration that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Plan by
Article X Zones 10-43
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
the planning commission: provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan obsolete. The amount of construction constituting initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the Stage II approved plan.
M. UTILITIES: All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
Article X Zones 10-44
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.16 HC (HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Automobile laundry
2. Automobile, motorcycle, and truck sales, new or used
3. Automotive service and repairs, providing that all business activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building
4. Boat and other marine equipment sales and service, new and used
5. Eating establishments and taverns, including drive-ins
6. Hotels and motels
7. Mobile home and trailer sales, rental and service (new and used)
8. Off-street parking lots and garages
9. Police and fire stations
10. Service stations
11. Skating rinks, golf driving ranges, miniature and par-3 golf courses
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Seventy (70) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
4. Minimum side yard width on each side of lot - No restrictions, except when adjacent to a dedicated street, road, highway, or other right-of-way, then the required width shall be the same as required for a minimum front yard depth in this zone. When buildings abut each other, firewall construction, as required by the building code, shall be required. In the event a side yard is provided, it shall never be less than fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifteen (15) feet
6. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
7. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
Article X Zones 10-45
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use in this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
8. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
9. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
10. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
11. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-46
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.17 LHS (LIMITED HIGHWAY SERVICE) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Automotive service and repairs, providing that all business activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building
2. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies with drive through facilities
3. Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up station
4. Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-ins
5. Hotels and motels
6. Night clubs
7. Police and fire stations
8. Service stations
9. Exercise/Fitness Equipment Sales
10. New Luxury Car Dealership
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses as listed below, included within and entered from within, any motel or hotel building, as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers, provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays for any accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Barber shops
b. Beauty shops
c. Gift shops
d. News and confectionery stands
e. Restaurants
5. Convenience food sales, provided in conjunction with a service station, and serving primarily as a convenience to the customers thereof. The area utilized for the sale of food items, and the required off-street parking facilities, shall be subordinate in area to the service station. The area for the service station, for comparative purposes, shall be limited to gas pumps, required parking facilities, and storage and circulation areas.
6. Self service car washes, provided in conjunction with a service station and not exceeding a total of four (4) bays. Adequate vehicular circulation and on-site vehicular storage areas shall be provided to serve such facilities.
Article X Zones 10-47
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Circulation and storage areas shall be designed in a manner that will not adversely effect the traffic patterns for the principal use or the adjacent roadway.
7. Uses listed below, only in conjunction with a New Luxury Car Dealership, provided that the accessory use(s) shall not exceed forty-nine (49) percent of the gross sales area utilized by the permitted use:
a. Luxury automobiles service departments associated with the New Luxury Car Dealership. All such service shall be conducted within the dealership or other fully enclosed building;
b. Pre-owned car sales or leases controlled by, and associated with, the primary New Luxury Car Dealership.
8. Helipads used in conjunction with new luxury car dealership.
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
7. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed within the tract for development, but in no case shall there be more than one principal structure within the minimum lot area, as provided for in Section 10.17, C., 2., of this ordinance
8. In the case of a New Luxury Car Dealership, the minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be at least one hundred (100) feet, the minimum front yard depth shall be at least forty (40) feet, the minimum side yard width shall be zero (0) feet, and the minimum rear yard depth shall be zero (0) feet.
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
Article X Zones 10-48
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be required for any use in this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
8. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
9. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
10. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
11. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
12. No New Luxury Car Dealership may be open tot the public or conduct and business operations or activities in any manner:
a. Before 7:30 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays;
b. Before 8:30 a.m. and after 7:30 p.m. on Saturdays;
c. Before 12:00 p.m. and after 6:30 p.m. on Sundays.
13. The sound pressure level from any speaker at the New Luxury Car Dealership, used to project announcements, pages, or music, shall not exceed 55 decibels. Furthermore, all exterior lighting from this use shall be directed away from residential zones and any light poles or posts shall not extend to a height that is greater than 20 feet above ground level.
Article X Zones 10-49
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.18 NC (NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Apparel shop
2. Art supplies
3. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively on the premises
4. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies with drive-in windows
5. Barber and beauty shops
6. Billiard or pool hall
7. Book, stationery, or gift shop
8. Bowling alley
9. Camera and photographic supplies
10. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store, excluding drive-ins
11. Delicatessen
12. Drug store
13. Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up station
14. Eating places (excluding drive-ins) and taverns
15. Florist shop
16. Food store and supermarkets
17. Furniture store
18. Garden supplies
19. Glass, china, or pottery store
20. Haberdashery
21. Hardware store
22. Health spas
23. Hobby shop
24. Household and electrical appliance store, including incidental repair
25. Interior decorating studio
26. Jewelry store, including repair
27. Laundromats and self-service washing and drying
28. Leather goods and luggage store
29. Library
30. Locksmith shop
31. Music, musical instruments, and records, including incidental repair
32. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
33. Offices
34. Opticians and optical goods
35. Package liquor and wine store
36. Paint and wallpaper store
37. Pet shop, excluding boarding and outside runs
38. Police and fire stations
39. Post office
Article X Zones 10-50
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
40. Racquetball, tennis, handball, and other similar facilities
41. Radio and television store, including repair
42. Service stations
43. Shoe store and shoe repair
44. Sporting goods
45. Studios for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts, photography, music, drama, or dance
46. Tailor shop
47. Toy store
48. Variety store, including notions and "five and ten" stores
49. Animal clinics, excluding boarding and outside runs
B. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance.
1. Outdoor dining, provided that such area meets the following minimum requirements:
a. Such area shall be designed to clearly identify the limits of the outdoor dining area
b. Such area shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the maximum seating capacity of the indoor dining area
c. Entertainment shall not be permitted within the outdoor dining areas
d. Such area shall not be permitted to locate within any minimum required front, side, or rear yard, except where a variance has been approved by the board of adjustment
C. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - Seventy (70) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Fifty (50) feet
4. Minimum side yard width - No restrictions, except when adjacent to a street, road, highway, or other right-of-way, when the required width shall be the same as required for a minimum front yard depth in this zone. When buildings abut each other, firewall construction, as required by the
Article X Zones 10-51
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
building code, shall be required. In the event a side yard is provided, it shall never be less than fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Fifteen (15) feet
6. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
7. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any residential zone.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
6. Except as herein provided, all business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone.
8. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
9. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
10. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
11. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
12. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-52
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.19 NSC (NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Apparel shop
2. Art supplies
3. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively on the premises
4. Banks, savings and loans, and credit unions
5. Barber and beauty shops
6. Billiard or pool hall
7. Book, stationery, or gift shop
8. Camera and photographic supplies
9. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store, excluding drive-ins
10. Delicatessen
11. Drug store
12. Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up station
13. Eating places and taverns, sit-down only
14. Florist shop
15. Food store and supermarkets
16. Furniture store
17. Garden supplies
18. Glass, china, or pottery store
19. Haberdashery
20. Hardware store
21. Health spas
22. Hobby shop
23. Household and electrical appliance store, including incidental repair
24. Interior decorating studio
25. Jewelry store, including repair
26. Laundromats and self-service washing and drying
27. Leather goods and luggage store
28. Library
29. Locksmith shop
30. Music, musical instruments, and records, including incidental repair
31. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
32. Offices
33. Opticians and optical goods
34. Package liquor and wine store, excluding drive-ins
35. Paint and wallpaper store
36. Pet shop, excluding boarding and outside runs
37. Police and fire stations
38. Post office
39. Radio and television store, including repair
40. Service stations
Article X Zones 10-53
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
41. Shoe store and shoe repair
42. Sporting goods
43. Studios for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts, photography, music, drama, or dance
44. Tailor shop
45. Variety store, including notions and "five and ten" stores
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum building site area - Five (5) acres and shall abut a deeded right-of-way. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area.
2. Minimum yard requirements - Fifty (50) feet for each front, side (on each side of the building), and rear yards, except where the lot abuts an arterial street, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan, then there shall be a minimum yard requirement of one hundred (100) feet
3. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
6. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
8. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
Article X Zones 10-54
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
9. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone. Such site plan shall include the layout of the entire area of the proposed shopping center and shall take into consideration good shopping center design (i.e., internal and external good pedestrian and vehicle access) and functional relationships of uses within the shopping center.
10. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
11. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
12. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
13. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-55
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.20 PO-1 (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies with drive-in windows
2. Clinics - medical or dental
3. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
4. Offices
5. Police and fire stations
6. Post offices
7. Business or Professional Colleges
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses as listed below, included within and entered from within, any office building, as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays for any of the accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Barber shops
b. Beauty shops
c. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
d. Eating and drinking places (excluding drive-by window and drive-in facilities)
e. Medical or dental laboratories
f. News and confectionery stands
g. Prescription pharmacies
C. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses, or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance.
1. Hotels
2. Motel, not to exceed thirty-five (35) rooms
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
Article X Zones 10-56
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet for the first two (2) stories, plus ten (10) feet for each additional story up to and including ten (10) stories, plus five (5) feet for each story in excess of ten (10) stories
4. Minimum side yard width - Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any dedicated street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be required for any use in this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
8. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
9. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
10. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
11. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
12. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-57
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.21 PO-2 (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies with drive-in windows
2. Clinics - medical or dental
3. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
4. Offices
5. Police and fire stations
6. Post offices
7. Sit down restaurants and taverns (including drive-thru facilities but excluding drive-in facilities) within a free standing building, provided all the following conditions, and other applicable sections of this ordinance, are met:
a. The total development, including principal and accessory uses, comprises a minimum building site of three (3) acres
b. Such sit down restaurants and taverns as specifically permitted herein shall include all of the following:
(1) Provides tableside waiter/waitress service
(2) Payment for services by patrons shall generally be
made after food has been consumed
(3) Patrons shall not generally order food at a cash register prior to consumption
(4) Menus shall be generally distributed to patrons before they eat
(5) Food servings to patrons shall generally be made using non – paper and/or non – plastic items (i.e., china, glassware, silverware and/or similar type items shall be used)
(6) Shall not be classified as a “limited – service” (Fast Food) type restaurant as identified by the National Restaurant Association
c. A pedestrian and vehicular pedestrian plan in accordance with Section 11.0, H., of this ordinance, is submitted and approved by the zoning administrator. Said plan shall provide for the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from and within the site
d. Such an accessory use shall be developed only in conjunction with a principally permitted use (except off-street parking lots and/or garages) and shall not exceed forty-nine (49) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted use(s)
Article X Zones 10-58
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
e. Signs are provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 14.7, as it applies to the Professional Office Zone.
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Except as herein provided, uses as listed below, included within and entered from within, any office building, as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building(s) and no exterior advertising displays for any of the accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Barber shops
b. Beauty shops
c. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
d. Eating and drinking places, excluding drive-by windows and drive-in facilities
e. Medical or dental laboratories
f. News and confectionery stands
g. Prescription pharmacies
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet for the first two (2) stories, plus ten (10) feet for each additional story up to and including ten (10) stories, plus five (5) feet for each story in excess of ten (10) stories
4. Minimum side yard width - Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any dedicated street, or into any adjacent property.
Article X Zones 10-59
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be required for any use in this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
8. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
9. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
10. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
11. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
12. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-60
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.22 PO-3 (PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies with drive-in windows
2. Clinics - medical or dental
3. Luxury new car dealerships (ex., Mercedes, Lexus, etc.)
4. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
5. Offices
6. Police and fire stations
7. Post offices
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses as listed below, included within and entered from within, any office building, as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays for any of the accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Barber shops
b. Beauty shops
c. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
d. Eating and drinking places (excluding drive-by window and drive-in facilities)
e. Medical or dental laboratories
f. News and confectionery stands
g. Prescription pharmacies
5. Uses as listed below, only in conjunction with a luxury new car dealership, provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed forty-nine (49) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted use:
a. Luxury automobile service departments associated with the primary dealership. All service shall be within the dealership building.
b. Pre-owned luxury car sales controlled by, and associated with, the primary luxury dealership.
Article X Zones 10-61
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum lot area - Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum front yard depth - Thirty (30) feet for the first two (2) stories, plus ten (10) feet for each additional story up to and including ten (10) stories, plus five (5) feet for each story in excess of ten (10) stories
4. Minimum side yard width - Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum rear yard depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone, with the exception of the outdoor display of vehicles as part of a luxury car dealership.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any dedicated street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be required for any use in this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust, shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas and the outdoor display of vehicles as part of a luxury car dealership.
8. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
9. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
10. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
11. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
12. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or
Article X Zones 10-62
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-63
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.23 SC (SHOPPING CENTER) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Advertising agencies
2. Antique shops
3. Apparel shops
4. Art supplies
5. Automobile laundry
6. Automotive parts and accessories store (new)
7. Automotive service and repair shops
8. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively on the premises
9. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan, and finance companies, with drive-in windows
10. Barber and beauty shops
11. Billiard or pool halls
12. Books, stationery, or gift shops
13. Bowling alleys
14. Business or professional colleges
15. Bus stations
16. Camera and photographic supplies stores
17. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream stores, excluding drive-ins
18. Carpet and rug stores
19. Clinics - medical or dental
20. Clubs - including businessmen's, YMCA/YWCA
21. Delicatessens
22. Department stores
23. Drug stores
24. Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations
25. Eating establishments and taverns, excluding drive-ins
26. Employment agencies
27. Florist shops
28. Food stores and supermarkets
29. Furniture stores
30. Garden supplies
31. Glass, china, or pottery stores
32. Haberdashery
33. Hardware stores
34. Health clinics and health spas
35. Hobby shops
36. Household and electrical appliance store, including incidental repair
37. Interior decorating studios
38. Jewelry stores, including repair
39. Laboratories - medical and dental
Article X Zones 10-64
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
40. Laundromats and self-service washing and drying
41. Leather goods and luggage stores
42. Library
43. Locksmith shops
44. Music, musical instruments, and record stores, including incidental repair
45. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
46. Office appliances and supplies stores
47. Offices
48. Opticians and optical goods stores
49. Package liquor and wine stores, excluding drive-ins
50. Paint and wallpaper stores
51. Pet shops, excluding boarding and outside runs
52. Police and fire stations
53. Post offices
54. Radio and television stores, including repair
55. Service stations
56. Shoe stores and shoe repair
57. Sporting goods stores
58. Studios for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts, photography, music, drama, or dance
59. Tailor shops
60. Theaters, excluding drive-ins
61. Toy stores
62. Travel bureaus
63. Variety stores, including notions and "Five and Ten" stores
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be created or structurally altered except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum building site area - Five (5) acres and shall abut a deeded right-of-way. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area. Individual outlots that do not meet this minimum size may be allowed as part of an integrated shopping center, provided that the overall site meets this requirement.
2. Minimum yard requirements - Fifty (50) feet for each front, side (on each side of the building site), and rear yards except where the lot abuts an arterial street, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan, then there shall be a minimum yard requirement of one hundred (100) feet. Outlots
Article X Zones 10-65
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
shall have a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from any Right of Way, zero (0) feet side and rear yard setbacks, and fifty (50) feet setback from any residential use or zone.
3. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any residential zone.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
5. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
6. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use permitted in this zone. Such site plan shall include the layout of the entire area of the proposed shopping center and shall take into consideration good shopping center design (i.e., internal and external good pedestrian and vehicular access) and functional relationships of uses within the shopping center.
8. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
9. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
10. Exterior building materials of structures located on permitted outlots shall be of the same materials as the primary building, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
11. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top ofthe building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
12. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
13. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-66
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.24 IP (INDUSTRIAL PARK) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Industrial Park (IP) Zone are to allow manufacturing, warehousing, professional office, and research uses within a planned and architecturally unified development; and allow development in a low rise setting, but always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for development within an Industrial Park (IP) Zone shall be processed as follows:
1. Applications for a map amendment to zone an area IP shall follow the procedures set forth in Article XVII of this ordinance. In addition to the regulations set forth in Article XVII, of this ordinance, the application shall be accompanied by a development plan, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, for the entire area under single ownership.
2. When a site is proposed to be developed within an area which is currently zoned IP, a Stage I Development Plan for the entire area under single ownership, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, shall be submitted for review by the planning commission. Development shall include: grading of any land; construction of any streets or other improvements; and the demolition, erection, physical expansion, or change of use of any structure. Development shall not include the normal maintenance (e.g., cleaning, painting, etc.) of any structure.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Stage I Development Plan in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said Stage I Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the stated purpose of the Industrial Park (IP) Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
Article X Zones 10-67
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage I Development Plan. Action to approve the Stage I Development Plan may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the action impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection B., 1., a., of this section.
A copy of the approved Stage I Development Plan shall be forwarded to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the requirements for a Stage II Development Plan.
3. Stage II - A Stage II Development Plan, for the area proposed to be developed, shall be developed in conformance with the approved Stage I Development Plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance, and submitted to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B. of this ordinance, its conformity with the approved Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Minor adjustments from the approved Stage I Development Plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do not affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and
Article X Zones 10-68
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Following review of the submitted Stage II Development Plan, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall make one of the following recommendations to the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage II Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage II Development Plan. Upon approval of the Stage II Development Plan by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, the zoning administrator shall grant permits only in accordance with the approved Stage II Development Plan, and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
C. PERMITTED USES: The following uses are permitted providing all permitted uses are in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Article XV of this ordinance:
1. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or assembling of the following materials:
a. Animated and/or illuminated billboards and other commercial advertising structures.
b. Candy and confectionery products, food and beverage products, except the rendering or refining of fats and oils excluding poultry and animal slaughtering and dressing.
c. Cigars and cigarettes.
d. Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries.
e. Electric appliances, television sets, phonographs, household appliances.
f. Electrical machinery, equipment and supplies.
g. Fountain and beverage dispensing equipment.
h. Furniture.
i. Instruments of professional, scientific, photographic, and optical use.
Article X Zones 10-69
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
j. Metal products and metal finishing, excluding the use of blast furnaces or drop forgers.
k. Musical instruments, toys, novelties, jewelry, rubber or metal stamps.
l. Office equipment.
m. Pottery and figurines.
n. Products from the following previously prepared materials: paper, glass, cellophane, leather, feathers, fur, precious or semi - precious metals, hair, horn, shell, tin, steel, wood, plastics, rubber, bone, cork, felt, fibers, yarn, wool, tobacco.
o. Textile products including canvas and burlap, clothing, cotton products, hosiery and knitting mills, rope and twine.
2. Athletic and recreational facilities
3. Bus line maintenance and operation facility.
4. Crating services.
5. Fire stations.
6. Hospital, Animal
7. Industrial engineering consultant offices.
8. Kennel, excluding the raising of small domestic animals.
9. Laboratories, offices, and other facilities for research, both basic and applied, conducted by or for any industrial organization or concern, whether public or private.
10. Machine shops.
11. Offices.
12. Police stations
13. Printing, engraving and related reproduction processes.
14. Publishing and distribution of books, newspapers, and other printed material.
15. School for industrial or business training.
16. Shops of special trade and general contractors, such as plumbing, heating, carpentry, masonry, painting, and electrical.
17. Warehousing or wholesaling, excluding self storage.
18. Wholesale and retail hardware, light equipment, construction machinery and building materials.
19 Ammunitions manufacturing
D. CONDITIONAL USES: The following uses or any customary accessory buildings or uses, subject to the approval of the board of adjustment, as set forth in Sections 9.14 and 18.7 of this ordinance.
1. Barber and beauty shops, provided that the maximum gross floor area of the barber or beauty shop does not exceed 40% of the gross floor area of the entire building in which it is located.
Article X Zones 10-70
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
D. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory structures and uses, including operations required to maintain or support any use permitted in this zone on the same lot as the permitted
2. Uses, as listed below, located and entered from within any use permitted in this zone as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers, providing such accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Cafeterias.
b. Coffee shops or refreshment stands.
c. Soda or dairy bars.
3. Uses, as listed below, located and entered from within any animal hospital or kennel as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers:
a. Indoor boarding
b. Grooming
c. Retail services, provided that the retail area does not exceed five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the animal hospital and that no exterior advertising displayed shall be visible from outside the building.
4. Fences and/or walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance;
5. Signs, as regulated by Article XV of this ordinance.
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
1. Minimum Tract for Development - Twenty - five (25) acres, except where area restrictions are less, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan; however, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved site may be permitted providing the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new site has been a part of the originally approved site plan layout.
2. Minimum Lot Area Within Minimum Tract - One (1) acre.
3. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line - One hundred fifty (150) feet.
4. Maximum Building Height - Forty (40) feet.
5. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio - Eighty (80) percent.
6. In the case of this zone, more than one principal structure, as herein defined, may be permitted on one lot.
F. SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan.
Article X Zones 10-71
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
G. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
H. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Development shall be consistent with any conceptual development plan/study which has been adopted/approved by the legislative body.
2. Off - street parking and loading and/or unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
3. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
4. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from any use located within this zone onto any street or into any adjacent property.
5. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
6. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of those business activities related to athletic and recreational facilities and kennels.
7. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers. Such area shall be screened from view.
8. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
9. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
10. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
I. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposed Industrial Park (IP) Zone and/or development plan shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Design
a. Agreement with the various elements of the Area - Wide Comprehensive Plan, and where applicable, any other adopted plan.
b. Extent to which the proposed development plan is consistent with the purpose of the Industrial Park (IP) Zone.
Article X Zones 10-72
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
c. Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (e.g., topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.).
d. Nature and extent of the proposed uses in relation to the unique characteristics of the site.
e. Extent to which the design of the proposed development responds to the natural and man - made features of the site.
f. Building locations should be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with open spaces, pedestrian areas, and off - street parking areas.
g. Extent to which the scale of each building relates to the natural environment.
h. The primary activity area of a building should be oriented toward a natural site amenity.
i. The location of buildings should be designed to provide for an orderly rhythm by avoiding long, unbroken building facades.
j. Heights of structures should be compatible with the height of existing structures adjacent to the site.
2. Circulation
a. Amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed development and the ability of the existing street system to adequately handle said traffic. Where deficiencies exist, proposed traffic improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
b. Extent to which the design of the internal street system provides for the efficient and safe movement of traffic within and adjacent to the site.
c. The circulation system should follow the natural terrain of the site.
d. The circulation system should provide for the continuation of existing streets and provide for the connection of proposed streets to adjoining properties.
e. Extent to which the complete separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems is achieved.
f. Pedestrian street crossings should provide for safe crossings where there is good sight distance along the street or at a grade separated crossing.
3. Open Space
a. Existing trees, streams, natural features, and scenic views should be preserved and maintained where feasible and practicable.
Article X Zones 10-73
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. Extent to which an overall landscaping plan is developed and achieved to compliment the overall project.
c. Landscaping should be an integral part in the design of off - street parking areas to soften the impact of hard surfaced areas on adjacent areas.
d. Open spaces should not be isolated from one another by unrelated physical obstructions, but rather, should be linked together by open space corridors having a reasonable width.
e. Open spaces and landscaping along the perimeter of the site shall be compatible with adjoining uses and zones.
4. Utilities
a. Extent to which all necessary public utilities and facilities are available to service the proposed development, including police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and other services normally provided within the area. Where deficiencies exist, improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
5. Signage
a. Signage should be designed to protect and enhance the visual amenities of the site.
b. A sign package should be developed for the entire development that forms an integral part of the total design of the site.
c. All signs should be of a complimentary scale and proportion in design and in visual relationship to the site and buildings.
d. Extent to which signs define and enhance the architectural elements of a building or site.
e. Extent to which signage is consolidated and coordinated with the overall site design.
J. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection B., 2. or B., 3., above, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
K. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the Industrial Park (IP) Zone shall be subject to the time constraints noted below. Upon expiration of said time constraints, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining: (1) whether said Industrial Park (IP) Zone should revert to its original zoning designation; or
Article X Zones 10-74
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(2) that the approved Development Plan should be voided. A public hearing may be initiated if the following condition applies:
1. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Stage II Development Plan obsolete. Substantial construction shall be deemed to mean the placing of footers and/or foundation.
L. UTILITIES: All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
Article X Zones 10-75
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.25 I-1 (INDUSTRIAL-ONE) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES: The following uses are permitted providing all uses are in compliance with the performance standards as set forth in Article XV of this ordinance:
1. The assembling, compounding, manufacturing, packaging, or processing of the following uses:
a. Animated and/or illuminated billboards and other commercial advertising structures
b. Candy and confectionery products, food and beverage products, except the rendering or refining of fats and oils, and excluding poultry and animal slaughtering and dressing;,
c. Cigars and cigarettes
d. Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries
e. Electric appliances, television sets, phonographs, household appliances
f. Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies
g. Fountain and beverage dispensing equipment
h. Furniture
i. Instruments for professional, scientific, photographic, and optical use
j. Metal products, and metal finishing, excluding the use of blast furnaces or drop forges
k. Musical instruments, toys, novelties, jewelry, rubber or metal stamps
l. Office equipment
m. Pottery and figurines
n. Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, cork, feathers, felt, fibers, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, precious or semi-precious metals, plastics, rubber, shell, steel, tin, tobacco, wood, wool, yarn
o. Textile products, including asbestos products, canvas and burlap, clothing, cotton products, hosiery and knitting mills, rope and twine
2. Automotive and light truck (1-1/2 ton and under) service and repairs (major)
3. Bottling and canning works
4. Building materials, sales yards
5. Bus line shops and storage
6. Contractors' offices and accessory storage yards, including storage of general construction equipment and vehicles
7. Crating services
8. Fire stations
Article X Zones 10-76
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
9. Governmentally owned and/or operated city, county, and state garages
10. Industrial engineering and consultant offices
11. Laboratories, offices, and other facilities for research, both basic and applied, conducted by, or for, an industrial organization or concern, whether public or private
12. Laundry and dry cleaning plants, involving laundering and dry cleaning of articles delivered to the premises by commercial vehicles
13. Machine shops
14. Police stations
15. Printing, engraving, and related reproduction processes
16. Public utilities' rights-of-way and pertinent structures
17. Publishing and distribution of books, newspapers, and other printed materials
18. Schools for industrial or business training
19. Studios for teaching any form of fine art, photography, music, drama, dance, or gymnastics
20. Warehousing or wholesaling, excluding self storage
21. Wood yards
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory building and uses, including operations required to maintain or support any permitted use in this zone on the same lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops, power plants, and machine shops
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses, as listed below, including within and entered from within any permitted use in this zone as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers, provided such accessory uses shall not exceed ten (ten) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Cafeterias
b. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
c. Soda or dairy bars
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. Minimum tract for industrial development - Twenty-five (25) acres, except where area restrictions are less, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan; however, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved site may be permitted providing the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new site has been a part of the originally approved site plan layout
Article X Zones 10-77
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
2. Minimum lot area within minimum tract - One (1) acre
3. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
4. Minimum front yard depth -
a. When abutting a major arterial (as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan) - Seventy-five (75) feet
b. On internal roads - Fifty (50) feet
5. Minimum side yard width -
a. In internal parts of the park - Twenty-five (25) feet
b. Where the side yard is adjacent to a major arterial (as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan) - Seventy-five (75) feet
6. Minimum rear yard depth - In internal parts of the park - Fifty (50) feet. No rear yard is required where a rail spur line forms the rear property line
7. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
8. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
3. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
4. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use in this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
7. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
8. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-78
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.26 I-2 (INDUSTRIAL-TWO) ZONE
A. PERMITTED USES: The following uses are permitted providing all uses are in compliance with the performance standards as regulated in Article XV of this ordinance:
1. The assembling, compounding, manufacturing, packaging, or processing of the following uses:
a. Acetylene, butane, and bottled gas, including bulk storage
b. Animated and/or illuminated billboards and other commercial advertising structures
c. Asphalt and asphalt products
d. Brick, tile, or terra cotta
e. Candy and confectionery products, food and beverage products, including the rendering or refining of fats and oils
f. Cement, concrete, and concrete products
g. Cigars and cigarettes
h. Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries
i. Electric appliances, television sets, phonographs, household appliances
j. Electrical and non-electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies
k. Fertilizer, gypsum, lime, or plaster of paris
l. Fountain and beverage dispensing equipment
m. Furniture
n. Instruments of professional, scientific, photographic, and optical use
o. Musical instruments, toys, novelties, jewelry, rubber or metal stamps
p. Office equipment
q. Pottery and figurines
r. Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, cork, feathers, felt, fibers, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, precious or semi-precious metals, plastics, rubber, shell, steel, tin, tobacco, wood, wool, yarn
s. Sand and gravel, including storage
t. Stone and monument works employing power driven tools
2. Bag, carpet, and rug cleaning
3. Bottling and canning works
4. Building materials sales yards
5. Bulk storage stations
6. Bus line shops and storage
7. Carting, express, hauling, or storage yards
Article X Zones 10-79
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
8. Contractors' offices and accessory storage yards, including storage of general construction equipment and vehicles
9. Crating services
10. Fire stations
11. Flour mills
12. Industrial engineering consultant offices
13. Laboratories, offices and other facilities for research, both basic and applied, conducted by, or for, an industrial organization or concern, whether public or private
14. Laundries and dry cleaning plants, involving laundering and dry cleaning of articles delivered to the premises by commercial vehicles
15. Machine shops
16. Police stations
17. Printing, engraving, and related reproduction processes
18. Public utilities' rights-of-way and pertinent structures
19. Publishing and distribution of books, newspapers, and other printed materials
20. Railroad facilities, including passengers and freight terminals, marshaling yards, maintenance shops, and round houses
21. Schools for industrial or business training
22. Trucking terminals
23. Warehousing or wholesaling, excluding self storage
24. Wood yards
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses, including operations required to maintain or support any permitted use in this zone on the same lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops, power plants, and machine shops
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses, as listed below, including within and entered from within any permitted use in this zone as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers, provided such accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Cafeterias
b. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
c. Soda or dairy bars
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Article X Zones 10-80
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
1. Minimum tract for industrial development - Twenty-five (25) acres, except where area restrictions are less, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan; however, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved site may be permitted providing the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new site has been a part of the originally approved site plan layout
2. Minimum lot area within minimum tract - One (1) acre
3. Minimum lot width at building setback line - One hundred fifty (150) feet
4. Minimum front yard depth -
a. When abutting a major arterial (as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan) - Seventy-five (75) feet
b. On internal roads - Fifty (50) feet
5. Minimum side yard width -
a. In internal parts of the park - Twenty-five (25) feet
b. Where the side yard is adjacent to a major arterial (as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan) - Seventy-five (75) feet
6. Minimum rear yard depth - In internal parts of the park - Fifty (50) feet. No rear yard is required where a rail spur forms the rear property line
7. Maximum building height - Forty (40) feet
8. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building, as defined herein, may be constructed on one lot
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
3. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
4. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be required for any use in this zone.
5. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
6. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
7. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
8. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or
Article X Zones 10-81
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-82
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.27 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Community Commercial (CC) Zone are to: allow businesses, within a planned and architecturally unified development, which provide convenience goods and services to a work population and the residences of adjacent neighborhoods; allow development at a small scale with a town - like setting; and supplement or serve adjacent areas without having an adverse impact on adjacent areas; but always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for development within a Community Commercial (CC) Zone shall be processed as follows:
1. Applications for a map amendment to zone an area CC shall follow the procedures set forth in Article XVII of this ordinance. In addition to the regulations set forth in Article XVII, of this ordinance, the application shall be accompanied by a development plan, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, for the entire area under single ownership.
2. When a site is proposed to be developed within an area which is currently zoned CC, a Stage I Development Plan for the entire area under single ownership, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, shall be submitted for review by the planning commission. Development shall include: grading of any land; construction of any streets or other improvements; and the demolition, erection, physical expansion, or change of use of any structure. Development shall not include the normal maintenance (e.g., cleaning, painting, etc.) of any structure.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Stage I Development Plan in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said Stage I Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the stated purpose of the Community Commercial (CC) Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission
Article X Zones 10-83
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage I Development Plan. Action to approve the Stage I Development Plan may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the action impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection B., 1., a., of this section.
A copy of the approved Stage I Development Plan shall be forwarded to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the requirements for a Stage II Development Plan.
3. Stage II - A Stage II Development Plan, for the area proposed to be developed, shall be developed in conformance with the approved Stage I Development Plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance, and submitted to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B. of this ordinance, its conformity with the approved Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Minor adjustments from the approved Stage I Development Plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do not affect the
Article X Zones 10-84
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Following review of the submitted Stage II Development Plan, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall make one of the following recommendations to the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage II Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage II Development Plan. Upon approval of the Stage II Development Plan by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, the zoning administrator shall grant permits only in accordance with the approved Stage II Development Plan, and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
C. PERMITTED USES:
1. Business equipment sales and service
2. Business support services
3. Cultural exhibits and libraries
4. Day Care Center
5. Dwelling units, provided they are not located on the ground floor
6. Eating and drinking establishment
7. Entertainment (not including Sexually Oriented Businesses, see Section 9.33)
8. Financial services
9. Food and beverage sales, retail
10. Medical services
11. Offices
12. Personal Improvement services
13. Retail sales and service
D. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory structures and uses.
Article X Zones 10-85
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
2. Fences and/or walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance.
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance.
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area - One - half (1/2) acre.
2. Minimum Lot Width At Building Setback Line - One hundred (100) feet.
3. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio - Seventy (70) percent.
4. Maximum Building Height – Forty-five (45) feet.
5. Structures shall be limited to a maximum size of 50,000 square feet,
6. In the case of this zone, more than one principal structure, as herein defined, may be permitted on one lot.
F. SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan, except that where any front, side, or rear yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts a residential zone, a minimum yard requirement of ninety (90) feet shall be provided, fifty (50) feet of which shall be maintained by a screening area, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. This area shall remain open and not permit off - street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
G. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
H. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Development shall be consistent with any conceptual development plan/study which has been adopted/approved by the legislative body.
2. Off - street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
3. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
4. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from any use located within this zone onto any street or into any adjacent property.
5. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of the following:
a. off - street parking and loading and/or unloading areas.
b. outdoor play areas of a child day care center.
c. areas used for the dispensing of fuel.
6. Circulation systems (vehicular and pedestrian) shall be coordinated with those of adjacent areas.
Article X Zones 10-86
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
7. Mechanical equipment, whether ground or roof mounted, shall be screened from view.
8. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
9. Sidewalks shall be required when any new development occurs.
10. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
11. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers. Such area shall be screened from view.
12. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
13. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
14. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
15. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
I. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposed Community Commercial (CC) Zone and/or development plan shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Design
a. Agreement with the various elements of the Area - Wide Comprehensive Plan, and where applicable, any other adopted plan.
b. Extent to which the proposed development plan is consistent with the purpose of the Community Commercial (CC) Zone.
c. The extent to which structures proposed in the development plan use the same, or similar exterior finishes and colors that would complement newer buildings in the mixed use area.
d. Building locations should be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with open spaces, pedestrian areas, and off - street parking areas.
e. The location of buildings should be designed to provide for an orderly rhythm by avoiding long, unbroken building facades.
f. Unless specifically approved by the city’s chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative or city council, exterior building materials shall be chosen from the following:
(1) Brick and tile masonry
Article X Zones 10-87
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(2) Stucco (cementitious finish)
(3) Native stone (or synthetic equivalent)
(4) Pre-cast masonry (for trim and cornice elements only)
(5) Gypsum reinforced fiber concrete (GFRC – for trim elements only)
(6) Exterior Insulation Finish System fascias, with moderate finish texture
g. Unless specifically approved by the city council, roofs shall adhere to the following design standards:
(1) Parapet: Parapets shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet as measured from the top of the roof deck and shall conceal flat roofs and shall be in proportion to the supporting walls. (see figure 1)
(2) Cornice: Cornices shall be three-dimensional. (see figure 2)
Figure 1
Article X Zones 10-88
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(3) Minimum Eave/Overhang Width: Pitched roofs shall have eaves and overhangs equal to or greater than twelve (12) inches in depth. Depth shall be determined prior to the installation of masonry. (see figure 3)
(4) Cupola: Cupolas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet past the base roofline. (see figure 4)
Figure 2
Figure 3
Article X Zones 10-89
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(5) Pitched Roofs:
i. Minimum Pitch: 5 (vertical units): 12 (horizontal units). (see figure 5)
ii. Planes: Pitched roofs shall be comprised of three (3) or more roof slope planes. (see figure 6)
Figure 4
Figure 5
Article X Zones 10-90
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
iii. Materials: Pitched roofs shall be covered with high quality roofing materials such as natural clay tiles, slate, concrete tiles (with natural texture and color), high quality standing seam metal roofing, wood shakes or shingles (with adequate fire protection), three-dimensional asphalt/fiberglass shingles. Metal roofs shall have a low-gloss finish to reduce glare.
(6) Flat Roofs: Mechanical equipment must be screened.
(7) Variation in Roofline: For buildings with elevations in excess of one hundred (100) feet in length, a variation in roofline shall be employed for architectural interest and to reduce the apparent scale of the buildings.
i. Wall Planes: For every fifty (50) feet of building facade as measured horizontally, there shall be a minimum of four percent (4%) projection or recess in the facade (vertical plane). Any wall exceeding fifty (50) feet in length shall include at least one (1) change in wall plane. Absolute minimum changes in plane shall be two (2) feet. The projection or recess can be realized with setbacks of the building facade, but also with architectural elements that include but are not exclusive of arcades, columns, ribs, piers, and pilasters.
2. Circulation
a. Amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed development and the ability of the existing street system to adequately handle said traffic. Where deficiencies exist, proposed
Figure 6
Article X Zones 10-91
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
traffic improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
b. Extent to which the design of the internal street system provides for the efficient and safe movement of traffic within and adjacent to the site.
c. The circulation system should follow the natural terrain of the site.
d. The circulation system should provide for the continuation of existing streets and provide for the connection of proposed streets to adjoining properties.
e. Extent to which the complete separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems is achieved.
f. Pedestrian street crossings should provide for safe crossings where there is good sight distance along the street or at a grade separated crossing.
3. Open Space
a. Existing trees, streams, natural features, and scenic views should be preserved and maintained where feasible and practicable.
b. Extent to which an overall landscaping plan is developed and achieved to compliment the overall project.
c. Landscaping should be an integral part in the design of off - street parking areas to soften the impact of hard surfaced areas on adjacent areas.
d. Open spaces and landscaping along the perimeter of the site shall be compatible with adjoining uses and zones.
4. Utilities
a. Extent to which all necessary public utilities and facilities are available to service the proposed development, including police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and other services normally provided within the area. Where deficiencies exist, improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
J. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection B., 2. or B., 3., above, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
K. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the Community Commercial (CC) Zone shall be subject to the time constraints noted below. Upon expiration of said time constraints, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a
Article X Zones 10-92
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining: (1) whether said Community Commercial (CC) Zone should revert to its original zoning designation; or (2) that the approved Development Plan should be voided. A public hearing may be initiated if the following condition applies:
1. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Stage II Development Plan obsolete. Substantial construction shall be deemed to mean the placing of footers and/or foundation.
Article X Zones 10-93
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.28 HOC (HIGHWAY ORIENTED COMMERCIAL) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone is to provide for a zoning district which would allow the development of individual retail and service businesses which are primarily oriented towards serving the traveling/transient public or which require immediate access to the regional transportation system.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for development within an Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone shall be processed as follows:
1. Applications for a map amendment to zone an area HOC shall follow the procedures set forth in Article XVII of this ordinance. In addition to the regulations set forth in Article XVII, of this ordinance, the application shall be accompanied by a development plan, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, for the entire area under single ownership.
2. When a site is proposed to be developed within an area which is currently zoned HOC, a Stage I Development Plan for the entire area under single ownership, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, shall be submitted for review by the planning commission. Development shall include: grading of any land; construction of any streets or other improvements; and the demolition, erection, physical expansion, or change of use of any structure. Development shall not include the normal maintenance (e.g., cleaning, painting, etc.) of any structure.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Stage I Development Plan in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said Stage I Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the stated purpose of the Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
Article X Zones 10-94
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage I Development Plan. Action to approve the Stage I Development Plan may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the action impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection B., 1., a., of this section.
A copy of the approved Stage I Development Plan shall be forwarded to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the requirements for a Stage II Development Plan.
3. Stage II - A Stage II Development Plan, for the area proposed to be developed, shall be developed in conformance with the approved Stage I Development Plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance, and submitted to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B. of this ordinance, its conformity with the approved Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Minor adjustments from the approved Stage I Development Plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do not affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and
Article X Zones 10-95
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Following review of the submitted Stage II Development Plan, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall make one of the following recommendations to the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage II Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage II Development Plan. Upon approval of the Stage II Development Plan by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, the zoning administrator shall grant permits only in accordance with the approved Stage II Development Plan, and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
C. PERMITTED USES:
1. Automobile laundry
2. Automobile, motorcycle, and truck sales, new or used
3. Automotive service and repairs
4. Banks, savings and loans, and credit unions
5. Boat and other marine equipment sales and service, new and used
6. Eating establishments, including drive - in and drive - thru facilities
7. Hotels and motels
8. Mobile home and trailer sales, rental and service (new and used)
9. Service stations
D. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory structures and uses.
2. Fences and/or walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance.
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance.
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area - Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
Article X Zones 10-96
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
2. Minimum Lot Width At Building Setback Line - One hundred (100) feet.
3. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio - Eighty (80) percent.
4. Maximum Building Height - Forty (40) feet.
5. In the case of this zone, more than one principal structure, as herein defined, may be permitted on one lot.
F. SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan.
G. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in conformance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
H. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Development shall be consistent with any conceptual development plan/study which has been adopted/approved by the legislative body.
2. Off - street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
3. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
4. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street or into any adjacent property.
5. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. Mechanical equipment, whether ground or roof mounted, shall be screened from view.
8. Sidewalks shall be required when any new development occurs.
9. All business activities involving service and repairs shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
10. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
11. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers. Such area shall be screened from view.
12. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
13. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
14. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement. or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
Article X Zones 10-97
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
I. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposed Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone and/or development plan shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Design
a. Agreement with the various elements of the Area - Wide Comprehensive Plan, and where applicable, any other adopted plan.
b. Extent to which the proposed development plan is consistent with the purpose of the Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone.
c. Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (e.g., topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.).
d. Nature and extent of the proposed uses in relation to the unique characteristics of the site.
e. Extent to which the design of the proposed development responds to the natural and man - made features of the site.
f. Building locations should be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with open spaces, pedestrian areas, and off - street parking areas.
g. Extent to which the scale of each building relates to the natural environment.
h. The primary activity area of a building should be oriented toward a natural site amenity.
i. The location of buildings should be designed to provide for an orderly rhythm by avoiding long, unbroken building facades.
j. Heights of structures should be compatible with the height of existing structures adjacent to the site.
2. Circulation
a. Amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed development and the ability of the existing street system to adequately handle said traffic. Where deficiencies exist, proposed traffic improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
b. Extent to which the design of the internal street system provides for the efficient and safe movement of traffic within and adjacent to the site.
c. The circulation system should follow the natural terrain of the site.
Article X Zones 10-98
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
d. The circulation system should provide for the continuation of existing streets and provide for the connection of proposed streets to adjoining properties.
e. Extent to which the complete separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems is achieved.
f. Pedestrian street crossings should provide for safe crossings where there is good sight distance along the street or at a grade separated crossing.
3. Open Space
a. Existing trees, streams, natural features, and scenic views should be preserved and maintained where feasible and practicable.
b. Extent to which an overall landscaping plan is developed and achieved to compliment the overall project.
c. Landscaping should be an integral part in the design of off - street parking areas to soften the impact of hard surfaced areas on adjacent areas.
d. Open spaces should not be isolated from one another by unrelated physical obstructions, but rather, should be linked together by open space corridors having a reasonable width.
e. Open spaces and landscaping along the perimeter of the site shall be compatible with adjoining uses and zones.
4. Utilities
a. Extent to which all necessary public utilities and facilities are available to service the proposed development, including police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and other services normally provided within the area. Where deficiencies exist, improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
5. Signage
a. Signage should be designed to protect and enhance the visual amenities of the site.
b. A sign package should be developed for the entire development that forms an integral part of the total design of the site.
c. All signs should be of a complimentary scale and proportion in design and in visual relationship to the site and buildings.
d. Extent to which signs define and enhance the architectural elements of a building or site.
e. Extent to which signage is consolidated and coordinated with the overall site design.
Article X Zones 10-99
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
J. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection B., 2. or B., 3., above, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
K. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone shall be subject to the time constraints noted below. Upon expiration of said time constraints, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining: (1) whether said Highway Oriented Commercial (HOC) Zone should revert to its original zoning designation; or (2) that the approved Development Plan should be voided. A public hearing may be initiated if the following condition applies:
1. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Stage II Development Plan obsolete. Substantial construction shall be deemed to mean the placing of footers and/or foundation.
Article X Zones 10-100
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.29 OP (OFFICE PARK) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Office Park (OP) Zone are to: allow professional, research, and similar uses within a planned and architecturally unified development; allow development in a low intensity/low rise setting; and supplement or serve adjacent areas without having an adverse impact on adjacent areas; but always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for development within an Office Park (OP) Zone shall be processed as follows:
1. Applications for a map amendment to zone an area OP shall follow the procedures set forth in Article XVII of this ordinance. In addition to the regulations set forth in Article XVII, of this ordinance, the application shall be accompanied by a development plan, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, for the entire area under single ownership.
2. When a site is proposed to be developed within an area which is currently zoned OP, a Stage I Development Plan for the entire area under single ownership, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, shall be submitted for review by the planning commission. Development shall include: grading of any land; construction of any streets or other improvements; and the demolition, erection, physical expansion, or change of use of any structure. Development shall not include the normal maintenance (e.g., cleaning, painting, etc.) of any structure.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Stage I Development Plan in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said Stage I Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the stated purpose of the Office Park (OP) Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission
Article X Zones 10-101
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage I Development Plan. Action to approve the Stage I Development Plan may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the action impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection B., 1., a., of this section.
A copy of the approved Stage I Development Plan shall be forwarded to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the requirements for a Stage II Development Plan.
3. Stage II - A Stage II Development Plan, for the area proposed to be developed, shall be developed in conformance with the approved Stage I Development Plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance, and submitted to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B. of this ordinance, its conformity with the approved Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Minor adjustments from the approved Stage I Development Plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do not affect the
Article X Zones 10-102
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Following review of the submitted Stage II Development Plan, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall make one of the following recommendations to the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage II Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage II Development Plan. Upon approval of the Stage II Development Plan by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, the zoning administrator shall grant permits only in accordance with the approved Stage II Development Plan, and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
C. PERMITTED USES:
1. Athletic and recreational facilities
2. Banks and other financial institutions
3. Clinics - medical or dental
4. Day care centers
5. Funeral homes
6. Offices
7. Printing and publishing facilities
8. Research and development facilities
9. Training, educational, and conference facilities
D. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory structures and uses.
2. Fences and/or walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance.
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance.
4. Uses as listed below, included within and entered from within any office building as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients, clients, or customers, providing that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10)
Article X Zones 10-103
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
percent of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays for any of the accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building:
a. Pharmacies
b. Barber shops
c. Beauty shops
d. Eating and drinking places
e. Medical or dental laboratories
f. News stands
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area - Two (2) acres.
2. Minimum Lot Width At Building Setback Line - One hundred (100) feet.
3. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio - Sixty (60) percent.
4. Maximum Building Height - Forty (40) feet.
5. In the case of this zone, more than one principal structure, as herein defined, may be permitted on one lot.
F. SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan.
G. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
H. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Development shall be consistent with any conceptual development plan/study which has been adopted/approved by the legislative body.
2. Off - street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
3. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
4. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from any use located within this zone onto any street or into any adjacent property.
5. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. Mechanical equipment, whether ground or roof mounted, shall be screened from view.
Article X Zones 10-104
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
8. Sidewalks shall be required when any new development occurs.
9. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
10. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers. Such area shall be screened from view.
11. Business buildings within this zone may outline the top of the building on three (3) sides with a single strand of LED building accent lights.
12. No lighting shall be permitted that would glare from this zone onto any street or into any residential zone
13. No Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving lights, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving, or movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity shall be permitted.
I. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposed Office Park (OP) Zone and/or development plan shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Design
a. Agreement with the various elements of the Area - Wide Comprehensive Plan, and where applicable, any other adopted plan.
b. Extent to which the proposed development plan is consistent with the purpose of the Office Park (OP) Zone.
c. Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (e.g., topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.).
d. Nature and extent of the proposed uses in relation to the unique characteristics of the site.
e. Extent to which the design of the proposed development responds to the natural and man - made features of the site.
f. Building locations should be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with open spaces, pedestrian areas, and off - street parking areas.
g. Extent to which the scale of each building relates to the natural environment.
h. The primary activity area of a building should be oriented toward a natural site amenity.
i. The location of buildings should be designed to provide for an orderly rhythm by avoiding long, unbroken building facades.
j. Heights of structures should be compatible with the height of existing structures adjacent to the site.
Article X Zones 10-105
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
2. Circulation
a. Amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed development and the ability of the existing street system to adequately handle said traffic. Where deficiencies exist, proposed traffic improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
b. Extent to which the design of the internal street system provides for the efficient and safe movement of traffic within and adjacent to the site.
c. The circulation system should follow the natural terrain of the site.
d. The circulation system should provide for the continuation of existing streets and provide for the connection of proposed streets to adjoining properties.
e. Extent to which the complete separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems is achieved.
f. Pedestrian street crossings should provide for safe crossings where there is good sight distance along the street or at a grade separated crossing.
3. Open Space
a. Existing trees, streams, natural features, and scenic views should be preserved and maintained where feasible and practicable.
b. Extent to which an overall landscaping plan is developed and achieved to compliment the overall project.
c. Landscaping should be an integral part in the design of off - street parking areas to soften the impact of hard surfaced areas on adjacent areas.
d. Open spaces should not be isolated from one another by unrelated physical obstructions, but rather, should be linked together by open space corridors having a reasonable width.
e. Open spaces and landscaping along the perimeter of the site shall be compatible with adjoining uses and zones.
4. Utilities
a. Extent to which all necessary public utilities and facilities are available to service the proposed development, including police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and other services normally provided within the area. Where deficiencies exist, improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
Article X Zones 10-106
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
5. Signage
a. Signage should be designed to protect and enhance the visual amenities of the site.
b. A sign package should be developed for the entire development that forms an integral part of the total design of the site.
c. All signs should be of a complimentary scale and proportion in design and in visual relationship to the site and buildings.
d. Extent to which signs define and enhance the architectural elements of a building or site.
e. Extent to which signage is consolidated and coordinated with the overall site design.
J. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection B., 2. or B., 3., above, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
K. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the Office Park (OP) Zone shall be subject to the time constraints noted below. Upon expiration of said time constraints, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining: (1) whether said Office Park (OP) Zone should revert to its original zoning designation; or (2) that the approved Development Plan should be voided. A public hearing may be initiated if the following condition applies:
1. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Stage II Development Plan obsolete. Substantial construction shall be deemed to mean the placing of footers and/or foundation.
Article X Zones 10-107
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.30 C-PUD (COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) OVERLAY ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone are to: promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the relationships between location of and types of uses and structures; promote the advantages of large scale site planning for community development through the efficient use of land, facilitating a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses, and utilities; preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the existing landscape features and amenities, and to utilize such features in an harmonious fashion; provide for more usable and suitably located open space facilities and other public and/or common facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures, but always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. GENERAL: A Commercial-Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone may be permitted to be superimposed over any of the commercial zones, provided that all conditions or provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable standards of the subdivision regulations, and any additional requirements as may be determined necessary to provide for the most efficient layout of the C-PUD and its proper integration with the surrounding development, are met; and a public hearing is held on the C-PUD application.
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for development within a Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone shall be processed as follows:
1. Applications for a map amendment to zone an area C-PUD shall follow the procedures set forth in Article XVII of this ordinance. In addition to the regulations set forth in Article XVII, of this ordinance, the application shall be accompanied by a development plan, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, for the entire area under single ownership.
2. When a site is proposed to be developed within an area which is currently zoned C-PUD, a Stage I Development Plan for the entire area under single ownership, as regulated by Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance, shall be submitted for review by the planning commission. Development shall include: grading of any land; construction of any streets or other improvements; and the demolition, erection, physical expansion, or change of use of any structure. Development shall not include the normal maintenance (e.g., cleaning, painting, etc.) of any structure.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Stage I Development Plan in accordance with the
Article X Zones 10-108
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and review said Stage I Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the stated purpose of the Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone, the required elements of the Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the Stage I Development Plan shall become final and automatically implemented as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
c. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage I Development Plan. Action to approve the Stage I Development Plan may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the action impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendation, in accordance with Subsection C., 1., a., of this section.
A copy of the approved Stage I Development Plan shall be forwarded to the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the requirements for a Stage II Development Plan.
3. Stage II - A Stage II Development Plan, for the area proposed to be developed, shall be developed in conformance with the approved Stage I Development Plan and in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance, and submitted to the planning
Article X Zones 10-109
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
commission, or its duly authorized representative, for its review. Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 9.20, B. and C. of this ordinance shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of Section 9.20, B. of this ordinance, its conformity with the approved Stage I Development Plan, applicable requirements of this section of the ordinance, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Minor adjustments from the approved Stage I Development Plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do not affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Following review of the submitted Stage II Development Plan, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall make one of the following recommendations to the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Stage II Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall, within ninety (90) days after the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, makes its recommendation, process the proposed Stage II Development Plan. Upon approval of the Stage II Development Plan by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, the zoning administrator shall grant permits only in accordance with the approved Stage II Development Plan, and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
D. PRIMARY PERMITTED USES: Permitted uses shall be as specified within the zones being overlaid. A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the floor space within a proposed C-PUD shall be primary permitted uses.
Article X Zones 10-110
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
E. OTHER USES PERMITTED: Permitted uses as specified in other commercial zones within this ordinance are permitted, subject to all other requirements of this section. Additionally, the following uses may also be permitted:
1. Community centers, including day care facilities
2. Fire and police stations
3. Libraries
4. Schools
F. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No C-PUD Overlay Zone shall be permitted on less than five (5) acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing C-PUD Overlay Zone may be permitted, if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
G. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as approved in the plan. A minimum fifty (50) foot setback shall be provided from adjacent residential zoning districts.
H. OUTDOOR STORAGE
1. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or products shall be permitted in this zone.
2. No outdoor storage of any waste materials shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers. Such area shall be screened from view.
I. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street parking and when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance. Parking may be permitted within required yards but no closer than fifteen (15) feet to any adjoining residential zoning district.
J. FENCES, WALLS, SIGNS, LIGHTING, AND LANDSCAPING: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, signs, lighting, and landscaping shall be as approved in the plan and shall be consistent throughout the development.
K. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance and the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations.
L. OPEN SPACE: A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total acreage of the proposed C-PUD shall be retained as open space area and a minimum of eight (8) percent of this area shall be located within the interior of the development, as
Article X Zones 10-111
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
opposed to the perimeter of the development. Open space area shall be that part of the total project exclusive of streets, parking areas, and buildings. A landscape plan shall be submitted with the Stage II Plan and Record Plat.
For purposes of this subsection, the perimeter of the development shall be that area within the front, side, and rear yards, as identified in the Stage I Development Plan. The interior of the development shall be that area outside of the front, side, and rear yards, as identified in the Stage I Development Plan.
M. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposed Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone and/or development plan shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Design
a. Agreement with the various elements of the Area - Wide Comprehensive Plan, and where applicable, any other adopted plan.
b. Extent to which the proposed development plan is consistent with the purpose of the Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone.
c. Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (e.g., topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.).
d. Nature and extent of the proposed uses in relation to the unique characteristics of the site; the current or anticipated need for such use(s) and the specific size and locale of the market area from which the specific uses of the site will draw or serve.
e. Extent to which the design of the proposed development responds to the natural and man - made features of the site.
f. Building locations should be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with open spaces, pedestrian areas, and off - street parking areas.
g. Extent to which the scale of each building relates to the natural environment.
h. The primary activity area of a building should be oriented toward a natural site amenity.
i. The location of buildings should be designed to provide for an orderly rhythm by avoiding long, unbroken building facades.
j. Heights of structures should be compatible with the height of existing structures adjacent to the site.
Article X Zones 10-112
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
k. Extent to which the proposed design responds to the impact of the proposed development on adjacent land uses, in terms of noise, visual impact, hours of operation, and traffic circulation.
2. Architectural Elements
a. Extent to which a character or theme is proposed which creates a sense of place and arrival for the development within the community.
b. The identification and use of a language of materials and colors which enhances the character of the proposed development.
c. Extent to which there is a continuity throughout the proposed development through the establishment of specific features, elements, and details.
d. Attention to architectural detail which recognizes that buildings are finished three dimensional structures which are viewed from all sides and have a relationship with the pedestrian scale.
e. Extent to which mechanical equipment and service areas are appropriately screened.
3. Circulation
a. Amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed development and the ability of the existing street system to adequately handle said traffic. Where deficiencies exist, proposed traffic improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
b. Extent to which the design of the internal street system provides for the efficient and safe movement of traffic within and adjacent to the site.
c. The circulation system should follow the natural terrain of the site.
d. The circulation system should provide for the continuation of existing streets and provide for the connection of proposed streets to adjoining properties.
e. Extent to which the complete separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems is achieved.
f. Pedestrian street crossings should provide for safe crossings where there is good sight distance along the street or at a grade separated crossing.
4. Open Space
a. Existing trees, streams, natural features, and scenic views should be preserved and maintained where feasible and practicable.
Article X Zones 10-113
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. Extent to which an overall landscaping plan is developed and achieved to compliment the overall project.
c. Landscaping should be an integral part in the design of off - street parking areas to soften the impact of hard surfaced areas on adjacent areas.
d. Open spaces should not be isolated from one another by unrelated physical obstructions, but rather, should be linked together by open space corridors having a reasonable width.
e. Open spaces and landscaping along the perimeter of the site shall be compatible with adjoining uses and zones.
f. Extent to which a variety of plant materials and species are utilized throughout the project.
5. Utilities
a. Extent to which all necessary public utilities and facilities are available to service the proposed development, including police and fire protection, water and sewer services, and other services normally provided within the area. Where deficiencies exist, improvements that would correct such deficiencies may be considered.
6. Signage
a. Signage should be designed to protect and enhance the visual amenities of the site.
b. A sign package should be developed for the entire development that forms an integral part of the total design of the site.
c. All signs should be of a complimentary scale and proportion in design and in visual relationship to the site and buildings.
d. Extent to which signs define and enhance the architectural elements of a building or site.
e. Extent to which signage is consolidated and coordinated with the overall site design.
N. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the city's chief administrative official, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection C., 2. or C., 3., above, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
O. UTILITIES: All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
P. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone shall be subject to the time constraints
Article X Zones 10-114
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
noted below. Upon expiration of said time constraints, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining: (1) whether said Commercial-Planned Unit Development (C-PUD) Overlay Zone should revert to its original zoning designation; or (2) that the approved Development Plan should be voided. A public hearing may be initiated if the following condition applies:
1. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Stage II Development Plan obsolete. Substantial construction shall be deemed to mean the placing of footers and/or foundation.
Article X Zones 10-115
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.31 TOWN CENTER FORM DISTRICT (TCFD) ZONE
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Town Center Form District is to represent a high quality commercial development area that is aesthetically pleasing, visually unified and has a balanced functionality between pedestrian and vehicular uses. The vision for this area is one with buildings scaled and massed appropriately together and set closer to the street and to each other, inviting pedestrians to walk from place to place, with mixed uses that will serve a multitude of purposes for both the resident and visitor, and always with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare. The provisions of this section are intended to ensure that new development within the designated Town Center Form District is consistent with the desired pattern and characteristics of the district, promoting the following as applicable:
1. Safe access and that will facilitate traffic movement on Madison Pike;
2. A circulation system that balances multi-modal uses;
3. A mixture of moderately intense uses including civic, shopping, restaurants, offices and residences;
4. An aesthetically pleasing appearance of building mass, placement and materials, lighting, landscaping, and vehicular areas;
5. Coordinated development between adjacent properties including shared parking, vehicular and pedestrian movement and appearance;
6. Development in areas containing steep slopes and floodplains need to designed so as to minimize erosion, landslides and/or flood damage. Any grading or disturbance in such areas shall be mitigated and restored.
B. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING
1. Administration - The Town Center Form District development approval process is intended to provide an incentive to property owners and developers who are willing to develop in a particular form. Development within the “Town Center Form District” is development “by-right” which entails only an administrative review carried out by PDS and the City of Fort Wright.
Wherever there appears to be a conflict between the Town Center Form District regulations and other sections of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance, the Town Center Form District regulations shall apply. For development standards not covered by these Codes, all other sections of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
This section sets forth provisions for reviewing and approving development applications within the Town Center Form District. The intent is to ensure that all development occurring under the provisions of the Town Center Form District regulations is consistent with the provisions of
Article X Zones 10-116
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
these regulations as they pertain to height, siting, architectural standards, and building form. All elements of the Town Center Form District, including Definitions, Building Envelope Standards, Streetscape Standards and Architectural Standards, will be applied as part of the development review process. PDS staff and Fort Wright Chief Administrative Official are charged with review of all Town Center Form District applications.
2. Items for Discretionary Review – Table 1 identifies a list of discretionary items that shall be reviewed and validated by the City of Fort Wright’s Chief Administrative Official prior to the pre-application conference, per Section 10.31, B., 3 of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance.
3. Pre-application conference - Prior to filing for development plan review, the developer, petitioner, applicant or property owner shall attend a pre-application conference with PDS staff [and the City’s Chief Administrative Official] to discuss the development review process, be informed of the Town Center Form District, the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance requirements, and to confer about the application. No person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development plan, or any expression of any nature about the proposal made by any participant at the pre-application conference as a representation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. This meeting is intended to review the development plan and flag any issues in applying the regulations of the Town Center Form District regulations.
4. Stage II Development Plan Review - Projects may be built as a matter of right when they meet all of the standards of the Town Center Form District regulations. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for review. Following the formal submission of a Stage II Development Plan, the KCPC’s duly authorized representative/PDS Staff shall prepare a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. This recommendation shall be forwarded to the city’s Chief Administrative Official, Mayor, or his/her designee. Final review and approval by the City shall take place within 30 days from receipt of PDS staff recommendation.
Article X Zones 10-117
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-118
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-119
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
5. Compliance with the Code - Compliance with the Town Center Form District Code standards shall be evaluated based on the intent of the Code, how well the development conforms to the regulations and whether it is consistent with the city’s goals and plans to revitalize the Town Center Form District as detailed in the Madison Pike Corridor Land Use and Economic Development Study. Minor modifications shall be reviewed and discussed at the pre-application conference and shall be based on problems related to topography, or street grade, the location of streets, breaks and passages between buildings, signs, streetscape details, design issues related to the inclusion of existing buildings or mature trees as part of a development proposal.
6. Exceptions - Lots having less area than the five (5) acres required for development under the Town Center Form District and legally created prior to the adoption of these regulations may be occupied by one (1) single family dwelling unit.
7. Substantial Additions to Existing Developed Sites - The Town Center Form District regulations shall be applied when substantial additions to existing buildings are made. Substantial building additions are defined per the criteria established in the table below. Developments that do not fall under this criteria must meet the minimum setback requirements as contained within Subsection G.1 (b) and (c). Developments that do meet these criteria must comply with the requirements listed in Table 2.
Where Existing Substantial Increase
Structure Is An Addition Of
0 – 1,000 sq. ft. 101% or greater
1,001 – 10,000 sq. ft. 40% or greater
10,001 – 25,000 sq. ft. 30% or greater
25,001 – 50,000 sq. ft. 20% or greater
50,001 sq. ft. and above 10% or greater
8. Permit Process - Zoning and Building Permits will not be issued for building activity until the Stage II Development Plan review process is completed and a determination is made by the City or its duly authorized representative, that the proposal is consistent with the Town Center Form District regulations, per the approved plan.
Article X Zones 10-120
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-121
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
9. Pre-Certificate of Occupancy Meeting - At least thirty (30) days prior to expected occupancy, the applicant shall notify PDS staff and arrange for a pre-Certificate of Occupancy meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to review and address outstanding items as per the approved development plan, as well as discuss the terms and conditions for securing performance bonds for any public improvements as part of the development.
C. PERMITTED USES:
1. Banks, Savings and Loans, and Credit Unions
2. Barber and Beauty Shops, Shoe Repair, Nail Shops, Tailor Shop, Florist, Locksmith, Optician, Engraving, Self-Service Laundry
3. Billiards and Pool Halls
4. Clinics - Medical or Dental
5. Day Care Center
6. Dry Cleaning and Laundry Pick-up Station
7. Eating and Drinking Establishments, sit-down only (may include outdoor dining and/or live entertainment)
8. Educational Institutions
9. Funeral Homes
10. Hardware and Garden Supply Stores (no outdoor storage of products, materials, supplies or equipment)
11. Home Occupations as per Article 9.11
12. Libraries, Museums and Art Galleries, excluding Tattoo Parlors and Body Piercing
13. Movie and Entertainment Theaters (Indoor or Outdoor)
14. Offices, including Medical and Dental
15. Parking Garages
16. Pet shops and Pet Grooming, excluding Boarding, Outside Kennels and Runs
17. Photocopying, Printing and Publishing and Mailing Facilities
18. Publicly Owned and/or Operated Parks and/or Recreational Areas
19. Recreational Uses Other Than Those Publicly Owned and/or Operated, as Follows: Golf Courses and Driving Ranges, Health and Fitness Facilities
20. Retail Goods and Supplies, Sales and Repairs
21. Retail Sales of Food Products: Dairy, Meat, Vegetables, Bakery, Package Sales of Beer, Wine and Liquor
22. Single Family Residential Dwellings (Attached), Two or Multi-family Residential Dwellings, Assisted Living Communities
23. Studios for Design Professionals such as Interior Decorating, Landscape Architecture, Architecture, Engineering
24. Studios for Professional Work or teaching of any of Fine Arts
25. Ticket, Travel and Advertising Agencies
26. Video, DVD sales and rentals
Article X Zones 10-122
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
D. USE SPECIFICATIONS
1. Buildings which front onto a public street shall contain retail or office uses on the ground floor.
2. Movie and entertainment theaters may be exempt from the minimum story requirement and the maximum floor-to-floor story height requirements, but must have the appearance of at least a two-story building and meet all other requirements.
3. If a parking garage is incorporated into building design, two tiers of parking may be located above ground level without counting toward the measurement of building height. However, retail space must be incorporated on the ground floor, facing the street. Underground parking is permitted, not to count toward the measurement of building height.
E. SPECIAL PERMITTED USES
1. The following uses existing and in conformance with the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance at the time of adoption of these regulations are to be considered permitted uses and are subject to the review criteria in Table 2.
a. Single family residential (detached)
b. Convenience stores, with the dispensing of fuels
c. Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-ins
d. Animal hospitals
e. Tire sales, service and repair
F. DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for the purpose of the Town Center Form District zoning regulations. Terms not defined here may be defined elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. In such case, the definition contained in the Zoning Ordinance will be used. Certain terms in the Town Center Form District regulations are used in very specific ways, often excluding some of the meanings of common usage.
ANODIZED ALUMINUM: A metallic element that has good electrical and thermal conductivity, high reflectivity, and resistance to oxidation, which has undergone a special process of coating with a protective or decorative film.
ARCADE: An arched covered passageway or avenue (as between shops), or a series of arches with their columns or piers.
ASSISTED LIVING COMMUNITY: A series of living units on the same site, operated as one business entity, and certified under KRS 194A.707 to provide
Article X Zones 10-123
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
services for five or more adult persons not related within the third degree of consanguinity to the owner or manager.
AWNING: A cantilevered, projected or suspended cover over the sidewalk portion of the STREET. Also, roof-like coverings, usually of canvas or metal and often adjustable, placed over the sidewalk, windows, or doors to provide protection from sun and rain.
BALCONY: An exterior platform attached to the main building that projects from the wall of the building and is enclosed by a parapet or railing.
BAY or BAY WINDOW: Generally, a U-shaped enclosure, extending the interior space of the building outward of the exterior building wall/build to line (along its street side).
BUILD TO LINE (REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL)): The distance measured from the property line to the building. The building must be built-to (coincident with) the required building line (RBL) The RBL is a requirement, not a permissive minimum as is a setback.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of the lot within which buildings and parking areas will sit. The buildable area sets the limits of the building footprint now and in the future -- additions must be within the designated area.
BUILDING CORNER: This refers to the outside corner of a building (where the building mass is within an angle less than 180 degrees. Some of the proscriptions of the building envelope standards are specific to building corners. Inside corners, where the exterior space is within an angle less than 180 degrees, are not considered building corners.
BUILDING ENVELOPE STANDARDS: The building envelope standards establish the basic parameters governing building construction. This includes the envelope for building placement (in 3 dimensions) and certain required/permitted building elements, such as balconies and street walls.
COMMON LOT LINES: Lot lines shared by private lots, generally side lot lines.
CIVIC GREEN OR SQUARE: The term civic green is generally used to describe a formally configured, small lawn or park that is primarily unpaved. The term civic square is generally used to describe spaces that have more paved surface area. Civic greens and squares are often dedicated to important events and shall not include active recreation structures such as ball fields and courts, but may include temporary ice skating rinks. See the Outdoor Amenities Standards for the specific controls on civic greens and squares.
Article X Zones 10-124
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
CIVIC USE: Community uses open to the public including: meeting halls, libraries, schools, child care centers, police stations, fire stations, post offices (retail operations only, no primary distribution facilities), religious halls, museums, cultural societies, visual and performance arts, transit centers, and government functions, especially those involving the public.
COPING: Tile or brick used to cap or cover the top of a masonry wall.
CUT-OFF: Condition of an installed outdoor luminaire such that only 2.5 percent of all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer.
CUT-OFF, SEMI: Condition of an installed outdoor luminaire such that only five percent of all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer.
DEVELOPABLE AREA: The total area within a site that may be disturbed. Calculated by the total area of the site minus the area hillside area required to be preserved (not disturbed by grading) minus the area required to be preserved as the riparian buffer.
DORMERS: Small, roofed ancillary structures with windows providing light and air to occupiable space within the roof.
EASEMENT, ACCESS: An interest in land that is owned by one property owner, entitling other users to enter, and pass through the property in order to reach other surrounding properties.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION: A non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
2.5% Light Output @ 90°
10% of Light Output @80°
5% Light Output @ 90°
20% of Light Output @80°
Article X Zones 10-125
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
EAVE, EAVE HEIGHT: The lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall. Where used to limit building height in the Code, eave height shall be measured at the bottom of the top layer of roofing material at its outermost point from the building wall.
FENESTRATION: The arrangement, proportioning, and design of windows and doors in a building, allowing light and views between interior and exterior.
FINISHED FLOOR: The level base of the room that is covered by flooring materials such as tile, carpet, hardwood, located above the sub floor.
FOOTCANDLE: The unit of illuminance on a surface one square foot in area on which there is a uniformly distributed flux of one lumen, or the illuminance produced on a surface all points of which are at a distance of one foot from a directionally uniform point source of one candela.
GARAGE ENTRY: An opening (with curb cut) in the building façade and or street wall where vehicles may enter the block interior for general parking and business servicing.
GROUND FLOOR, GROUND STORY: The first level of buildings where at least 80 percent of the finished floor elevation is within 18 inches of the adjacent fronting sidewalk level. The next story above the ground story is the second floor.
INTERACTIVE AMENITY: Facilities for social gathering, recreation and interactive learning that are developed at street level directly adjacent to the street.
LUMEN: A unit of luminous flux. One foot-candle is one lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the lumen-output values shall be the initial lumen output rations of a lamp.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
MEZZANINE: A low-ceilinged story between two main stories of a building; especially an intermediate story that projects in the form of a balcony.
OPEN SPACE: Any publicly dedicated or privately owned area of land or water that is permanently preserved and maintained. Such an area may be predominately in a natural condition or improved or modified for uses such as recreation, education, aesthetics, cultural or natural resource management or public health and safety.
Article X Zones 10-126
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space that is (1) owned in common and maintained by the owners of lots in a subdivision (i.e. a homeowners association), or (2) owned by a private individual or entity but managed and maintained for common use by residents, occupants or customers of the development. Common open space shall be preserved by either a conservation easement or deed restriction.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Open space that is owned by a private individual entity but is protected or maintained under a recorded conservation easement.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: Open space that is accessible to the general public.
OUTDOOR DINING FACILITY: An outdoor dining area connected or attached to an indoor restaurant, bar, tavern or nightclub.
PARAPET: A low wall or railing to protect the edge of a roof.
PARKING, RESERVED: Parking not available to the public, but only to specifically identified users (either a single user per space or a set of users for a group of spaces), whether for free or at a fee that shall not exceed the prevailing market rate.
PARKING, SHARED: Parking available to the public on an unreserved basis for free or at the same fee for all users, which shall not exceed the prevailing market rate. Time limits may be imposed to ensure turnover. Hours of public availability may also be restricted.
MULTI USE PATHWAY: Interconnecting paved ways that provide pedestrian and bicycle passage running from a street to either a street, alley or an interior parking area. The area within a multi use pathway shall be a public access easement or public right of way.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface capable of being permeated, having pores or openings that permit liquids to pass through.
PUBLIC ART: Art that is visually or physically accessible to the public and that provided by a private entity as a community benefit. Public art encompasses the broadest definition of visual art including the imaginative use and interplay of artistic disciplines. Area of public art is measured by the square footage of the width multiplied by the depth of the structure, at it widest and deepest points. In the case of two-dimensional objects (wall murals, etc) the area shall be determined by height multiplied by the width.
PUBLIC SPACE: Property (streets, alleys, civic greens and squares, and parks) within the public domain within which citizens may exercise their rights.
Article X Zones 10-127
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
RIPARIAN BUFFER: Area adjacent to a flowing waterway, including stream banks, vegetation. For the purpose of this ordinance, the riparian buffer is reflective of and interpreted from the Federal Insurance Administration’s Flood Insurance Study floodway boundaries, plus an additional fifty (50) feet, however, no less than fifty (50) feet in total width (measured from the outline of the creek, as defined within LINK GIS drain layer).
SEATING, FORMAL: A long bench seat for two or more persons.
SEATING, INFORMAL: Planters, ledges, or similar seating features, and measuring a minimum of 30 inches in width and 15 inches in height.
STREET WALL: A vertical surface at the build-to line used to screen the off-street parking area from the street while maintaining the building facade along a given block face.
STREETSCAPE: Improvements to a property, including paving, tree and/or other decorative plantings, lighting, and the placement of street furniture, within the street.
TRANSOM WINDOW: A window or pane above a door, whether rectangular or arched (fanlight); also, a window that is hinged along its top edge.
UNIFORMITY RATIO: The relationship between the average level of illumination and the lowest level of illumination for a given area. For example, if the uniformity ratio is 3:1 and the average illumination of an area is 3.0 foot-candles, then the lowest level of illumination allowed in the given area would be 1.0 foot-candles.
VERGE STRIP: A strip or border with grass or landscaping that separates the sidewalk from the street.
WALL OPENING: Any break in the wall or façade.
WHERE CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET: A number of regulations apply only where the subject is “clearly visible from the street.” A building element more than 30 feet from the build to line/street (such as items facing a common lot line more than 31 feet away from a build to line and/or street) is by definition not clearly visible from the street. Also common and/or party walls are by definition not clearly visible from the street.
G. BUILDING ENVELOPE STANDARDS
1. Siting Specifications
Article X Zones 10-128
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
a. Minimum Tract for Development
(1) Five (5) acres; however, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved site may be permitted providing the proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the new site has been a part of the originally approved site plan layout. Substantial additions to existing developed sites must meet the requirements contained in Section 10.31, B., 6.
b. Setbacks from Street Frontages (See Figure 1)
(1) No minimum.
(2) Build to Line (Maximum) – 20 feet from the right of way, except in any of the following cases:
(a) Outdoor amenities are located between the right-of-way and the build-to line, in which case no more than 50 feet from the right of way.
(b) Development sites containing hillsides with slopes of 20% or greater may modify the build-to line to accommodate front parking, but only subject to the requirements of subsection K., 1., a.
c. Side and rear yard setbacks
(1) No setback requirements, except when adjacent to a residential use above the first floor, then a minimum side yard of 5 feet shall be maintained.
(2) Where adjoining a residential zone outside of the form district a minimum 50 feet from the property line must be maintained.
d. Use and Building Size Requirements
(1) Maximum building footprint are as follows:
(a) Single structure: 15,000 square feet, however, one building per development tract may have a maximum footprint of up to 30,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum size of each individual tenant/occupant:
(a) In a single-use structure: 30,000 square feet, however, one building per development tract may
Article X Zones 10-129
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
contain up to 60,000 square feet.
(b) In a multi-use structure: Calculated by total number of stories
e. Multiple Principal Structures
(1) Either multiple principal structures or common wall construction is permitted. Principal structures on the same or adjacent lots, constructed as detached buildings, shall maintain following minimum separations:
(a) Building wall with entrance or exit: 20 feet.
(b) Building wall with no entrance or exit: 10 feet
f. Building Frontage (See Figure 2 and 3)
(1) At least 50% of the linear street frontage of each lot shall be occupied by a building at the required setback/build to line.
(2) Open unenclosed public seating or similar areas, fountains, and outdoor amenities are permitted to encroach beyond the build-to line as long as the corner requirements are met per Section 10.31, G., 1. h.
g. Building Entrances
(1) Buildings shall have at least one public entrance on all façades facing the street and at least one where parking is located.
(2) Buildings shall have one public entrance oriented toward the required Riparian Buffer or toward any required Outdoor Amenity or Open Space (see Section 10., I., 2., and 10., I., 3). No service entrances are permitted to be oriented towards the required Riparian Buffer or toward any required Outdoor Amenity or Open Space.
(3) On corner lots, entrances may be on the front façade or at the corner of the building.
(4) There shall be functioning entry door(s) along the street façade spaced at a distance of no less than 60 feet per structure (including those with common wall construction).
(5) Garage entries shall not exceed 16 feet clear height and 24 feet clear width and shall not be sited within 100 feet of the block corner or another garage entry on the same block. Garage entry portals may be set back up to 24 inches behind the surrounding façade, but may not project beyond the building facade.
Article X Zones 10-130
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
h. Corners (See Figure 4)
(1) Buildings on corner lots shall be constructed at the build to line along both sides of the street for a minimum of 15 linear feet.
(2) If a principal building or tenant entrance is at the corner, the entrance may be recessed within the 15 feet at a 45-degree (45o) angle to both streets.
Article X Zones 10-131
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-132
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Commentary: Buildings overseeing the street and public areas with active fronts, contribute to a vital and safe public space. Enliven facades of retail or commercial space by providing visibility into building interiors or merchandising display windows.
2. Height Specifications (See Figure 6)
a. Building Height
(1) Each building shall have a minimum of two (2) stories and shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height.
(2) If a parking garage is incorporated into building design, two tiers of parking may be located above ground level without counting toward the measurement of building height. However, retail space must be incorporated on the ground floor, facing the street. Underground parking is permitted, not to count toward the measurement of building height.
(3) Maximum height of building with only residential uses above the first floor is 90 feet.
b. Floor Height
(1) Maximum floor-to-floor story height limit for stories other than the ground story is 14 feet.
(2) All upper stories shall each have a minimum of 9 feet 4 inches clear (floor to ceiling height) and shall be useable floor space, unless otherwise regulated by Section 10.31, D., 2.
3. Building Element Specifications (See Figure 7 and 8)
a. Ground Story Fenestration
(1) No blank/uninterrupted walls shall be facing streets, access drives, sidewalks, outdoor amenities, recreational areas or other public uses.
(2) Ground story façades shall have between 50 and 90 percent fenestration (measured as a percentage of the façade that is between 2 and 10 feet above the fronting streets, sidewalks, outdoor amenities or recreational areas) with a combination of two or more of the following animating features:
Commentary: Retail helps to make the street active and interesting.
Article X Zones 10-133
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(a) Transparent doorways and entry areas;
(b) Display windows at least 50% open to the business interior with a minimum height of 8 feet and having a maximum sill height of 3 feet;
(c) Arcades; with a minimum clear height of 11 feet (signage or lighting may encroach) at the sidewalk (street), and a minimum clear width (from frontage or build to line to inside column face) of 10 feet. The area within an arcade shall be open to all public access. Supporting Column/Pier shall be located no more than 20 inches from the back of the curb (minimum 60 inches public access easement/sidewalk within the arcades’ clear width). (See Figure 9)
(d) Projections and windows.
(3) Awnings and overhangs in increments of 15 feet widths or less are permitted with the following requirements:
(a) Minimum 10 feet clear height above sidewalk, minimum 6 feet depth out from the building façade (Maximum to curb or tree-planting strip/furniture zone, whichever is closer).
(b) Canvas cloth or equivalent (no shiny or reflective materials), metal or glass.
(c) No internal illumination through the awning/overhang.
(d) Lettering on awning limited to five (5) inches tall on vertically hanging fabric at curb side of awning.
(e) No one-quarter cylinder configurations.
(4) Other features, such as public art are permitted.
b. Upper Stories – Fenestration
(1) Walls facing streets, sidewalks, outdoor amenities, recreational areas, off street parking areas or other public uses shall have between 50 and 70 percent fenestration (see Figure 5).
Article X Zones 10-134
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-135
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Commentary: It is recommended that when development is proposed in hillside areas, that consideration be given to fitting the proposed development to the natural configurations of an existing landscape.
H. HILLSIDE PROTECTION
1. The following requirements shall be met for development within areas identified as having 15% slope or greater.
a. Slope Determination
Topographic information has been created and stored by the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Department of the PDS. The data comprises polygons which contain the generalized slope of Kenton County derived from a 10-foot resolution slope grid, created from the elevation grid for Kenton County.
b. Slope Setbacks
Proposed structures shall be set back from either the toe or top of the slope to a structure, whichever applies, a minimum of 10 feet, unless otherwise required by a geotechnical investigation or retaining walls are used. These setbacks do not supercede the minimum setbacks required by the Kentucky Building Code. Setbacks shall be measured as shown in Figure 11.
2. In areas where 15% slopes or greater will be disturbed, a geotechnical evaluation must be completed by a registered professional engineer and submitted with the Stage II Development Plan for review. All disturbances must follow the recommendations of the geotechnical evaluation. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the site, the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall require written authorization from a registered professional engineer that the proposed development is in compliance with the specifications as contained within the geotechnical investigation.
3. Areas containing slopes of 35% or more shall not be disturbed.
4. Grading and Drainage
a. All excavations on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) shall be made to approximate grade or subgrade elevations consistent with approved plans. Applications for grading permits must include an approved Land Disturbance Permit from Sanitation District No.1. Grading plans must be based on adequate surveys and soil
Article X Zones 10-136
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
investigations. The Kenton County Subdivision Regulations refer to general soil conditions that exist in the area.
b. Excavation, Movement of Soil, Tree Removal, and Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Section 9.7 of the City of Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance currently states:
(1) No governmental entity or other person or entity shall strip, excavate, fill, or otherwise move soil, trees, or other vegetation, except for minor changes such as: the filling of small depressions, removal of vegetation which is diseased or endangering the public safety, etc. without first insuring that all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the legislative body, if applicable, have been fulfilled and then obtaining a permit.
(2) The required permit may be issued after determining that the resulting change in grade, or removal of trees and other vegetation, in the affected area will be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit normal excavation or grading incidental to the construction or alteration of a building on the premises for which a building permit has been granted as required otherwise in this ordinance.
(3) Erosion and Sedimentation Control: Erosion and sedimentation controls for excavation, movement of soil, and tree removal, shall be planned and applied according to the following:
(a) The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time during development.
(b) When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of time.
(c) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas exposed during development.
(d) Sediment basins (debris basins or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing development.
Commentary: It is necessary to minimize problems associated with water runoff and soil erosion incurred in grading these slopes while preserving unique scenic resources and wildlife habitat.
Article X Zones 10-137
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(e) Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
(f) Permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development.
(g) The development shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the least erosion potential.
(h) Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
c. In addition to the above, the following requirements shall be met:
(1) Within the allowable disturbance area, finished cut and fill slopes shall be constructed to a maximum 3:1 (33.3%) slope or flatter (unless retaining walls are used) unless otherwise approved by the city based on results of a geotechnical investigation.
(2) Remove good topsoil from areas to be graded or filled, and preserve it for use in finishing the grading of all slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%).
(3) Stabilize all graded areas with native vegetation or erosion control blankets as soon as grading is completed or work is interrupted for 30 days or more.
(4) Use mulch to stabilize areas temporarily where final grading must be delayed.
(5) Roughen the surface of all slopes during construction to retain water, increase infiltration and facilitate vegetation.
5. Slope Restoration
a. Cuts and fills shall be restored to a maximum 3:1 (33.3%) slope or flatter and re-vegetated. Slope breaks, such as benches, may be used to reduce the length of cut and fill slopes to limit sheet and rill erosion and prevent gullying (see Figure 12). The required spacing between benches shall be in accordance with the Kentucky Department of Highways Geotechnical Manual. Other methods, such as geotextiles, may be used, however, they must be installed by a qualified geotechnical engineer.
b. Cuts and fills that are controlled by retaining walls must meet the requirements of this ordinance (see Section 10.31, O).
c. Re-vegetated slopes shall include both native trees and shrubs, as per the recommended Plant lists contained within the Planting
Article X Zones 10-138
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Manual and Landscape Regulation Guidelines within the text of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance.
I. RIPARIAN PROTECTION, OPEN SPACE AND OUTDOOR AMENITIES
1. Riparian Buffer Requirements
a. The minimum Riparian Buffer width shall be reflective of and interpreted from the Federal Insurance Administration’s Flood Insurance Study floodway boundaries, plus an additional 50 feet, however, no less than fifty (50) feet in total width (measured from outline of the creek, as defined within LINK GIS drain layer).
b. If the applicant can demonstrate that the floodway boundaries in their location are inaccurate, boundary revisions may be made, in agreement with the city.
c. Building facades must include additional entrances when oriented toward the Riparian Buffer.
d. The minimum required Riparian Buffer width shall remain undisturbed and restricted in use for flood control and restoration, as regulated in Section 9.25, C., 3., of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance.
e. An applicant has the option to obtain additional open space credits by applying a conservation easement to the entire area comprising the Riparian Buffer within the parcel. In such cases, a pedestrian and bicycle trail may be developed within the Riparian Buffer, at least ten (10) feet in width (See Figure 13), in cooperation with the recipient entity. A conservation easement shall count towards:
Figure 12: Benching
Benching is a variation on sloping, and consists of cutting the sides of the excavation to form one or more horizontal levels or steps, usually with vertical or near-vertical surfaces between levels. Soil type and local conditions determine the max horizontal and vertical dimensions of a benched excavation. Often a combination of benching and sloping is used.
Figure 11: Slope Setbacks
Cuts and fills shall not be placed so close as to endanger adjoining property.
Article X Zones 10-139
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(1) An additional fifty percent (50%) of the required Open Space within the proposed development (See Section I., 2), and
(2) A ten percent (10%) reduction in the required off-street parking landscaping requirements.
(3) A copy of a recorded conservation easement assuring the permanent protection, preservation and maintenance of the Riparian Buffer within the proposed development shall be submitted by the developer and recipient entity (i.e. the City of Fort Wright) prior to the recording of a plat or the issuance of a clearing/grading or zoning/building permit, whichever occurs first.
2. Open Space and Outdoor Amenities Requirements
a. Definitions: For the purposes of the regulations within this section of the ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
Open Space: Any publicly dedicated or privately owned area of land or water that is permanently preserved and maintained. Such an area may be predominately in a natural condition or improved or modified for uses such as recreation, education, aesthetics, cultural or natural resource management or public health and safety.
Figure 13: Shared Use Paths
Article X Zones 10-140
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Outdoor Amenity: Improvements within the developed area that encourage outdoor activities and public interaction.
b. The amount of open space and outdoor amenities required shall be calculated as follows:
Table 3: Open Space and Outdoor Amenity Requirement
Total area of development
Open Space*
Outdoor amenity*
5 acres or larger
15%
10%
Less than 5 acres adjacent to existing approved site
-
15%
* Percentage of buildable area (calculated as the area of the lot within which buildings and parking will sit)
c. Table 4 describes which uses may be credited toward each of the required open space and outdoor amenity requirement.
d. Additional requirements for Outdoor Amenities are as follows:
(1) All outdoor amenity areas (except for sidewalks, and multi use paths) shall be accessible by sidewalks connecting with all surrounding buildings and a clear view through the public space must be maintained for public safety and urban design purposes
(2) All outdoor amenity areas other than planting beds and interior parking lot landscaping shall have seating at a rate of not less than 1 seat per 400 square feet (lineal feet in the case of multi use paths) of space and located within the outdoor space. Seating may be formal or informal and may include benches, planters, ledges, or similar seating features, and shall be a minimum of 12 inches in depth, 30 inches in width and 15 inches in height.
(3) Required outdoor amenities areas may not be counted as open space area.
e. Additional requirements for Open Space are as follows:
(1) If additional development on an existing approved site is proposed, then the total open space needs may be recalculated and credits may be shared, provided the open
Article X Zones 10-141
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
spaces are adjacent and accessible to both developments. An agreement from the property owners of the development sites involved must be submitted with the application.
(2) When an area is to be preserved as private or common open space, prior to the recording of a plat or the issuance of a grading/zoning/building permit, whichever occurs first, the developer and recipient entity may apply a recorded conservation easement to the area of the proposed open space, and submit documentation assuring its permanent protection, preservation and maintenance by the City or other responsible entity as approved by the City.
(3) When an area is to be preserved as public open space, determination must be made by the city if the space is accessible by and a benefit to the general public. Prior to the recording of a plat or the issuance of a grading/zoning/building permit, whichever occurs first, the developer shall permanently dedicate the open space to public use in a manner acceptable to the recipient entity and submit documentation that the property will be accepted by the city or other responsible entity as approved by the city.
Article X Zones 10-142
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-143
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
J. TRANSPORTATION STANDARDS
1. Transportation connections are to be multi modal and useable by the public.
2. Vehicular
a. Direct vehicular connections are required between all uses, existing and future.
b. Developments that create public and private streets shall connect with and provide for future extension of the street network.
c. Developments that adjoin vacant sites shall be designed to accommodate future connections with access easements if necessary.
d. Easements and agreements must be identified on the submitted development plans and submitted prior to the pre-Certificate of Occupancy meeting per Section 10.31, B, 9.
3. Pedestrian
a. Direct pedestrian connections are required between all uses, existing and future.
b. Developments that create public and private streets shall connect with and provide for future extension of pedestrian access.
c. All uses within the form district shall provide pedestrian connections with adjacent uses outside the form district.
d. Developments that adjoin vacant sites shall be designed to accommodate future connections with access easements if necessary. Easements and agreements must be identified on the submitted development plans and submitted prior to the pre-Certificate of Occupancy meeting per Section 10.31, B, 9.
e. All development shall provide clearly defined safe pedestrian access to the public right of way, to the building entrances1, to bus stops, and connecting to or including installation of the bicycle and pedestrian multi-use trail within the required Riparian Buffer.
f. With KYTC approval, pedestrian access is required to be located within abutting rights-of-way and across driveways with striping or contrasting pavements, or raised surfaces, that meet Kenton County Subdivision Regulations.
g. Sidewalks and trails must connect with any presently adjacent sidewalks and shall be a minimum of five (5) unobstructed feet in width. Sidewalks and trail connections are required to be constructed and completed at the time of street construction.
1 See Parking Lot Standards for pedestrian access requirements
Article X Zones 10-144
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
h. Construction of the bicycle and pedestrian multiuse trail shall in no case be less than ten (10) feet in width, with vertical grades no steeper than three percent (3%), and designed as shown in Figure 13.
4. Bicycle
a. Direct bicycle connections are required between all uses, existing and future.
b. Developments that create public and private streets shall connect with and provide for future extension of bicycle access. Bicycle lanes, shared use paths, paved and marked shoulders, or wider outside lanes designated for bicycles and with signage shall be installed on both sides of all streets with the following standards.
(1) Shared Use Paths – See Figure 13
(2) Bicycle Lanes – see Figure 15
(3) Paved Shoulders shall be minimum 4 feet in width.
(4) Wide outside lanes must be at least 14 feet in width.
c. Connections are required to be constructed and completed at the time of street construction.
d. Developments that adjoin vacant sites shall be designed to accommodate future connections with access easements if necessary. Easements and agreements must be identified on the submitted development plans and submitted prior to the pre-Certificate of Occupancy meeting per Section 10.31, B, 9.
e. Construction of the bicycle and pedestrian shared use trail shall in no case be less than ten (10) feet in width, with grades no steeper than three percent, and designed as shown in Figure 13.
5. Transit
a. Prior to plan submittal the Transit Authority of Northern Kentucky (TANK) shall be consulted on the appropriate location, number, and design of bus stops. Documentation from TANK must be submitted with application.
Commentary: The intent of the following regulations is to manage access in a manner consistent with the City’s desire, described in the Madison Pike Corridor Land Use and Economic Development Study, to mitigate congestion and increase capacity of Madison Pike. It is of the utmost importance to maintain and improve the functional quality of KY 17 for all future private and public activities within the corridor and for those traversing the corridor on a daily basis to destinations elsewhere.
Article X Zones 10-145
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
6. Access Management
a. All left-turn ingress and egress, except at signalized intersections existing at the time of the adoption of these regulation and identified in the Madison Pike Corridor Land Use and Economic Development Study, shall be considered a temporary right-of-way and may be terminated, reduced, limited to certain turning movements, or caused to be relocated by the city at such time as the particular use(s) served by the access point changes and/or the property is otherwise provided an alternate means of access. All such temporary access points shall be noted on the plan by being clearly labeled “temporary access only” and included in the submission of the record plat.
b. Design of the non-traversable median, roundabouts or other continuous flow facility shall identify locations of left-turn in only movements, subject to approval of the city and Kentucky Transportation Cabinet.
c. Sites with multiple buildings shall have joint access.
d. Properties on arterial or collector streets shall provide access drives (joint use driveways and/or cross access easement) or access roads, including pedestrian access to allow circulation for commercial-to-commercial, office, industrial or multi-family. Access roads or drives may be in front of the property or in the rear or side. If planned as a public or private road the design shall conform to all applicable regulations of the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations.
e. Spacing of access points along the cross access drive or frontage road shall be a minimum of 100 feet or as otherwise approved by the city.
f. Access drives shall be at least twenty-two (22) feet in width and with stub outs for future development.
g. Easements and agreements must be identified on the submitted development plans and submitted prior to the pre-Certificate of Occupancy meeting per Section 10.31, B, 9.
h. When property proposed to be developed abuts KY 17, the non-mountable median and landscaping must be implemented by the property owner in coordination with the City. Construction shall be in conformance with all City and KYTC requirements. Figure 14 represents a street cross section of KY 17 (for illustration purposes only). Subject to City approval, funds may be escrowed with the City to allow for a coordinated design, planning and implementation process for these improvements.
Article X Zones 10-146
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-147
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
K. PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING
1. Location of parking
a. Parking shall not be permitted between the property line and the build-to-line, except in the following cases:
(1) Development sites containing hillside slopes of 20% or greater are permitted a maximum of two (2) rows of parking, not exceeding 20% of the total allowable parking for the site, but only when it can be demonstrated that slope conditions make provisions for adquate parking economically unreasonable. Where clearly visible from the stree, this parking area must be screened with earth berms, landscaping and/or a street wall
b. Parking within the side yard is permitted, the total width of which may not exceed 15% of the total linear lot frontage.
2. Number of Parking Spaces
a. Section 11.2 of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance applies with the following conditions:
(1) A 10% minimum reduction in the number of required spaces is required and a maximum allowable reduction of 50% shall be permitted.
b. All parking spaces may be located off site but must be connected by pedestrian access (see pedestrian connection requirements) and must be located within 500 feet of the building. All parties shall execute a properly drawn legal instrument/agreement providing for the use of the off-site parking spaces. This instrument shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the city and shall be executed by all parties concerned assuring the availability of the number of spaces designated for off-site and shall be recorded in the City Clerk’s Office.
c. Twenty percent (20%) of required parking may be pervious surface and may be counted as open space credits.
d. No maximum number of spaces if parking structures are utilized.
e. Underground parking shall count towards the total number of allowable parking spaces.
3. Connections between parking lots
Article X Zones 10-148
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
a. Vehicular and pedestrian connections are required between parking lots in adjacent developments.
4. Pedestrian circulation
a. Clearly defined safe access must be provided from parking facilities, adjacent public rights of way and activity areas to building entrances.
b. Parking lots must have walkways minimum five feet in width.
c. Walkways must be lighted and must connect parking areas with building entrances. Walkways must be differentiated by means of landscaping, alternative paving materials or change in grade.
d. Walkways adjacent to parking spaces must be 5 feet wide with separation by curbing, bollards, bumper blocks, elevation 4 inches high, or landscaping.
e. Walkways that cross drive aisles must be defined by stripes, contrasting pavement materials, elevated pavement or combination.
f. Walkways shall not pass behind a row of parking spaces.
g. All developments must provide for future pedestrian circulation connecting parking lots or alleys, by hard surface walkways or similar.
5. Street wall requirement
a. Any side yard parking areas shall have a street wall along the lot frontage, minimum height of 4 feet and a maximum height of 6 feet, with a required rail or fence to be anodized aluminum or steel.
b. Street wall heights are measured relative to the adjacent sidewalk or to the ground elevation when not fronting a sidewalk.
c. Street walls may be set back (or forward) not more than 8 inches from the build to line or adjacent building façade.
d. A vehicle entry gate (opaque, maximum 18 feet wide) and a pedestrian entry gate (maximum 6 feet wide) are both allowed within any required street wall length.
6. Landscaping
a. See Section 9.17 of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance.
7. Bicycle parking
a. For non-single-family residential uses, two bicycle parking spaces are required plus one additional space per 25,000 square feet GFA (Gross Floor Area) of building area.
Article X Zones 10-149
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. The parking spaces must be a minimum of 2 feet from a parallel wall and 2.5 feet from a perpendicular wall (See Figure 16).
c. If located on or next to a sidewalk, a minimum of 5 feet of clear sidewalk must remain when bicycles are parked at the device.
d. If the device is installed at a transit stop, its location cannot impede transit boarding.
e. If the installation is near a curb cut on a street with motor vehicle parking, at least three feet of space must remain between a bicycle parked at the rack and the curb.
f. Whenever the device will be placed in the public right-of-way, the appropriate jurisdiction must approve the locations.
8. Loading/Unloading areas
a. Shall be screened with same materials as main building so as not to be visible front adjacent public streets and residential uses.
b. Front loading docks are not permitted.
L. STREETSCAPE STANDARDS
1. Street trees
a. Street trees shall be required. The minimum planting strip for street trees shall be four (4) feet, with plant material of one of the following:
(1) 1 tree every 60 feet on center (maximum) from List A (shade trees)*
(2) 1 tree every 60 feet on center (maximum) from List F (street trees)*
(3) 1 tree every 60 feet on center (maximum) from List B (flowering and non-flowering trees)*
*Plant lists can be found in the “Planting Manual and Landscape Regulation Guidelines” within the text of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance.
Figure 16: Bicycle parking stalls
Article X Zones 10-150
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. Facades with customer entrance or visible from streets, sidewalks, outdoor amenities, recreational areas or other public uses: One tree planted within 15 feet of the building, for each 50 ft of façade length.
c. Streetscape elements such as brick pavers, benches, waste bins, planters, and window boxes are encouraged and should be coordinated with the city to ensure compatibility (see Figure 17).
2. Verge/Planting Strips
a. Along State Route 17, a minimum verge strip of 10 feet shall be maintained with planting types that meet the requirements of the existing landscape regulations. This may be located within the right-of-way per the approval of an encroachment permit from the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet.
b. Clustering of trees along State Route 17 may be permitted as long as the same numbers of trees are planted. Trees must be spaced properly to accommodate tree size at maturity.
c. All landscaping along State Route 17 must be set back a minimum of 3 feet from the edge of pavement or per approval of Kentucky Transportation Cabinet encroachment permit, whichever is greater.
3. Utility Installation
a. All utilities shall be underground.
M. ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
1. Standards for building walls - Where clearly visible from streets, sidewalks, outdoor amenities, recreational areas or other public uses.
a. Materials - The following materials are permitted (See Figure 18):
Figure 17: Streetscape elements
Article X Zones 10-151
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(1) Brick and tile masonry
(2) Stucco (cementitious finish)
(3) Native stone (or synthetic equivalent)
(4) Pre-cast masonry (for trim and cornice elements only)
(5) Gypsum reinforced fiber concrete (GFRC – for trim elements only)
(6) Exterior Insulation Finish System fascias, with moderate finish texture
b. Configurations and Techniques
(1) Walls
(a) Wall openings shall be taller than they are wide except as otherwise permitted for atriums and arcades.
(b) Wall openings shall not span vertically more than one story except as otherwise permitted for atriums and arcades.
(c) Wall materials shall be consistent horizontally (i.e. joints between different materials must be horizontal and continue around corners) except for towers, chimneys and piers.
c. Stucco (cementitious finish)
(1) Smooth or sand finish only, no “cake icing” finish.
2. Standards for roofs and parapets - Where clearly visible from streets, sidewalks, outdoor amenities, recreational areas or other public uses.
a. Materials: The following materials are permitted:
(1) Clay or concrete (faux clay)
(2) Tile (barrel or flat roman)
(3) Slate (Equivalent synthetic or better)
(4) Metal (Standing seam 5-v crimp, equivalent or better)
(5) Shingle
Figure 18: Wall materials
Article X Zones 10-152
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
b. Only the following configurations and techniques are permitted (See Figure 19 and 20):
(1) Roof shapes
(a) Side gabled
(b) Front gabled
(c) Cross gabled
(d) Simple hipped
(e) Pyramidal hipped
(f) Cross hipped
(g) Gable-on-hipped
(h) Flat with parapet
(2) Pitched roofs (exclusive of roofs behind parapet walls):
(a) The primary ridge beam shall run parallel to the street.
(b) Simple hip and gable roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 25 and 50 percent.
(c) Mechanical equipment must be screened from view from the ground from all public use areas, adjacent to the site in question.
(d) Sloping roofs with a vertical rise that exceeds one-half the average height of supporting walls as measured along each facade are not permitted.
(3) Overhang (See Figure 21)
(a) Eaves must overhang at least 24 inches on primary structures.
(b) Rakes (gable end) must overhang at least 18 inches.
(c) Balconies must be minimum of four (4) feet of platform and be accessible from the interior.
c. Parapet Roofs and Other Features (See Figure 22)
(1) Parapets, towers, or cornices (See Figure 23 and 24), both incorporating a peaked or a flat-faced elevation shall be incorporated into each building design in the development.
(2) Parapet walls sufficiently high enough to screen rooftop mechanical from viewing shall conceal roofs of building structures that are generally flat.
(3) Parapet height shall be measured at the top of the Parapet, including any coping. An additional 3 feet in height by 12 feet
Article X Zones 10-153
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
in width (or 15 percent of the façade, whichever is greater) is permitted for a section of the Parapet emphasizing the building’s main street entry or a corner. Any other variations regarding building heights must receive a variance.
(4) Facades that exceed 100 feet in length measured along the street frontage shall have variations in roofline or rooftop parapet.
Article X Zones 10-154
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-155
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Article X Zones 10-156
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Figure 25: Bay Window
3. Standards for Windows and Doors - Where clearly visible from streets, sidewalks, outdoor amenities, recreational areas or other public uses. (Exceptions include religious buildings.)
a. Materials: The following materials are permitted.
(1) Windows of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel
(2) Window glass must be clear, with light transmission at the ground story at least 90%, and at least 75% for the upper stories
(3) Specialty windows may utilize stained or opalescent glass
(4) Window screens shall be black or gray
(5) Screen frames shall match window frame material or dark anodized
(6) Doors of wood, clad wood, or metal
b. Configurations and Techniques
(1) The following requirements apply to all windows:
(a) Openings for windows, windowpanes, and doors shall be taller than they are wide. Transom windows are not included in the measurements of this requirement.
(b) Windows may be ganged horizontally (maximum 3 per group) if subdivided by a mullion, column, pier or wall section that is at least 7inches wide.
(c) Windows shall be no closer than 30 inches to building corners, excluding bay windows and where the building corner is also a block corner.
(d) Bay windows shall have a minimum interior clear width at main wall of 4 feet; projection not greater than 36 inches beyond the build to line; walls and windows shall be between 90 degrees (perpendicular) and 0 degrees (parallel) relative to the primary wall from which they project. Bay windows may not project into any adjacent right-of way or property line (see Figure 25).
(e) Exterior shutters shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window (1/2 the width), even if inoperable.
Article X Zones 10-157
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Figure 27: Recessed doorway with view into building
Figure 26: Ganged Windows
(2) The following requirements apply to all upper-story windows:
(a) Windows shall be double-hung, single-hung, awning, or casement windows.
(b) Fixed windows are permitted.
(c) Egress windows may be installed according to the appropriate building code.
(3) Shopfront (ground floor) windows and doors:
(a) Single panes of glass not larger than 8 feet in height by 4 feet wide.
(b) Ground floor windows shall not be made opaque by window treatments (excepting operable sunscreen devices within the air conditioned space) and shall allow a minimum 50 percent of surface view into the building for a depth of at least 20 feet.
(4) Doors
(a) Double-height entryways (those that span more than one story) are not allowed.
(b) Entryways may be set at a 45-degree (45o) angle to the door and shall have a clear view of the interior as shown in Figure 27.
N. STREET WALL STANDARDS
1. Materials
a. Native stone (carved with local and traditional techniques) and equivalent imitation stone
b. Metal – Wrought iron, welded steel and/or aluminum (black) (chain link fence is not permitted).
c. Brick
Article X Zones 10-158
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
d. Stucco on concrete block (or poured) only with brick or stone coping.
e. A combination of materials; i.e. stone piers with brick infill panels.
2. Configurations and Techniques
a. Stucco Street Walls shall have a hardy species of climbing vine planted along them.
b. Metal work may additionally be treated to imitate a copper patina.
c. All Street Wall facades shall be as carefully designed as the building façade, with the finished side out, i.e. the “better” side facing the street.
O. RETAINING WALL STANDARDS
1. Materials: When retaining walls are used, the following materials may be used:
a. Native stone and equivalent cultured/imitation stone (carved with local and traditional techniques)
b. Brick
2. Configurations
a. Walls not designed and approved by a registered professional engineer may not exceed four (4) feet in height. Walls greater than six (6) feet in height must be screened in a planting bed of not less than 10 feet in width, parallel to the exposed side of the retaining wall, with one of the following:
(1) 1 tree per 35 linear feet, or fraction thereof, from List A (shade trees), plus double row hedge from List E (evergreen/broadleaf shrubs)*
(2) 1 tree per 20 linear feet, or fraction thereof, from List B (flowering and non-flowering trees), plus a double row hedge from List E (evergreen/broadleaf shrubs)*
* Plant lists can be found in the Planting Manual and Landscape Regulation Guidelines within the text of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance.
b. A series of smaller retaining walls is preferable to one large wall, provided that the series of walls can be built without excessive removal of vegetation during construction, and must be re-vegetated.
Article X Zones 10-159
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
P. COLORS
1. Building Wall Colors
a. Colors chosen for the building facades shall be of the same color palette/shade regardless of whether the structure is used as single or multi tenant space.
b. Colors chosen for the building exteriors shall be taken from an earth tone color palette or substitute as acceptable by the city. Colors may allow for national identity, with approval from the city.
c. Brick shall approximate the color of bricks made from regional clays.
d. Primary colors shall not be used for building walls unless they are a muted tone.
e. Neon colors are not allowed.
2. Roof Colors
a. Natural colors or substitute as acceptable by the city.
3. Trim Colors
a. For windows, soffits, cornices, moldings, etc.: whites or dark saturated cool colors (greens, blues), bronze or substitute as acceptable by the city. Aluminum windows, screen frames, etc. shall be bronze anodized.
b. Schemes may have no more than two trim colors.
c. Entry doors are permitted a greater color latitude, subject to approval by the city.
d. Brick and stone shall be left their natural color.
Q. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. Accessory structures shall have the same architectural detail, elements, materials and roof design as the principal structure.
2. Size, placement and screening of accessory structures:
Commentary: Schemes with building walls of more than one color are discouraged except where materials are different, such as when a decorative stucco door surround is used. Where different wall materials allow two-tone schemes, similar colors and tones are recommended.
Article X Zones 10-160
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
a. Storage areas, refuse areas, mechanical equipment, and gas pumps with associated canopies, shall not be visible from the street.
b. Use of wing walls and other similar structures is required.
3. Drive through windows
a. Drive through, drive up, or drive in windows are not permitted.
4. Automated teller machines (ATMs)
a. ATMs are permitted only if incorporated into the primary building.
b. ATMs shall not be accessible via drive aisles or drive-thrus, must be walk up only.
R. LIGHTING STANDARDS
1. Plan Requirements
a. A lighting plan shall be submitted for review including details of, but not limited to, the number and location of all luminaries, height of poles, intensity, lighting patterns and details of lighting fixtures.
b. All lighting fixtures/poles shall be black tapered poles.
2. Specifications
a. No flashing, traveling, animated, neon or intermittent lighting shall be permitted whether such lighting is for temporary or for long-term duration. No fluorescent lights (except compact fluorescent bulbs that screw into standard sockets) may be used on the exterior of buildings.
b. Floodlights or directional lights (max. 75-watt bulbs) may be used to illuminate parking garages and maintenance areas, but must be shielded or aimed away from the property line. Floodlighting shall not be used to illuminate building walls (i.e. no up-lighting) or parking areas.
c. All luminaries designed for entryways and decorative purposes on nonresidential and multifamily residential buildings and structures that exceed 2,000 lumens shall have fixtures that cut off light from direct view.
3. Street Lighting
a. Lighting along State Route 17
Article X Zones 10-161
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(1) Street lighting standards shall meet the IES (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America) illumination recommendations for Roadway Lighting by providing a uniformity ratio of 3:1 along arterial roadways, 4:1 along collector roadways and 6:1 along local roadways. The height and spacing of the lighting fixtures shall be designed to achieve the uniformity ratio specified in the IES standards.
(2) All fixtures along State Route 17 in the district shall be of the Holophane (A company that manufacturers and supplies lighting products), “revitalization series”. The fixture shall be black in color, be fitted with a high renaissance base type and a pendant mount teardrop type lighting fixture (see Figure 28).
(3) No cobra or shoebox type lighting fixtures shall be permitted along the corridor in the district.
(4) The fixtures shall be installed within the median.
b. Lighting interior streets/driveways within development
(1) All lighting fixtures shall be fitted with metal halide or high-pressure sodium “Acorn” full cut-off or cut-off type luminaire.
(2) The maximum permitted height of lighting fixtures shall be 12 feet.
(3) The fixtures shall be located in the verge strip area between the sidewalk and the street.
(4) When lighting fixtures are placed along mixed-use buildings with residential uses on top floors an attempt shall be made to place the fixtures in areas without fenestrations.
4. Lighting for Off Street Parking
a. The limits of minimum illumination in the parking areas shall in no case be less than 0.2-foot candles, unless otherwise required by the city where pedestrian security and site entrance issues arise.
b. The following requirements for minimum and maximum illumination apply:
Figure 28: Pendant mount teardrop type lighting fixture
Article X Zones 10-162
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Table 5: Minimum and Maximum Illumination
Primary Use*
Maximum permitted illumination at property line (in foot candles)
Maximum permitted height of luminaries (in feet)
Minimum Maintained illumination at site (in foot candles)
Commercial
0.5 (0.2 where adjacent to residential areas)
20
0.2
Residential
0.2
12
-
* If the use is 60% or greater on the site.
c. All outdoor lighting shall be reduced by 25% during non-operating hours in mixed-use areas.
d. All luminaries utilized shall be designed to have full cutoff or cutoff type fixtures to shield light from the direct view of an observer at ground level at the property line.
e. All lighting must be located on poles or at ground level and must be directed toward the property interior.
5. Lighting for Pedestrian Walkways/Bikeways
a. Pedestrian walkways/bike lanes adjacent to roadways shall maintain a minimum average illuminance level based on the primary use (See Table 7).
b. Pedestrian walkways and bikeways away from roadways shall be lit and shall maintain an average illuminance level no less than 0.5 foot-candles.
c. The maximum lighting levels in any pedestrian area (excluding building entrances) shall not exceed a maintained level of 3 foot-candles.
Table 6: Average Illuminance
Primary Use
Minimum Average Illuminance Level
In foot candle
Commercial
1
Mixed Use
0.5
Residential
0.2
d. The uniformity ratio shall not exceed 4:1 except where increased pedestrian security is desired in which case the uniformity ratio shall not exceed 5:1.
e. Luminaries shall have a low brightness with an internal shield and prismatic refractor such as a 50-watt metal halide lamp with Aromat electronic ballast or a 55-watt induction lamp. Their aesthetic
Article X Zones 10-163
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
character shall be appropriate for the surrounding buildings and landscape, as approved by the plan.
f. Civic greens, squares and pedestrian walkways shall include luminaries of a particular “period” or architectural style (except when adjacent to residential buildings) such that:
(1) If the fixtures are not cut off luminaries, the maximum output shall not be more than 2,000 lumens (60 watts incandescent).
(2) Maximum pole height of luminaires shall not exceed 12 feet.
g. Decorative bollard lighting may be used in place of pole-mounted fixtures to direct light towards walkways/bikeways within public open space or civic areas. The height of decorative bollards shall not exceed 4 feet.
6. Lighting For Recreational Fields
a. All luminaries must have a cut off angle less than 90 degrees and shall be turned off when not in use.
b. No illumination for the purposes of sports activity shall be permitted after 11:00 p.m. unless already in progress prior to 9:00 p.m, or otherwise approved by the city.
c. Luminaire specifications shall be determined based on the class of play for the athletic field in question based on the IESNA RP-6-01 (Recommended Practice for Sports and Recreational Area Lighting).
7. Lighting For Gas Stations
a. Outdoor sales and gas station canopies must utilize canopy lights that are fully recessed into the canopy or are fully shielded by the canopy.
b. The minimum average minimum illuminance levels for Exterior Service Canopies listed in Table 8 shall be maintained to meet the values set forth in IESNA RP-33-99, Table 8: Service Station or Gas Pump Area Average Illuminance Levels.
c. The total under canopy initial bare lamp lumens used for illuminating Exterior Service Canopies shall have a maximum output limit not to exceed 25 lumens per square foot of canopy area. Lighting limit shall include all canopy-mounted luminaires, as well as any signage or illuminated panels below the canopy.
Article X Zones 10-164
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Table 7: Minimum Average Illuminance
S. SIGNAGE STANDARDS
1. Article XIV of the Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance applies with the following additional regulations:
a. Façade signs are permitted only within the area between the first story and the second story, but no higher than 25 feet, and no lower than 10 feet above the adjacent grade.
b. Non-illuminated names of buildings, dates of erection, monument statues, tablets when carved into stone, concrete, metal, or any other permanent type of construction and integral part of an allowed structure are permitted, not larger than five (5) square feet in size.
c. Pole signs and cabinet type façade signs are not permitted.
d. Flashing, traveling, animated or intermittent lighting are not permitted.
e. No illuminated signage is permitted which would glare into residential units within multi-use structures.
f. Pedestrian-oriented signs
(1) Pedestrian oriented signs are signs that are designed for and directed toward pedestrians so that they can easily and comfortably read the sign, as they stand adjacent to the business (see Figure 29).
(2) One (1) pedestrian-oriented sign is permitted per business for facades facing the public street and the required recreational corridor area.
(3) Signs of this type shall be erected on or attached to and not parallel to a building.
Service Station Component
Minimum Average Illuminance
(in footcandles)
Approach
2.0
Driveway
2.0
Pump Island Area
10.0
Building Façade
3.0
Service Areas
3.0
Landscape Highlights
2.0
Figure 29: Pedestrian-oriented signs.
Article X Zones 10-165
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
(4) Signs must not be placed lower than ten (10) foot above grade.
(5) Signs must not exceed four (4) square feet in size and not extend beyond the building wall more than twenty-four (24) inches.
2. Finish Materials
a. All exterior materials will be of high quality, durable, and easy to maintain, and provide for longevity of use. Permitted finish materials include:
b. Masonry
c. Wood; painted, stained or natural
d. Metal
e. Plastic, when used for individual letters and symbols only
Article X Zones 10-166
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
SECTION 10.32 INST (INSTITUTIONAL ZONE)
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship
2. Convalescent homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged
3. Dormitories when associated with a permitted use
4. Public and parochial schools, including those structures and facilities used by such schools for related purposes. Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, administrative buildings, classrooms, lecture halls, laboratories, libraries, athletic fields and facilities, swimming pools, dormitories, theatres, cafeterias, alumni centers, book stores, student and faculty centers, nursery schools, and maintenance buildings.
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls, as regulated by Article XIII of this ordinance
3. Signs, as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
1. Minimum Lot Area - One (1) acre
2. Front, Side, and Rear Yard Setback - 25 feet
3. Maximum height – Fifty (50) feet (except as provided for in Section 9.13)
4. In the case of this zone, more than one principal building as defined herein, may be permitted on one lot
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Articles XI and XII of this ordinance.
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except within enclosed containers.
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or into any adjacent property.
4. Screening and landscaping shall be provided, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. In no case shall the minimum planting strip be required to exceed the minimum setback requirement established for this zone
5. A site plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be
Article X Zones 10-167
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
required for any use in this zone.
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone.
7. All utilities must be underground when any new development occurs.
8. The lighting of outdoor athletic facilities and outdoor sound amplification systems are prohibited.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
ARTICLE XI
OFF-STREET PARKING AND ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS
In all zones, off-street parking facilities for the storage or parking of motor vehicles for use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the building hereafter erected, altered, or extended, and all uses of the land after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, and provided that construction has not begun within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days of such effective date, off-street parking facilities in the amounts required by this ordinance shall prevail.
SECTION 11.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACES: In determining the number of parking spaces required, if such spaces result in fractional parts thereof, the number of said spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number.
B. ADDITIONAL PARKING SPACES TO BE PROVIDED: Whenever the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, change of use, or other units of measurement specified herein, additional parking spaces shall be provided in the amounts hereafter specified for that use, if the existing parking space is inadequate to serve such increase in intensity of use.
C. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES
1. Off-street parking facilities shall be located as follows:
a. Single-Family Residential Zones - (A-1, A-2, R-RE, R-1A, R-1B, R- 1C, R-1D, R-1DD, R-1E, R-1EE, R-1F, R-1G): Off-street parking may be permitted in driveways in the front, side, and rear yards of permitted uses in these zones, provided all requirements of this ordinance are met. Additionally, off-street parking located in the rear yard shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. No off-street parking area, located in the front yard in a single-family residential zone, may exceed four hundred (400) square feet (two parking spaces) except, however, the zoning administrator may allow additional off-street parking spaces to be located thereon, provided that the additional parking spaces will not cause the ratio of unpaved area to paved area (parking and driveway areas) in the front yard to be less than 3:1.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
b. Multi-Family Residential Zones - (R-2, R-3): Off-street parking may be permitted in side or rear yards of permitted uses in these zones, provided that off-street parking facilities shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. Off-street parking may be permitted in required front yards, only if approved according to an approved development plan.
c. Special Development Zones - (RCD, PUD, MHP, C-PUD) Off-street parking shall be located as designated on the approved plan.
d. Commercial, Institutional, and Industrial Zones
(1) Except as herein provided, off-street parking may be permitted in minimum required front, side, and rear yards of these zones, provided that all off-street parking facilities shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any street right- of-way lines.
(2) IP Zone: Off-street parking may be permitted in the side and rear yards, provided that all off-street parking facilities shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line, and shall not be permitted in the minimum required side yards. Off-street parking may be permitted in minimum front yards, provided that all minimum front and side yard requirements are maintained.
2. All off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the building served, except for the following:
a. Permitted uses locating within multi-family and industrial zones may supply off-street parking within three hundred (300) feet from such lot served, upon approval of the zoning administrator, provided that such off-street parking facilities are unable to be provided on the same lot, or contiguous to the same lot, as the building being served. In addition, said off-street parking shall be located in the same zone as the use being served.
b. Existing single, two, or multi-family dwellings, which are permitted uses herein and occupy a lot of such size that off-street parking could not be provided on the same lot as the use being served, said off-street parking may be permitted to locate within a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from said dwelling or dwellings, upon approval of the zoning administrator. In addition, said off- street parking lot shall be located in the same zone as the use
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
being served.
c. Off-street parking, as required for a conditional use, may be permitted to locate on a lot other than the lot on which the building or use being served is located, when approved by the Board of Adjustment, provided that said parking is located at the most convenient and visible area of the parking facility nearest to the use or building being served and available at all times without restrictions for said purposes, except as provided under Section 11.0, E. of this ordinance.
D. COLLECTIVE PARKING PROVISION: Collective off-street parking facilities may be provided, however, the area for such parking facilities shall not be less than would otherwise be individually required, except as provided for mixed use conditional use in accordance with Section 11.0, E. and under Shared Parking Provision Section 11.0, F.
E. Collective Parking Provision - Collective off-street parking facilities for a mixed use conditional use, including those located on a lot other than the lot on which the building or use being served is located, may be provided; however, the area for such parking facilities shall not be less than would otherwise be individually required unless approved by the board of adjustment. In granting such approval, the board of adjustment shall consider:
1. The required parking for the highest use shall be located on the premises as the minimum requirement, additional parking, as determined by the board of adjustment shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent on premises. The other percentage may be located off premises based on written contracts to provide said off-street parking.
2. The actual need for parking spaces of each individual use or building in relation to requirements for such type of use or building provided under Section 11.2.
3. Times of actual need for parking of each individual use or building and the relationship of these times to one another.
4. The internal control plan of the applicant shall be submitted with the application for review.
5. The internal controls for scheduling the uses of the mixed use and said controls and/or schedule may be accepted or changed by the board of adjustment, but internal control schedule shall be made a condition of approval.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
6. The parking needed for the scheduled uses on premises shall not exceed the number of parking spaces as established by the board of adjustment.
7. Collective off-street parking located on another lot must be located within five hundred (500) feet walking distance of the entrance to the use to be served. Said walking access shall provide a safe means of pedestrian access to and from the establishment being served.
8. Reserved spaces shall not be counted in the minimum requirement.
9. Allowance by the board of adjustment for such collective parking facilities, on lots other than the lot upon which the building or use being served is located, should be situated so as to ensure that such locations will not result in added traffic problems, or traffic or pedestrian safety problems.
The board is authorized after consideration to issue a permit for not less than the required parking for the highest use on the premises and any additional parking per use the board determines necessary based on the evidence.
The board of adjustment shall retain continuing approval and review power of Collective Parking for mixed use conditional use. Said review and re-approval or change may be brought before the board of adjustment on its motion or through the appeal process from the Zoning Administrator. Said parking requirements may be increased using the formula outlined above, to assure that whenever the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through lack of internal control of scheduling, addition of seating capacity, gross floor area, dwelling units, change of use, or other units of measurement specified herein, additional parking spaces shall be provided in the amounts hereafter specified for that use, if the existing parking space is inadequate to serve such increase in intensity of use or scheduling.
F. SHARED PARKING PROVISION: When any land or building is under the same ownership, or upon submission of satisfactory guarantees of the continued operation and proper maintenance of the shared parking facility, and proposed development is for two (2) or more land uses, excluding residential uses, the number of minimum required parking spaces shall be computed by multiplying the minimum number of parking spaces normally required for each land use by the appropriate percentage, as shown in the following shared parking credit table, for each of the five (5) time periods shown. The number of parking spaces required is then determined by adding the results in each column. The column total that generates the highest number of parking spaces becomes the minimum parking requirement.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SHARED PARKING CREDIT TABLE
Time of Operation
Weekday Weekend Nighttime
LAND
USE TYPE
Daytime
(6 am –
6 pm)
Evening
(6pm – Midnight)
Daytime
(6 am –
6 pm)
Evening
(6pm – Midnight)
(Midnight- 6 am)
Office/Industrial
100%
10%
10%
5%
5%
Retail/Personal Service
60%
90%
100%
70%
5%
Hotel/Motel
75%
100%
75%
100%
75%
Restaurant
50%
100%
100%
100%
10%
Indoor Theater/Commercial Recreational Establishment
40%
100%
100%
100%
10%
1. The following requirements shall apply to any shared parking facility for mixed use development.
a. The shared parking facility must be located within five hundred
(500) feet walking distance of the entrance to the establishment to be served. Said walkway access shall provide a safe means of pedestrian access to and from the establishment being served.
b. Reserved spaces shall not be shared.
c. It shall be determined at the time of parking facility plan approval that shared parking is possible and appropriate at the location proposed. Particular attention is needed to assure that sufficient and convenient short-term parking will be available to commercial establishments during the weekday daytime period. The short-term shared parking spaces must be located in the most convenient and visible area of the parking facility nearest the establishment being served.
d. Any subsequent change in use shall require the issuance of a new zoning permit and proof that minimum parking requirements, per these regulations, will be met.
e. Shared parking may be utilized for other uses, which are not shown in the parking credit table. The applicant shall prepare a similar calculation for the proposed uses, indicating the estimated percentage of each time period, based upon current parking information. Documentation shall be submitted by the applicant to
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
demonstrate that the normal and regular operating hours of the uses proposing a shared parking arrangement do not coincide or overlap in any manner.
G. DRIVEWAYS NOT COMPUTED AS PART OF REQUIRED PARKING AREA: Entrances, exits, or driveways shall not be computed as any part of a required parking lot or area, except in the case of single-family residential zones, where access driveways may be used for parking.
H. OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE TO BE USED FOR PARKING ONLY: Any vehicle parking space shall be used for parking only. Any other use of such space, including repair work or servicing of any kind, other than in an emergency, or the requirement of any payment for the use of such space, shall be deemed to constitute a separate commercial, use in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
I. NO BUILDING TO BE ERECTED IN OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE: No building of any kind shall be erected in any off-street parking lot except a parking garage containing parking spaces equal to the requirements set forth in this section of the ordinance or a shelter house/booth for a parking attendant, provided the number of required spaces are not reduced.
J. PARKING PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED: Plans for all parking lot facilities, including parking garages, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and such other pertinent ordinances of the city. Such plans shall show the number of spaces and arrangements of parking aisles, location of access points onto adjacent streets, provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, location of sidewalks and curbs on or adjacent to the property, utilities, location of shelters for parking attendant, locations of signs, typical cross-sections of pavement, including base and sub-base, proposed grade of parking lot, storm drainage facilities, location and type of lighting facilities, and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant. Where such parking plans include provisions for access points to adjacent streets, then said plans shall also be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.2.
SECTION 11.1 DESIGN AND LAYOUT OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
A. SIZE OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES: For the purposes of this ordinance, one (1) parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen
(18) feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles. Such parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven (7) feet.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
B. WIDTH OF ACCESS DRIVES: All off-street parking areas shall be laid out with the following minimum aisle or access drive widths:
1. Ninety (90) degrees (perpendicular) parking -- Twenty-two (22) feet (either one or two way circulation)
2. Sixty (60) degree (angle) parking -- Fifteen (15) feet (one way circulation only)
3. Forty-five (45) degree (angle) parking -- Twelve (12) feet (one way circulation only)
4. Thirty (30) degree (angle) parking -- Eleven (11) feet (one way circulation only)
5. Zero degree (parallel) parking -- Twelve (12) feet (one way circulation)
When any combination of these types of parking is used (facing the same aisle) the most restricted aisle or access drive width requirements shall prevail. In addition, a two (2) foot overhang may be permitted on the external sides of a parking area.
If the width of the parking space is increased over nine (9) feet, the drive aisle width can be decreased proportionally (two (2) foot width in drive aisle per one
(1) foot increase in space width) except that a drive aisle for two-way traffic may not be decreased below twenty (20) feet in width and a drive aisle for one-way traffic may not be decreased below eleven (11) feet in width.
C. ACCESS TO OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES: Each required parking space shall be connected with a deeded public right-of-way by means of aisles or access drives as required by Section 11.1, B. The parking area shall be so designed to ensure that all maneuvering into and out of each parking space shall take place entirely within property lines of lots, garages, and/or storage areas.
D. OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS IN MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, OR INDUSTRIAL ZONES: All such parking areas shall have a protective wall and/or bumper blocks around the perimeter of said parking area and shall be so designed that all vehicles leaving the facility will be traveling forward to approaching traffic. All parking shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a zone permitting single-family residential development, by a solid wall, fence, or densely planted compact hedge, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. Ground cover shrubs and trees shall be located and maintained so as to not interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the property or with sight distance clearance at entrances and exits.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
E. LIGHTING: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall not glare upon any right-of-way or adjacent property.
F. PAVING OF NEW OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS: All new off-street parking areas shall be paved with asphalt concrete or Portland Cement concrete and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Appendix A.
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 11.2 SPECIFIC OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS: The
amount of off-street parking space required for uses, buildings, or additions, and changes in intensity of uses thereto, shall be determined according to the following requirements, and the space, so required, shall be stated in the application for a zoning and building permit and shall be reserved for such use. Where more than one conditional use is located in the same building, a multi use conditional use exists and, unless otherwise determined by the board of adjustment under Section 11.0, C., 2., c., or Section 11.0, E., each individual use shall be in accordance with the off-street parking requirements of this section of the ordinance.
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-10
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-11
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-12
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-13
1. Exercise/Fitness Equipment Two parking spaces per one thousand Sales (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-14
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-15
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-16
SECTION 11.3 ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS
In order to promote greater safety of passage between highway and land, improve the convenience and ease of movement of travelers on the highway, permit reasonable speeds and economy of travel, and increase and protect the capacity of the highway, the location and design of access points shall be in accordance with the following access control requirements. These requirements shall apply to all arterial and collector type streets, as identified in the adopted comprehensive plan.
A. PROVISION OF RESERVED TURNING LANES: At those access points where vehicles turning to and from the arterial and collector streets will affect the roadway capacity, reserved turn lanes shall be constructed by the developer.
B. PROVISION OF FRONTAGE ROAD: Where possible, provision for the construction of a frontage road shall be made. However, access to the arterial or collector streets via an intersecting street or a common driveway shall be investigated if such a design is not reasonable.
C. COORDINATION OF ACCESS POINTS: Major Access points on opposite sides of the arterial and collector streets shall be located opposite each other, otherwise turning movement restrictions may be imposed by the planning commission or zoning administrator, whichever is applicable. In addition, in order to maximize the efficient utilization of access points, access drives shall be designed, located, and constructed in a manner to provide and make possible the coordination of access with, and between, adjacent properties developed (present or future) for similar uses. As a condition of approval for construction, use, or reuse of any access road, the zoning administrator may require that unobstructed and unencumbered access, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, be provided from any such access point to adjacent properties.
D. SPACING RESTRICTIONS FOR SIGNALIZED ACCESS POINTS: Access points which will warrant signalization shall be spaced a minimum distance of one quarter (1/4) mile apart. The exact location of the signal light shall be determined by a traffic engineering study which shall at least account for the following variables:
1. Speed
2. Traffic signal phasing
3. Traffic signal cycle length
4. Roadway geometrics
5. Accident experience
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-17
Provision for all turning movements to maintain the design capacity of the roadway shall be required.
E. SIGHT DISTANCE: The location of access points shall comply with safe sight distance requirements, as provided in Table 1. The centerline of all access points shall intersect as nearly at a ninety (90) degree angle as possible, but in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than seventy-five (75) degrees or greater than one hundred five (105) degrees, unless approved by the planning commission or zoning administrator, whichever is applicable, due to certain exceptional conditions.
F. LOCATION OF UNSIGNALIZED ACCESS POINTS
1. Arterial Streets
a. Unsignalized access points shall be spaced a minimum distance of six hundred (600) feet apart. Turning restrictions and/or reserved lanes may be required.
b. One (1) access point per existing tract will be permitted. However, if the spacing requirements for a direct access point onto an arterial street (as provided in F., 1., a., above) cannot be met, then an access point may be located on a frontage road, or on an intersecting local street, or share a common driveway that meets the spacing requirements. In order for the intersecting local street or frontage road to function properly, access onto them should be controlled as follows:
(1) Access points onto local streets intersecting an arterial street shall be spaced a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet, measured from point of curb return to point of curb return, from the arterial street.
(2) In areas zoned to permit commercial, industrial, or multi- family residential uses, access points from adjacent properties onto frontage roads, shall be no less than one hundred (100) feet, measured from point of curb return to point of curb return, from intersections of the frontage road with local or collector streets.
c. Where the frontage of a tract is greater than five hundred (500) feet an additional access point may be permitted. However, the type of access will depend on the spacing requirements in F., 1., a.
(1) If the frontage of the tract is large enough, then at least one
(1) of the access points may have direct access onto the arterial street, provided the spacing between the adjacent
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-18
access points meet the requirements of Section F., 1., a., and all other requirements of this section of the ordinance. In the case where the frontage allows only one (1) point of direct access, due to spacing restrictions as provided herein, the second access point will be via a frontage road, or an intersecting local street, or share a common driveway that meets the spacing restrictions, as provided along the arterial street.
d. If a tract of land has no means of access that would meet the requirements of this section of the ordinance, one (1) access point shall be provided. However, all such access points shall be considered a temporary right-of-way and may be terminated, reduced, limited to certain turning movements, or caused to be relocated by the zoning administrator at such time as the particular use served by the access point changes and/or the property is otherwise provided an alternate means of access via a frontage road, or an intersecting local street, or sharing of a common driveway. Provisions for the construction of a frontage road, restricted turning movements, or other improvements, may be required, as a condition to approval, in order to minimize the number of access points and congestion to the adjacent street. In all cases where said access points are classified as temporary, such designation shall be duly noted on the plot plan or site plan submitted for a zoning permit and also upon the deed of the property in question.
2. Collector Streets
a. On two-lane roadways, one (1) access point per existing tract will be allowed. However, if the frontage is greater than five hundred
(500) feet, an additional access point may be permitted. Furthermore, the minimum spacing between adjacent access points on this type of facility shall be one hundred (100) feet, measured from point of curb return to point of curb return, except in the case where the street intersects another collector street or arterial street, then said access points shall be spaced a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from the intersection.
b. On multi-lane roadways, the spacing is dependent on whether or not a barrier median exists (prohibiting left-turn movements). If a barrier median exists, access points may be spaced as close as three hundred (300) feet. However, certain turning movements will be prohibited. If a barrier median does not exist, then the minimum
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-19
spacing of access points shall be six hundred (600) feet. In addition, some turning movements may be prohibited.
c. One (1) access point per existing tract will be allowed. However, if the spacing requirements for a direct access point, as provided in F., 2., a., cannot be met, then an access point may be located on a frontage road, or on an intersecting street, or share a common driveway that meets the spacing requirements.
d. If a tract of land has no means of access that would meet the requirements of this section of the ordinance, one (1) access point shall be provided. However, all such access points shall be considered a temporary right-of-way and may be terminated, reduced, limited to certain turning movements, or caused to be relocated by the zoning administrator at such time as the particular use served by the access point changes and/or the property is otherwise provided an alternate means of access via a frontage road, or an intersecting local street, or sharing of a common driveway. Provisions for the construction of a frontage road, restricted turning movements, or other improvements, may be required, as a condition to approval, in order to minimize the number of access points and congestion to the adjacent street. In all cases where said access points are classified as temporary, such designation shall be duly noted on the plot plan or site plan submitted for a zoning permit and also upon the deed of the property in question.
G. WIDTH OF ACCESS POINTS
1. In single-family residential zones, no access point width shall be less than nine (9) feet nor more than twenty (20) feet. In all other zones, access points shall not be less than twelve (12) feet nor more than forty-eight (48) feet in width. The width shall be as measured from the point of curb return to point of curb return, or edge of pavement if no curb exists, excluding the curb radius.
2. The zoning administrator may modify (enlarge or reduce) the width to provide for a more efficient and safe channelization and/or flow of traffic.
H. EXCEPTIONS TO ACCESS POINT REQUIREMENTS: Where situations develop that may require special treatment, the requirements as provided in Section 11.2,
A. - G., may be varied, provided that a traffic engineering report is prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, establishing that the special treatment will have no adverse effects on the roadway safety and capacity.
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-20
I. ACCESS POINT PROBLEM AREAS: If, after special study, it is determined that the type of use or activity proposed would have an adverse effect on the safety and capacity of the adjacent roadway, the access point spacing requirements, as contained in this section, may have to be increased in order to adequately solve the traffic movement.
J. APPROVAL OF ACCESS POINTS REQUIRED: Plans for all access points, and modifications thereto (including plans to use existing access points where a change of use for any tract of land would generate more traffic than the previous use, thus producing an adverse effect on the adjacent roadway), shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff, at a scale not less than 1 inch = 100 feet. No action of approving or rejecting these plans by the zoning administrator shall be taken until a review and recommendation of said plans has been made by Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff. Such plans shall show the location of all access points, and access points within six hundred (600) feet in either direction. The proposed access point shall include typical cross-sections of pavement, the base and subbase, proposed grade, and storm drainage, and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant. If such access points are being located in conjunction with off-street parking and/or loading and unloading facilities, then said plans shall also include parking and
off-street loading and/or unloading plans, in accordance with Sections 11.0 and
12.0 of this ordinance.
K. APPROVAL OF ACCESS POINTS ALONG STATE MAINTAINED ROUTES BY KENTUCKY DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION: A copy of the Plans for all access points to be constructed along a state maintained route shall also be submitted to the Kentucky Department of Transportation for review and approval during the same time as plans are submitted to the zoning administrator, as provided for in Section 11.2. No access point plans shall be approved, or permits issued, for construction by the zoning administrator, until said access point plans have been approved by the Kentucky Department of Transportation.
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-21
Table 1A
Sight Distance For Vehicles Exiting From Access Points Onto Adjacent Roads (see Figure 1A)
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-22
Notes For Table 1A
D=Distance along major road from access point to allow vehicle to enter safely. Figures given are measured from a vehicle ten (10) feet back of the pavement edge. Figures given are in feet.
Values are for urban conditions. On rural streets, distances are to be increased by ten
(10) percent to allow for greater reaction time.
The sight distances apply when street grades are zero (0) percent to three (3) percent, either up or down. When an upgrade is steeper than three (3) percent, adjustments are to be made to compensate for the longer time required to reach the speed of highway traffic. The time is less than shown when the highway is descending. Adjustment factors apply to grades only in that portion of the road between the access points and the downstream point at which a vehicle emerging from the access points has been able to accelerate to within ten (10) miles per hour of the route speed.
When the street, in the section to be used for acceleration after leaving the access point, ascends at three (3) percent to four (4) percent, then sight distances in the direction of approaching ascending traffic are to be increased by a factor of 1.4. When the access point ascends at five (5) percent to six (6) percent, sight distances should be increased by a factor of 1.7.
When the street, in the section to be used for acceleration after leaving the access point, descends at three (3) percent to four (4) percent, then sight distances in the direction of approaching descending traffic are to be reduced by a factor of 0.6. If the road descends at five (5) percent to six (6) percent, sight distances should be reduced by a factor of 0.5.
When the criteria for sight distances to the right cannot be met, the need can be eliminated by prohibiting left turns by exiting vehicles.
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-23
20 MPH 30 MPH
Vehicle
Type 2 lane 4 lane 6 lane 2 lane 4 lane 6 lane Passenger
Car 150 160 170 230 250 270
Truck 260 260 300 400 400 480
20 MPH 30 MPH
Table 1B Left Turn Sight Distance For Vehicles Entering Access Points (see Figure 1B)
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-24
Notes on Table 1B
S=Sight distance along major route to safely turn left into access point.
Figures given are measured from a vehicle ten (10) feet back of the pavement edge. Figures given are in feet.
Values are for urban conditions. On rural streets, distances are to be increased by ten
(10) percent to allow for greater reaction time.
The sight distances apply when street grades are zero (0) percent to three (3) percent, either up or down. When an upgrade is steeper than three (3) percent, adjustments are to be made to compensate for the longer time required to reach the speed of highway traffic. The time is less than shown when the highway is descending. Adjustment factors apply to grades only in that portion of the road between the access points and the downstream point at which a vehicle emerging from the access points has been able to accelerate to within ten (10) miles per hour of the route speed.
When the street, in the section to be used for acceleration after leaving the access point, ascends at three (3) percent to four (4) percent, then sight distances in the direction of approaching ascending traffic are to be increased by a factor of 1.4. When the access point ascends at five (5) percent to six (6) percent, sight distances should be increased by a factor of 1.7.
When the street, in the section to be used for acceleration after leaving the access point, descends at three (3) percent to four (4) percent, then sight distances in the direction of approaching descending traffic are to be reduced by a factor of 0.6. If the road descends at five (5) percent to six (6) percent, sight distances should be reduced by a factor of 0.5.
When the criteria for sight distances to the right cannot be met, the need can be eliminated by prohibiting left turns by exiting vehicles.
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XI Off-Street Parking and Access Control Regulations 11-25
FIGURE 1A
SIGHT DISTANCE FOR VEHICLES EXITING FROM ACCESS POINTS
refer to Table 1A
FIGURE 1B
LEFT TURN SIGHT DISTANCE FOR VEHICLES ENTERING ACCESS POINTS
refer to Table 1B
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE XII
OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING REGULATIONS
SECTION 12.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
For all buildings and structures erected, altered, or extended, and all uses of land established as specified herein, after the effective date of this ordinance, off-street loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations herein. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the adoption of this ordinance, and provided that construction has not begun within ninety
(90) days of such effective date, off-street loading and/or unloading facilities in the amounts required by this ordinance, shall prevail.
A. SPACES REQUIRED
1. Every building, or part thereof, erected and occupied for uses permitted in commercial and industrial zones, including conditional uses permitted in residential zones, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, and having up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area, shall be provided with at least one (1) loading and/or unloading space. A study shall be prepared by the company or operator to determine the additional loading and/or unloading space needs over and above the first space required for the specific use proposed. In determining the number of spaces needed, the study shall take into the consideration the following:
a. estimated and projected arrival and departure rates for scheduled and unscheduled (random) trucks
b. estimated and projected length of truck stop duration for loading and/or unloading of each truck
c. estimated number of trips by vehicle type (i.e., two axle vehicles, semi-tractor trailers, etc.) and size
The zoning administrator shall review the study of estimated and projected loading and/or unloading needs and make a determination if the number of spaces provided are adequate for the use proposed.
2. If it is determined by the zoning administrator, based on existing conditions of the proposed site, the design of the building, and the completed needs study, that additional loading and/or unloading spaces
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
are needed to accommodate the facilities than could be reasonably provided, the zoning administrator shall require that additional parking areas, properly designed to handle the parking of necessary trucks, including the maneuvering of the trucks to and from the space, be provided for the storage of trucks waiting to be loaded and/or unloaded.
3. If, after approval by the zoning administrator of the number of spaces and any storage of truck parking needed to accommodate the loading and/or unloading of trucks for a specific use, a need exists, based on operation of the specific use, to provide additional off-street loading and/or unloading spaces or storage of trucks than was previously determined, the zoning administrator may require that corrective action be taken to eliminate any deficiencies as follows:
a. limit the time and interval of arrival and departure of trucks, commensurate with the need
b. require necessary additional loading and/or unloading spaces, or require that adequate parking areas be provided for the storage of trucks waiting to be loaded and/or unloaded
B. ADDITIONAL LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACES TO BE PROVIDED: Whenever the intensity of any use of a building, or premises is increased through addition of gross floor area, change of use, or increased activity, additional loading and/or unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 12.0, A., above, if it is determined by the zoning administrator that the existing spaces are not adequate to serve such increase in intensity.
C. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING AREA: All loading and/or unloading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served. However, permitted uses located in industrial zones may provide parking areas for the storage of trucks waiting to be loaded and/or unloaded within three hundred (300) feet from each lot served, upon the approval of the zoning administrator, provided that said off-street storage of trucks are unable to be provided on the same lot, or contiguous to the same lot, as the use being served and further provided that said storage of trucks is located in the same zone as the use being served. Loading and/or unloading areas may be located in the side and minimum required rear yards, provided that all loading and/or unloading facilities shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line and minimum side yard clearances are maintained.
Unloading facilities shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line and minimum side yard clearances are maintained.
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
D. DRIVEWAYS NOT COMPUTED AS PART OF REQUIRED LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING AREA: Entrances, exits, or driveways shall not be computed as any part of a required loading and/or unloading space.
E. OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE TO BE USED FOR LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING ONLY: Any loading and/or unloading space shall be used for loading and/or unloading only. Any other use of such space, including repair work or servicing of any kind, other than in an emergency, or the requirement of any payment for the use of such space, shall be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
F. NO BUILDING TO BE ERECTED IN OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: No building of any kind shall be erected in any off-street loading and/or unloading space.
G. OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE SHALL NOT BE REDUCED: The required parking spaces, as set forth and designated in this ordinance, shall not be reduced, except as provided for in this ordinance.
H. LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED: Plans for all loading and/or unloading facilities shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and such other pertinent ordinances of the legislative body. Such plans shall show the number and location of loading and/or unloading spaces, including necessary maneuvering of trucks, and dock and apron approach, and arrangements of access aisles, location of access points onto adjacent streets, provisions for truck circulation, location of curbs on or adjacent to the property, utilities, location of signs, typical cross-sections of pavement, including base and subbase, proposed grade of lot, storm drainage facilities, location and type of lighting facilities, and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant. Where such loading and/or unloading plans include provisions for access points to adjacent streets, then said plans shall also be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.2.
SECTION 12.1 DESIGN AND LAYOUT OF OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING AREAS
A. SIZE OF OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: Each off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be at least fourteen (14) feet in width
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
A. SIZE OF OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: Each offstreet loading and/or unloading space shall be at least fourteen (14) feet in width and at least sixty (60) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering spaces and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet, provided, however, that when it is demonstrated that a particular loading and/or unloading space will be used by shorter trucks, as provided for in Section 12.0, A., the zoning administrator may reduce the minimum length to not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
B. ACCESS: Each required off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be designed with direct access, via an approved access drive, to a deeded right-of-way which offers efficient ingress, egress, and safety for trucks. Access drives or aisles shall be laid out with a width of at least twelve (12) feet for one-way circulation and at least twenty-two (22) feet for two-way circulation, with intersection radii not to be less than fifty (50) feet.
Off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be so designed and constructed so that all maneuvering for loading and/or unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises being served. Such off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk or street.
C. OTHER DESIGN FEATURES: Docks are to be designed to facilitate efficient loading and/or unloading. Platform heights should be forty-four (44) inches for light pickup and delivery trucks and forty-eight (48) to fifty-two (52) inches for heavy trucks and trailers. The dock area should be at least twice the total body floor area of the largest number of trucks that can be docked at one time. Minimum dock overhead clearance (including pipes, lights, etc.) should be twelve (12) feet.
D. PAVING OF OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING AREAS: All off-street loading and/or unloading areas, including spaces, maneuvering, and storage areas for truck parking shall be paved with asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards adopted by the legislative body.
E. LIGHTING: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street loading and/or unloading areas shall not glare upon any right-of-way or adjacent property.
F. SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING: All loading and/or unloading areas, including storage of parked trucks, shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residential zone, as regulated by Section
Article XII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 12-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
9.17 of this ordinance. Ground cover shrubs and trees shall be including storage of parked trucks, shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residential zone, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance. Ground cover shrubs and trees shall be located and maintained so as to not interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the property or with sight distance clearance at entrances and exits.
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
ARTICLE XIII
FENCES, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTION TO VIEW REGULATIONS
SECTION 13.0 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS: Except as herein provided, no fence, wall, hedge, or other obstruction, above a height of thirty-six (36) inches, as measured above the curb level, shall be erected, placed, maintained, or continued in any zone, within that triangular portion of a corner lot formed by measuring fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or of the right-of-way line of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line and joining these points with a straight line. No type of tree, or planting, or other obstruction, shall be planted, placed, maintained, or continued in such a manner which would obstruct the vision clearance at corners and railroad crossings.
SECTION 13.1 CLASSIFICATION OF FENCES AND WALLS
A. The following shall be the classification of fences and walls for this ordinance:
1. Masonry walls
2. Ornamental iron (eighty (80) percent open)
3. Woven wire (eighty (80) percent open); and chain link
4. Wood or other materials (more than fifty (50) percent open)
5. Solid fences, wood or other materials (less than fifty (50) percent open)
6. Hedges
SECTION 13.2 RESIDENTIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ZONES
A. Fences and/or walls within all residential (R) zones, including their applicable overlay zone, shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The requirements for the Residential (R) Zones for residential uses only, are as set forth and depicted on Figure 1 of this ordinance.
2. The location, height, and type of all fences and/or walls within any area zoned with a PUD, RCD, or MHP Overlay shall be as approved by the city.
3. For all institutional zones or non-residential uses conditionally permitted in any residential zone herein, the requirements are as follows:
a. Class 2, 3, 4, 6 fences and/or walls may be erected in rear yard, up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches, provided, however, for the following exceptions
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
(1) General purpose recreational areas may be enclosed with fences and/or walls of Class 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6, up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches.
(2) Class 3 fences and/or walls, may be erected to enclose tennis courts or as backstops for baseball and/or softball fields, up to a maximum height of one hundred forty-four (144) inches.
(3) In the case of corner lots, as governed by Section 13.0, fences of class 2 or 3 only may be erected, as regulated by the applicable provisions of this section.
SECTION 13.3 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES: Fences and/or walls within all commercial and industrial zones, including those permitted with all conditionally permitted uses in this zone shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Except as provided for in Section 13.0, fences of class 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 may be erected in side and rear yards of commercial zones, up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches. In the case of corner lots, as governed by Section 13.0, fences of class 2 or 3 only, may be erected up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches. In minimum front yards, fences of classes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 may be erected up to a maximum height of 48 inches (except as noted in Section 13.0).
B. Except as noted in Section 13.0, fences of classes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 may be erected up to a maximum height of 84 inches in all industrial zones in side and rear yards and not more than 48 inches in height in the minimum front yard depth. Except for the I-P Zone, classes 2 or 3 fences may be erected up to a maximum height of 72 inches in the minimum front yard depth in all industrial zones.
C. The location, height, and type of all fences and/or walls within an area zoned TCFD or with a C-PUD Overlay shall be constructed according to the approved Development Plan.
SECTION 13.4 MEASUREMENT OF ALL FENCE AND/OR WALL HEIGHTS AND/OR LOCATIONS
A. All fences and/or wall heights shall be measured along the fence or wall locations.
B. All locations for distance measurements shall be measured from lot lines.
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
SECTION 13.5 HEIGHT OF FENCES ATOP RETAINING WALLS: A combination fence and retaining wall may be erected. The retaining wall portion may be erected up to the level of the higher finished grade. The fence portion must be of the class and height permitted within this ordinance for the applicable zone. Said measurement shall be made at and along the location of the fence and retaining wall.
SECTION 13.6 ELECTRIFIED FENCES: No fence carrying an electrical charge shall be permitted in any zone.
SECTION 13.7 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ERECTION OF FENCES: No fence shall be erected, except as exempted or specified within this ordinance, until all required fees have been paid to the proper authorities, or their agents, and the necessary permits have been issued for such by the zoning administrator and the building inspector, in accordance with Sections 16.1 and 16.2 of this ordinance.
SECTION 13.8 STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF FENCES: Fences shall be constructed so that all structural members shall be located on the inside of the fence. The inside shall be the side which faces the property owned by the person building the fence.
Article XIII Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 13-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance May 2016 PDS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
ARTICLE XIV
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION 14.1 SHORT TITLE: This Article shall be known as the Sign Article of Fort Wright.
SECTION 14.2 PURPOSE AND INTERESTS SERVED
A. The purpose of this Article is to establish a comprehensive scheme for the regulation of signs within the jurisdiction of the City of Fort Wright These regulations are designed to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare by controlling the type, number, location and physical dimensions of signs, to prevent the disruptions, obstructions and hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic that signs may cause, and to enhance the quality of the environment in residential and nonresidential districts.
As a basis for adopting these regulations, the City of Fort Wright finds:
1. Signs are an essential form of communication in the built environment, providing way-finding guides to residents, visitors, public safety officials, customers and potential customers of local businesses, delivery people and others.
2. Signs also provide communication on public issues, as the U.S. Supreme Court found in City of LaDue v. Gilleo: Signs that react to a local happening or express a view on a controversial issue both reflect and animate change in the life of a community. Often placed on lawns or in windows, residential signs play an important part in political campaigns, during which they are displayed to signal the resident's support for particular candidates, parties, or causes. They may not afford the same opportunities for conveying complex ideas as do other media, but residential signs have long been an important and distinct medium of expression.
3. Retailers and other businesses depend on signs to help people find their businesses, and, in a large and expensive media market like that of Cincinnati (a market which includes Fort Wright), many small businesses depend on signs as one of the most affordable forms of advertising.
4. Although signs thus serve many important purposes in society in general and in Fort Wright in particular, there are other considerations that the City of Fort Wright weighs heavily.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
5. Signs may distract drivers and lead to deaths and injuries to pedestrians and cyclists as well as to drivers and passengers and to property damage. Moving, flashing and rapidly changing signs are particularly distracting to drivers. A proliferation of signs on a particular site can have the same effect as moving signs, as drivers try to sort through the visual cacophony to find the information that they want or need.
6. The Fort Wright City Council, with the advice of the Kenton County Planning Commission and its professional staff, and with input from residents through the Direction 2030: Your Voice. Your Choice. planning process, has placed an increasing emphasis on preserving the sense of place and the design of the built environment; limiting the size, height and number of signs is an important tool in preserving a sense of place, a tool that accompanies the County’s standards for landscaping.
7. Direction 2030: Your Voice. Your Choice. recommends that policies, regulations and incentives be developed and implemented that preserve and improve the existing community fabric.
8. Balancing these competing considerations is particularly difficult in residential areas, where people value both their pleasing and visually appealing environments and their ability to communicate their opinions regarding candidates and public issues through yard signs.
9. In updating its ordinance in 2016 after the Supreme Court’s landmark decision in Reed v. Town of Gilbert, the Fort Wright City Council, working with PDS staff and an outside consultant, has made a major effort to limit content as a factor in its sign regulations. After due consideration, however, it has concluded that one way to leave room for extensive free expression through signs in residential areas while limiting total sign clutter is to maintain significant limits on commercial signs in residential areas. Recognizing the importance of “for sale” and “for lease” signs in maintaining the occupancy of healthy neighborhoods (see the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro), those signs must remain. There is a similar utility in providing for yard sale signs, which allow people to dispose of unwanted items without sending them to a landfill.
10. Although as the Court found in Reed v Gilbert, time limits on signs can be arbitrary, as the Court recognized in 2009 in Pleasant Grove v. City of Summum, a significant distinction between speakers expressing an opinion and signs is that “Speakers, however long-winded, will eventually come to the end of their remarks.” Members of the Fort Wright City Council have long noted that signs for political campaigns as well as those advertising pancake breakfasts and spaghetti dinners for civic organizations are often abandoned after the events, contributing to clutter long after they have served their purpose. Although such signs were once typically paper or cardboard that would eventually decay, many today are plastic and will remain until removed. Thus, despite the expressed
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
concern of the Supreme Court with time limits, the Fort Wright City Council finds that it has a substantial governmental interest in clarifying the status of signs for past events that thus no longer serve a purpose so that there is a legal basis for the City of Fort Wright to remove them or force their removal.
11. The City of Fort Wright has long allowed unlimited numbers of small signs bearing non-commercial messages to allow merchants and others to designate handicapped parking places, provide directions to ATMs and restrooms, warn of guard dogs and other hazards and provide a variety of other place-based information. With the prohibition of commercial messages on such signs, it has been the observation of the Fort Wright City Council members and their professional staff members that property owners are judicious and appropriate in posting such signs. The City of Fort Wright thus finds that it has a substantial interest in allowing merchants and property owners freely to post necessary informational signs but without allowing an endless proliferation of commercial messages.
12. Although in findings above the City of Fort Wright has recognized the multiple values of signs in the built environment, Fort Wright officials after consultation with the Planning Commission and representatives of cities and towns in the County concluded several years ago that there is no place for signs of overwhelming size and no relation to context in an urban and urbanizing environment like Fort Wright. Although previous versions of these regulations followed the pattern of state and federal laws by defining such billboard as “off-site” signs, this ordinance addresses the same issue by establishing a form of circuit breaker size limit, prohibiting very large signs on small lots, on vacant lots, or on lots with only small buildings.
13. These are complex public policy issues, and the Fort Wright City Council with the help of its professional planners, attorneys and outside consultant, has attempted to balance the competing considerations in a way that it believes best protects the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Fort Wright, including its many valued businesses and the tens of thousands of visitors who arrive or pass through the City of Fort Wright each month.
SECTION 14.3 TEMPORARY SIGNS
A. One temporary sign will be permitted on each site in a non-residential zone, subject to the following standards and conditions:
1. It shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area;
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. It shall be attached at all four corners or otherwise firmly affixed to a wall of the principal building or it may be freestanding;
3. If it is freestanding, it shall be supported by one or more posts or similar devices in the ground and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height;
4. In no case shall such a sign be affixed to a tree or other natural feature, a fence, a utility pole, or a fixture or structure on the property other than the principal building;
5. If freestanding, it shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line;
6. It shall not be separately illuminated;
7. If the message relates to an event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of the event;
8. Such a sign may bear any commercial or noncommercial message.
SECTION 14.4 SCOPE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY
A. SCOPE: This Article is adopted pursuant to KRS 100.
B. AUTHORITY: This Article regulates signs, as defined herein, when mounted, located, or displayed on property located within the unincorporated limits of the City of Fort Wright, on land that is either private land or public land over which the City of Fort Wright has land use regulatory authority.
C. APPLICABILITY, GENERAL: This Article shall apply to all signs erected, placed, painted, installed or otherwise made visible on private or public property in the City of Fort Wright, except as otherwise provided herein. All signs displayed in the City of Fort Wright shall comply with all requirements of this Article and all other applicable law. Permits shall be required for all signs in the City of Fort Wright, except as specified herein. No sign, outdoor advertising, structure, billboard or display shall be erected, installed, located or maintained in any zoning district of the City of Fort Wright, except in conformity with these regulations. New signs, additional signs, relocations or structural alterations of existing signs also require sign permits.
D. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any person to fasten, place, paint, or attach in any way: any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done in or upon any curb-stone, lamp post, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, culvert, public drinking fountain, public trash container, courtesy benches, rest room, bus stop kiosk or shed, station building, tree, or in or upon any portion of any public sidewalk, street, or sign, except as specifically allowed within this Article.
E. EXEMPTIONS: The following signs or sign elements are exempt from the provisions of this Article but are subject to any other applicable laws and regulations:
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. Any sign installed in a building or enclosed space and not legible from the public right-of-way or from private or public property other than the property on which it is located;
2. Any sign with a sign area of less than four square feet in area and less than four feet in height (if freestanding), that is not separately illuminated and that is not legible from the public right-of-way or from private or public property other than the property on which it is located;
3. Signs on mass transit vehicles operating in or passing through the City of Fort Wright; and
4. Signs on vehicles and watercraft which are regularly used in the operation of a business; signs on vehicles which are parked for long periods of time, which are not operational and/or which are not regularly used in the operation of a business at the same parking lot or parking area where the vehicle is most frequently parked shall be considered detached signs and subject to regulation under this Article. For purposes of this subsection, a “long period of time” shall be a continuous period of 30 days or separate periods that total 40 days or more out of any 60-day period.
F. SIGNS SUBJECT TO OTHER STANDARDS: Signs listed in this Section shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this Article; but shall, to the maximum extent allowed by law, be subject to the other standards of this Article. Where a sign is erected pursuant to a statute or a court order, the sign may exceed the size standards of this Article or otherwise deviate from the standards set forth in this Article to the extent that the statute or court order expressly required the larger size or other deviation. In all other respects, such signs shall conform to the standards of this Article. This subsection shall apply to the following types of signs:
1. Signs conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and bearing no commercial message;
2. Signs installed for a governmental purpose by employees or officials of the City of Fort Wright, Kenton County, a state or federal agency during their governmental duties;
3. Signs required by a state or federal statute;
4. Signs required by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
5. Signs installed by public utilities in their rights-of-way or on their facilities and bearing no commercial message other than such message is necessary to identify the use and/or provide contact information regarding the facility; and
6. Signs installed by a transit company with a franchise or other right to operate in the City of Fort Wright, where such signs are installed along its routes and relate to schedules or other information about the transit route.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
G. SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT: The following signs or sign-like devices are allowed in all zoning districts without a sign permit and are not to be included in determination of the allowable numbers, type and area of a sign that requires a sign permit. If a sign otherwise falling under this Section is electrified, it will require an electrical permit. Signs subject to this Section shall conform to the requirements specified:
1. Address Numbers used for identifying the address of any building shall not be counted toward allowed sign area;
2. Detached signs smaller than four square feet in area and less than four feet in height, of which not more than 25 percent may be used for a commercial message; (e.g., “Enter” or “Exit” signs);
3. Detached signs smaller than seven square feet, allowed in residential, conservation and agricultural zoning districts;
4. Temporary signs not greater than twelve (12) square feet, allowed in non-residential zones;
5. Wall signs containing no commercial message and not larger than four square feet in area;
6. Cultural decorations or displays of noncommercial nature, mounted on private residential property, which pertain to cultural observances;
7. Cornerstones, foundation stones and memorial signs or tablets, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material, provided that no such sign shall exceed six square feet in area nor shall any such sign be separately illuminated;
8. Symbols that do not bear or include any commercial message, that are integrated into the architecture of a building;
9. Gravestones when erected in a lawful cemetery or graveyard; and
10. Graphic images which are visible only from aircraft flying above.
H. OTHER ACTIONS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT: The following signs and actions related to signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this Article but shall be subject to all other standards of this Article.
1. Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing painted or printed sign, marquee, changeable copy sign or a similar compliant sign,
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
whether electrical, illuminated, electronic message center or non-illuminated painted message, provided that the copy on an electronic message board shall not change more frequently than allowed under Section 14.6, D.;
2. Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign not involving structural alterations;
3. Installation of permanent signs smaller than four square feet where such signs are allowed by this Article and involve no electrical installation; and
4. Installation of temporary signs not larger than four square feet, where such signs are allowed by this Article and conform with this Article in all respects.
I. PRODUCT DISPLAYS, SALES DEVICES, MENU BOARDS
1. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit or limit the outdoor display of products where allowed under the zoning ordinance, although a particular product may be a thing which would be prohibited by this Article if used as a sign and although one or more such products may have on them permanent labels that might otherwise fall under this Article. This Article shall, however, apply to any sign, banner, pennant, or other attention-attracting device affixed to a product displayed outdoors. For example, the label “Chevrolet” on an automobile or “John Deere” on a tractor shall not be considered a sign for purposes of this Article, but a separate sign attached to such a product shall be considered a sign and subject to regulation.
2. Signs on gasoline pumps, vending machines, news racks and similar machines and devices used for the sale or dispensing of products shall be allowed without a sign permit if they do not flash and if they are either not legible from any public right-of-way, public property or private property other than the site on which the sign is located; or they consist entirely of letters, numerals or symbols that are less than four inches in height. All other signs on vending machines, gas pumps, news racks and similar machines and devices shall be considered “signs” and shall be subject to all of the regulations of this Article.
3. In districts where drive-through and drive-up facilities are allowed, menu boards or other instructional or informational devices related to the drive-through or drive-up facilities shall be allowed without a sign permit, provided that such device is less than 12 square feet in size, and that the only words, numerals, symbols or pictures on such device that are legible from any location other than the site on which it is located shall include no commercial message but shall simply identify the device as a “menu,” “directory,” “instructions,” “information” or something similar, or a logo that is no larger than one foot in any dimension. In such districts, directional information and logos installed on drive-through canopies are also permitted and are not considered signs.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
SECTION 14.5 PROHIBITED SIGN TYPES
A. Unless specifically authorized by another section of this Article, or by other law, the following sign types are prohibited always and in all zones.
1. New billboards;
2. Any freestanding sign of which the area exceeds 10 percent of the area of the site or parcel on which it is located; or two percent of the lawful, as-built floor area of the principal building on the site; note that this is intended as a circuit-breaker and that all signs are subject to other size and dimensional requirements in this ordinance;
3. Portable signs, including folding portable signs and flashing portable signs;
4. Pennants, banners, streamers, balloons, and similar devices;
5. Animated, projecting, revolving, and moving signs, including those which create the appearance of animation, projection, revolving or other movement, or utilize flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity; automatic changeable copy signs that conform with Section 14.6, D., are not subject to this limitation;
6. Signs which are not traffic, control or safety signals, but by their shape, color, or manner of mounting or display, appear to be traffic, control or safety signals, and thus create confusion for drivers and pedestrians, as well as signs which create or constitute traffic hazards;
7. Signs on vacant lots in non-residential zones larger than 12 square feet in area;
8. Signs for which a separate structure is mounted on a roof or parapet; this provision does not prevent signs which are integral to the building;
9. Signs using sounds, music, sound effects, noises, or other sound or noise-making or transmitting device or instruments.
SECTION 14.6 INSTALLATION, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. LOCATION
1. No sign shall be located closer than five feet to any property line.
2. No sign shall be located so that it obstructs access to or from a doorway, fire escape or required escape window.
3. No sign shall be located so that it blocks the free air flow through windows in residential units.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
4. No sign located within a clear sight triangle shall obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians between a height of 30 inches and 108 inches off the ground.
5. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
6. No sign shall be located within eight vertical feet or four horizontal feet of overhead electrical or other wires.
B. NO PROJECTIONS OVER STREETS OR ALLEYS: Projecting signs are allowed in some zoning districts. No sign shall project over a public right-of-way unless the sign owner has obtained an encroachment permit for such sign. No sign shall project over any portion of a right-of-way used as a street, alley or other way for vehicular travel; encroachment permits are limited to allowing projecting signs to extend over sidewalks.
C. SIGN MAINTENANCE
1. The property owner shall be liable to maintain such sign, including its illumination sources, in neat and orderly condition and good working order at all times and to prevent the development of any deterioration in the safety of such sign. The property owner may assign such responsibility to a tenant or other party, but the property owner shall remain accountable for the maintenance.
2. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the routine maintenance of any nonconforming sign or the changing of the copy or content of any nonconforming sign, except where such maintenance or change in copy would increase the degree of its nonconformity.
3. If a business no longer operates on a premises that contains a cabinet wall sign and/or freestanding cabinet sign, those sign faces shall be obscured with a blank panel within 30 days of the business closing its operation on premises.
D. FLASHING SIGNS, MOVING SIGNS, AND CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS
1. General Rule: Signs that move, flash or simulate movement are prohibited except as allowed under this section. A changeable copy sign is considered a different classification of sign under this Article; conversion of an existing sign to a changeable copy sign or to add changeable copy elements to it is allowed only if the modified sign will conform with all standards in this Section and with all other applicable standards related to the location, height, size and other characteristics of the sign.
2. Rules for Changeable Copy Signs Allowed under this Article: Automatic changeable copy signs shall be allowed only in those districts in which “changeable copy sign, automatic” is listed as a permitted sign type and shall be subject to the following additional restrictions:
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-10
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. Such technology shall be programmed so that the message or image on the sign changes no more often than every eight seconds.
b. There shall be no effects of movement, flashing, scintillation, or similar effects in the individual images.
c. Changes of image shall be substantially instantaneous as seen by the human eye and shall not use fading, rolling, window shading, dissolving or similar effects as part of the change.
d. Video technology in signs shall use automatic level controls to reduce light levels at night and under cloudy or other darkened conditions, in accordance with the following standards.
(1) All electronic or digital display unit message boards shall have installed ambient light monitors, and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic board based on ambient light conditions.
(2) Maximum brightness levels for electronic or digital display boards shall not exceed 5,000 nits when measured from the billboard’s face at its maximum brightness, during daylight hours and 500 nits when measured from the board face at its maximum brightness between dusk and dawn, i.e., the time of day between sunrise and sunset.
e. Any sign using electronic or electro-mechanical technology for changeable copy message boards, which malfunctions, fails, or ceases to operate in its usual or normal programmed manner causing therein motion, movement, flashing or any other similar effects, shall be repaired or disconnected within 48 hours by the owner or operator of such billboard.
f. The area of a sign consisting of electronic or electro-mechanical message board elements shall not constitute more than 200 square feet of a sign.
g. The following limitations shall apply to the location of signs using electronic or electro-mechanical technology for a message board:
(1) A sign on which the electronic or electro-mechanical message board includes 100 or more square feet of sign area shall not be erected within 500 feet of property falling in one of the City of Fort Wright or other jurisdiction’s residential zoning districts, although this restriction shall not apply to mixed use districts and commercial districts allowing residential uses.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-11
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(2) A sign on which the electronic or electro-mechanical message board includes 20 or more square feet of sign area but less than 100 square feet of sign area shall not be erected within 200 feet of property falling in one of the City of Fort Wright or other jurisdiction’s residential zoning districts, although this restriction shall not apply to mixed use districts and commercial districts allowing residential use.
(3) A sign on which the electronic or electro-mechanical message board includes less than 20 square feet of sign area shall not be erected within 100 feet of property zoned and used exclusively for single family uses; it is the express intent of this provision to allow the use of such technology on signs for institutional uses located in residential districts, provided that the required separation is maintained between the sign and any property zoned and exclusively used for a single-family use.
SECTION 14.7 SIGNS ALLOWED IN CONSERVATION, AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DISTRICTS (CO Zone)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. One wall sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, is allowed for each dwelling unit. Such sign may contain a noncommercial message or a commercial message related to an activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including a lawful home occupation. The sign shall not be illuminated.
2. For permitted uses other than single-family residences, one wall sign per use, not more than two (2) square feet in area is allowed, provided that such sign contains no commercial message and is not illuminated.
B. DETACHED SIGNS
1. Each lot shall be allowed a total of four detached signs, including not more than one permanent detached sign, and temporary detached signs (up to a total of four detached signs at any time), each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The only commercial messages allowed on such signs are messages related to commercial activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including the sale of agricultural products, the lawful, occasional sale of personal property (such as through a garage sale or yard sale) or the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
2. Signs related to the sale of personal property (not including agricultural products) shall be removed within twenty-four hours after the end of the sale. Signs related to the sale, lease or rental of the premises shall be
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-12
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
removed no later than the date on which the deed, lease or other document representing the transaction is completed. Any such sign may contain any message other than a commercial message. If a message relates to an election or special event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of such election or other event.
C. TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS
1. As a temporary use accessory to the permitted activity of lawful subdivision development, one temporary sign at each principal entrance to a subdivision is allowed. There shall in no case be more than one such sign for each fifty (50) lots in a proposed subdivision. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed upon the earlier of the following:
a. Installation of a permanent neighborhood identification sign;
b. Sale of more than ninety percent (90%) of the lots in the subdivision; or
c. A period of two (2) years from the date of installation.
D. PERMANENT ENTRANCE SIGNS
1. Permanent neighborhood, multi-family or mobile home park monument signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, are allowed. Such signs may include a masonry wall, landscaping or other similar materials or features. Such signs shall only be located at the principal entrance(s) to the neighborhood from a street classified on the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. There shall be a maximum total sign area of fifty (50) square feet which may be used in a single sign or may be divided between a maximum of two (2) signs located on opposite sides of the same entrance. Such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-13
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 150 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Thirty-six (36) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.8 SIGNS ALLOWED IN SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-1C, R-1CC, R-1D, R-1DD, R-1E, R-1EE, R-1F, R-1FF and R-1G Zones)
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-14
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
A. WALL SIGNS
1. One wall sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, is allowed for each dwelling unit. Such sign may contain a noncommercial message or a commercial message related to an activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including a lawful home occupation. The sign shall not be separately illuminated.
2. For permitted uses other than single-family residences, one wall sign per use not more than two (2) square feet in area is allowed, provided that such sign contains no commercial message and is not illuminated.
B. DETACHED SIGNS
1. Each lot in a residential district shall be allowed a total of four detached signs, including not more than one permanent detached sign, and temporary detached signs (up to a total of four detached signs at any time), each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The permanent sign shall not contain a commercial message, and no more than two (2) signs on a lot in a residential district at any one time, including all wall signs, detached signs, temporary signs, and others, may contain commercial messages. The only commercial messages allowed on such signs are messages related to commercial activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including the lawful, occasional sale of personal property (such as through a garage sale or yard sale) or the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
2. Signs related to the sale of personal property shall be removed within twenty-four hours after the end of the sale. Signs related to the sale, lease or rental of the premises shall be removed no later than the date on which the deed, lease or other document representing the transaction is completed. Any such sign may contain any message other than a commercial message. If a message relates to an election or special event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of such election or other event.
C. TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS
1. As a temporary use accessory to the permitted activity of lawful subdivision development, one temporary sign at each principal entrance to a subdivision is allowed. There shall in no case be more than one such sign for each fifty (50) lots in a proposed subdivision. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed upon the earlier of the following:
a. Installation of a permanent neighborhood identification sign;
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-15
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
b. Sale of more than ninety percent (90%) of the lots in the subdivision; or
c. A period of two (2) years from the date of installation.
D. PERMANENT ENTRANCE SIGNS
1. Permanent neighborhood, multi-family or mobile home park monument signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, are allowed. Such signs may include a masonry wall, landscaping or other similar materials or features. Such signs shall only be located at the principal entrance(s) to the neighborhood from a street classified on the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. There shall be a maximum total sign area of fifty (50) square feet which may be used in a single sign or may be divided between a maximum of two (2) signs located on opposite sides of the same entrance. Such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-16
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Wall
Maximum size
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 150 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Thirty-six (36) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.9 SIGNS ALLOWED IN MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-2 and R-3 Zones)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. One wall sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, is allowed for each dwelling unit. Such sign may contain a noncommercial message or a commercial message related to an activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including a lawful home occupation. The sign shall not be separately illuminated.
2. For permitted uses other than single-family residences, one wall sign per use not more than two (2) square feet in area is allowed, provided that such sign contains no commercial message and is not illuminated.
3. For any building containing three or more dwelling units sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance. Such sign shall bear no commercial message. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a commercial message.
B. DETACHED SIGNS
1. Permanent detached signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations. The principal detached sign may contain a commercial message related to the rental, lease or occupancy of the
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-17
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
premises. No other commercial message is allowed on the permanent signs allowed under this table.
Principal
Directory
Additional
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance per building
Maximum size
50 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
10 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any street right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
Concealed source
only
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
2. In addition to these permanent detached signs, each separately owned or controlled lot in such a residential district shall be allowed a total of four detached signs, including not more than one permanent detached sign, and temporary detached signs (up to a total of four detached signs at any time), each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The permanent sign shall not contain a commercial message, and no more than two (2) signs on a lot in a residential district at any one time, including all wall signs, detached signs, temporary signs, and others, may contain commercial messages. The only commercial messages allowed on such signs are messages related to commercial activity lawfully conducted on the premises, including the lawful, occasional sale of personal property (such as through a garage sale or yard sale) or the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
3. Signs related to the sale of personal property shall be removed within twenty-four hours after the end of the sale. Signs related to the sale, lease or rental of the premises shall be removed no later than the date on which the deed, lease or other document representing the transaction is completed. Any such sign may contain any message other than a commercial message. If a message relates to an election or special event, such sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the conclusion of such election or other event.
C. TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-18
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. As a temporary use accessory to the permitted activity of lawful subdivision development, one temporary sign at each principal entrance to a subdivision is allowed. There shall in no case be more than one such sign for each fifty (50) dwelling units in a proposed development. Such sign shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed upon the earlier of the following:
a. Installation of a permanent neighborhood identification sign;
b. Sale of more than ninety percent (90%) of the lots in the subdivision; or
c. A period of two (2) years from the date of installation.
D. PERMANENT ENTRANCE SIGNS
1. Permanent neighborhood, multi- family or mobile home park monument signs, either illuminated or non-illuminated, are allowed. Such signs may include a masonry wall, landscaping or other similar materials or features. Such signs shall only be located at the principal entrance(s) to the neighborhood from a street classified on the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. There shall be a maximum total sign area of fifty (50) square feet which may be used in a single sign or may be divided between a maximum of two (2) signs located on opposite sides of the same entrance. Such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. This may include
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-19
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 150 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Thirty-six (36) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.10 SIGNS ALLOWED IN OFFICE DISTRICTS (PO-1, PO-2, and OP Zones)
A. WINDOWS AND WALL SIGNS
1. Window and permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that building wall
See total
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-20
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Maximum number
Area limit only
One per building street frontage
N/A
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Indirect white light
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
For any building containing three or more offices or other tenants sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance. Such sign shall bear no commercial message related to activities, goods or services not offered on the premises. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a commercial message related to commercial activities not conducted on the premises.
B. DETACHED SIGNS
1. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
Less than 3 businesses: 50 square feet
3 or more businesses: 90 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
Adjacent to interstate: 40 feet
Any other street: 20 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-21
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
Only manual changeable copy is allowed; may cover entire sign face
C. DIRECTORY (WALL) SIGNS
1. One directory sign on a wall, not exceeding six square feet in area, is allowed per public entrance for a nonresidential building. Such sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way and shall be illuminated by direct white light only.
D. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 150 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-22
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Thirty-six (36) inches
E. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.11 SIGNS ALLOWED IN INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS (INST Zone)
A. WINDOW AND WALL SIGNS GENERALLY
Window and permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that building wall
See total
Two (2) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Maximum number
Area limit only
One per building street frontage
N/A
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Indirect white light
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
For any building containing three or more offices or other tenants sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance. Such sign shall bear no commercial message related to activities, goods or services not offered on the premises. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a commercial message related to commercial activities not conducted on the premises.
B. DETACHED SIGNS
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-23
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
1. Permanent detached signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations.
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage per
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
50 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
8 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from front property line; 10 feet from any other property line
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face
Not allowed
Only manual changeable copy is allowed; may cover entire sign face
C. TEMPORY BANNERS ON ATHLETIC FIELDS – SINGLE OR DOUBLE FACED
1. Structural Type – Temporary Banners
2. Maximum Sign Area – Thirty-two (32) square feet on one side
3. Maximum Height Above Grade At Top Of Sign – Eight (8) feet
4. Limitations On Number Of Signs – Twelve (12) signs total, which can be divided amongst several athletic fields
5. Other Limitations:
a. Such banners shall be anchored to a pole, fence, or building at the top and bottom, so that the end of the banner does not flap in the wind, like a flag or pennant.
b. Such banners may be attached to poles serving another purpose, such as a fence, or to separate poles used only for the banners.
c. Each such banner may contain a message on each side, except when directly adjacent to another zone or on a fence along a property line, then a message is only permitted on a single side facing the interior of the lot.
d. Such banners shall not be separately illuminated.
e. Such banners may be visible from the public right-of-way but shall not be legible from any location except the site used by the institution
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-24
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
D. DIRECTORY (WALL) SIGNS
1. One directory sign on a wall, not exceeding six square feet in area, is allowed per public entrance for a nonresidential building. Such sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way and shall be illuminated by direct white light only.
E. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.12 SIGNS ALLOWED IN GENERAL BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
A. WINDOW AND WALL SIGNS
1. NC, NSC, SC, HC, LHS, HOC and TCFD Zoning Districts
a. Window and permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that building wall
See total
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Maximum number
Area limit only
One per building street frontage
N/A
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Concealed source only
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
2. CC Zoning District
a. Window and permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-25
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that building wall
See total
One (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Maximum number
Area limit only
One per building street frontage
N/A
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Concealed source only
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
B. POLE OR GROUND SIGNS
1. NC and TCFD Zoning Districts
a. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
Less than 3 businesses: 50 square feet
3 or more businesses: 90 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
Adjacent to interstate: 40 feet
Any other street: 20 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-26
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. HC, LHS and HOC Zoning Districts
a. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
Less than 3 businesses: 50 square feet
3 or more businesses: 220 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
Adjacent to interstate: 55 feet
Any other street: 20 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
3. NSC and SC Zoning District:
a. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
Less than 3 businesses: 50 square feet
3 or more businesses: 150 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
30 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-27
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, exposed or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
4. CC Zoning District
a. Principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
32 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
6 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, exposed or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
C. DETACHED SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. HC, LHS and HOC Zoning Districts:
a. To improve wayfinding on multi-user sites, the following detached signs are allowed in addition to those allowed under subsection B. of this Section. One detached sign not legible from the right-of-way, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and not exceeding six feet in height shall be allowed for each ten separate nonresidential uses or per vehicle entrance, whichever is less. One additional such sign shall be allowed for each two drive-through lanes. Such sign shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50) feet, from any other property line a minimum of thirty (30) feet, and from a residential zoning district a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Such sign shall not contain changeable copy and the sign may be internally illuminated or externally illuminated from an exposed or concealed source.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-28
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. SC Zoning Districts:
a. One detached sign not legible from the right-of-way, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and not exceeding six feet in height shall be allowed for each ten separate nonresidential uses or per vehicle entrance, whichever is less. One additional such sign shall be allowed for each two drive-through lanes. Such sign shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50) feet, from any other property line a minimum of thirty (30) feet, and from a residential zoning district a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Such sign shall not contain changeable copy and the sign may be internally illuminated or externally illuminated from an exposed or concealed source.
D. WALL SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. For any building containing three or more uses of any type sharing a common entrance or hallway, one additional wall sign shall be allowed at each public entrance providing access to such uses. Such sign shall bear no commercial message related to activities, goods or services not offered on the premises. The sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not be separately illuminated. The sign shall not be more than four square feet in area. The purpose of this section is to allow for directory signs, listing tenants or occupants, but the sign may bear any message other than a commercial message not related to commercial activities on the premises.
E. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-29
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 150 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Thirty-six (36) inches
F. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.13 SIGNS ALLOWED IN PUD, RCD, MHP, AND PO-3 ZONES
A. The location, type, and size of signs shall be as approved according to the approved Development Plan.
SECTION 14.14 SIGNS ALLOWED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (IP, I-1, I-2, Zones)
A. WALL SIGNS
1. Permanent wall signs are allowed for nonresidential uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Window
Wall
Total
Maximum size
25 percent of window area on that building wall
See total
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-30
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Maximum number
Area limit only
One per building street frontage
N/A
Permitted illumination
No separate illumination
Concealed source only
N/A
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
N/A
B. POLE OR PRINCIPAL GROUND SIGNS
1. IP Zoning District
a. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage per site
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Maximum size
Less than 3 businesses: 50 square feet
3 or more businesses: 90 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
Adjacent to interstate: 40 feet
Any other street: 20 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, direct or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
2. I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts
a. Pole or principal ground signs are allowed in these zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
Principal
Directory
Other
Maximum number
One per street frontage
One per vehicle entrance
One per public entrance
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-31
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Maximum size
Less than 3 businesses: 50 square feet
3 or more businesses: 150 square feet
Six square feet
Six square feet
Maximum height
30 feet
4 feet
4 feet
Minimum setback from nearest property line
5 feet from any property line; 25 feet from any right-of-way
15 feet
25 feet
Permitted illumination
External or internal, exposed or concealed source
Concealed source only
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Automatic allowed; may cover up to 25 percent of sign face allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
C. DETACHED SIGNS NOT LEGIBLE FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. To improve wayfinding on multi-user sites, the following detached signs are allowed in addition to those allowed under subsection B of this Section. One detached sign not legible from the right-of-way, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and not exceeding six feet in height shall be allowed for each four separate nonresidential uses or per vehicle entrance, whichever is less. One additional such sign shall be allowed for each two drive-through lanes. Such sign shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of fifty (50) feet, from any other property line a minimum of thirty (30) feet, and from a residential zoning district a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Such sign shall not contain changeable copy and the sign may be internally illuminated or externally illuminated from an exposed or concealed source.
D. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
1. Any school, house of worship, recreation center or other institutional use permitted in the zoning district may have one detached sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. This may include changeable copy signs, not to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the sign area. Such signs may be illuminated.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-32
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
2. Each such use shall also be allowed one wall sign for each public entrance to a building; such wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet each and shall not be illuminated.
3. A permanent wall sign is allowed for institutional uses in these districts, subject to the following limits. No sign shall extend above the top of the wall of the building, including parapets and architectural extensions.
Wall
Maximum size
Two (2) square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building width on the side of building on which sign is located, with a maximum size of 150 square feet
Maximum number
One per building street frontage
Permitted illumination
Concealed source only
Changeable copy
Not allowed
Maximum Letter Size
Thirty-six (36) inches
E. OTHER SIGNS
1. Other signs as permitted pursuant to Section 14.4, F., Signs Subject to Other Standards, and Section 14.4, G., Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
SECTION 14.15 MASTER SIGNAGE PLANS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
1. It is the purpose of the City of Fort Wright to require owners, lessees and managers of sites containing multiple signs requiring permits to plan and design signs that are compatible with the buildings on the site, thus enhancing the appearance of the site and of the streetscape that includes it. This Section spells out specific criteria for review for compliance with the section, but the City of Fort Wright recognizes that the consideration of issues of design necessarily requires some exercise of judgment, within the specific criteria set out in this Section. Although the City of Fort Wright has provided a remedy of appeal for an applicant aggrieved by an action on a proposed master signage plan, it is the intent of the City of Fort Wright that the primary remedy for such an applicant is the erection and installation of all of the signs allowed by right, under other sections of this Article. It is thus the intent of the City of Fort Wright, that, to the extent that it can guide the scope of review of a court considering an appeal, a court considering an appeal under this
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-33
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
Section reverses or remands the decision of the Zoning Administrator only if it finds that such action is arbitrary and capricious.
B. APPLICABILITY
1. The owner of any site that includes more than one tenant or occupant shall apply for approval of a Master Signage Plan before applying for a sign permit for any detached sign.
C. PROCEDURE
1. The submittal of a Master Signage Plan shall be considered a Stage II Development Plan.
2. The owner(s) shall apply to the planning commission’s duly authorized representative.
3. Where an application for approval of a Master Signage Plan is submitted simultaneously or as part of another Stage II Development Plan, the two shall be processed together. Where an application includes properties not under common ownership, all property owners shall sign the application or shall submit documents granting the applicant the authority to process such an application.
4. The planning commission’s duly authorized representative shall review the submitted Stage II Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements of this Section, for Master Signage Plans, other applicable elements of this Article, and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with any approved Stage I Development Plan for the property. In approving the Master Signage Plan, the planning commission’s duly authorized representative may authorize minor adjustments from the Stage I Development Plan.
5. If a Master Signage Plan application is denied, the applicant may submit a new application with a revised plan at any time.
6. Any person aggrieved by the action of the planning commission’s duly authorized representative on a Master Signage Plan may appeal the decision by filing an application with the Planning Commission.
D. APPLICATION CONTENTS
1. The application for approval of a Master Signage Plan shall contain at least the following information. Where the application is submitted simultaneously with an application for a Stage II Development Plan approval, the Master Signage Plan may refer to portions of the Stage II Development Plan application or approved Stage I Development Plan for related requirements:
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-34
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. If the site has not been improved, all information required by Section 9.20, B., for a Stage II Development Plan;
b. If the site has been improved, as-built conditions, showing all buildings and other improvements and all parking areas and vehicle entrances;
c. A proposed design plan showing signage design at a scale of 1/2” = 1 ft
d. Computation of the maximum area for all signs, the height of signs and the number of detached signs allowed on the development site(s) included in the plan under this Article, including incentives authorized below;
e. For properties with multiple tenants or multiple occupants entitled to signs, an allocation of the allowed signage among the eligible tenants or users;
f. An accurate indication on the plot plan of the current or proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that signs not requiring permits need not be shown;
g. The color schemes and design features (excluding specific messages) for proposed signs; and
h. The signatures of all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the legislative body may require.
E. AMENDMENTS
1. A Master Signage Plan may be amended by filing a new Master Signage Plan that conforms to all requirements of this Section in effect at the time of submittal.
F. PROVISIONS FOR NONCONFORMING SIGNS
1. A Master Signage Plan for a property already containing signs on the date of submission of the application shall include a schedule for bringing all signs on the development site into conformance with the Master Signage Plan by a specified date. The conformance schedule included in such Master Signage Plan shall be considered a condition of approval of the Master Signage Plan.
G. CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL
1. A Master Signage Plan shall be approved if and only if the planning commission’s duly authorized representative finds that the proposed plan meets all of the standards set out in this Article. If the planning commission’s duly authorized representative finds that the proposed plan substantially meets such standards, it may approve the proposed plan
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-35
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
subject to conditions that will cause it to meet these standards. Otherwise, the planning commission’s duly authorized representative shall deny the application for plan approval:
a. Each proposed sign conforms with all applicable standards of this Article;
b. The total amount of signage proposed for any building, wall, site, or portion of a site, conforms with all applicable standards of this Article;
c. The proposed plan contains all of the information required by subsection D of this Section
d. The proposed allocation of allowed signage among eligible tenants, which shall be proportional to one of or a combination of the following criteria:
(1) The number of public entrances to space leased to or controlled by each tenant or occupant;
(2) The linear feet of frontage of the space leased to or controlled by each tenant or occupant along the wall(s) containing public entrances; and/or
(3) The façade area of the building elevation(s) containing the public entrances to the spaces leased to or controlled by each tenant or occupant.
e. All proposed signs shall be part of a common design scheme, meeting at least the following criteria:
(1) The materials and design of all wall signs shall follow one design scheme;
(2) The materials and design of freestanding signs shall follow one design scheme, which may or may not be the same as the design scheme for wall signs;
(3) Each design scheme shall require consistency among signs for at least three of the following criteria: lighting design; color schemes; materials; shape; proportion; and/or typefaces;
(4) If the design schemes for the wall signs and freestanding signs are different, they shall have in common at least two of the following criteria: lighting design; color schemes; materials; proportion; and
(5) The design scheme for freestanding signs shall use building materials, colors and, where applicable, architectural design features consistent with the materials, colors and architectural design features of the principal building on the site.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-36
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
H. EFFECT
1. After approval of a Master Signage Plan, no permit shall be issued for a sign on the site(s) subject to the Master Signage Plan except in accordance with such plan, and no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in accordance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this Article. In case of any conflict between a provision of a Master Signage Plan and one or more provisions of this Article, this Article shall prevail.
I. SPECIAL SEVERABILITY PROVISIONS
1. The severability provisions of Section 14.19, A., 11., are limited by this subsection. If any procedural aspect of this Section is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, it is the intent of the City of Fort Wright that this entire Section, but only this Section, should be stricken as unconstitutional, but that any plans previously approved under it should remain in effect, allowing the signs shown on such plans as lawful nonconforming signs, regardless of whether such signs have been erected on the date of such decision. If any substantive part of the standards and criteria for approval of this Section is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional it is the intent of the City of Fort Wright that such part be stricken and that the rest of this Section remain in full force and effect, in accordance with the principles set out in more detail in Section 14.19, A., 11.
SECTION 14.16 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
A. Unless a particular sign is exempt from the permit requirement under an explicit provision of this Article or other applicable law, then a permit for such sign is required.
1. WHEN REQUIRED
a. Replacements
(1) If any sign is removed and any new sign is erected in its place, a permit shall be obtained the same as if a new sign were erected at a new location, subject to all requirements enumerated herein.
b. Maintenance
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-37
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(1) If any sign is removed for maintenance and replaced on the same supports, a new permit will not be deemed necessary if the size or type of sign is not changed.
c. Relocation of Signs
(1) If any sign is removed from one location and erected at a new location, a new permit shall be obtained.
d. Alteration
(1) Alteration or enlargement of any sign shall require a permit the same as for a new sign. Any change in technology for a sign shall be considered an alteration; this shall expressly apply but not be limited to the conversion of a sign to changeable copy technology of any type.
2. APPLICATION
a. No permit shall be granted until and after an application has been filed with the designated administrative official, showing the plans and specifications, including application fees, dimensions, materials, and details of construction of the proposed structure and meeting all provisions of this Article.
3. APPLICATION FORM
a. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare and provide a form to be used as an application for a sign permit. The same form may constitute a permit, when duly approved. Multiple signs may be listed on a single permit only when they are all on the same lot or parcel, or are part of a single, comprehensive development.
4. INFORMATION ON APPLICATION
a. The sign application form shall include the following information:
(1) Name and contact information for the applicant, and if separate, the name, address and consent of the property owner;
(2) Street address and Property Identification Number (PIDN) of the site;
(3) Accurate site plan to scale describing the design, dimensions, proposed placement, structural and electrical characteristics and appearance of the sign(s), including the
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-38
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
location of existing buildings, signs and other structures on the same site as the proposed sign(s);
(4) If the plans and drawings require an engineer’s or architect’s seal, signature or certificate, such shall show current Kentucky registration or licensure;
(5) Any signs or other structures to be removed or relocated;
(6) Dimensions and heights of all existing and proposed sign(s);
(7) Information regarding electrification, trenching, demolition, plumbing, temporary street closure, or encroachment into the public right of way;
(8) Any known uncorrected violations of zoning laws on the site;
(9) Name, address and any licensing/bonding information for any sign contractors;
(10) Technical drawings, specifications, structural safety calculations for the sign structure;
(11) If the sign is subject to any of the safety codes (building, electrical, etc.), then all information required to determine compliance with such codes or to satisfy the requirements of such codes;
(12) The length of each occupant’s/tenant/s lineal wall frontage;
(13) Workers’ compensation and liability documents and occupational licenses for all contractors
5. INITIAL REVIEW
a. Unless a given sign is exempt from the permit requirement, all sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, and approved or denied on the basis of whether the proposed sign satisfies all requirements of this Article, and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. If it does, then the permit shall be issued. If it does not, then the denial notice shall specify the point(s) of noncompliance. Decisions on sign permit applications shall be made in writing by the Zoning Administrator, and are subject to the appeal procedures provided herein. When applicable, permits under building and electrical codes then in effect are also required; sign permits may be approved subject to compliance with building and electrical code requirements.
6. COMPLETENESS
a. Initial review of an application will be for the purpose of determining if the application is complete. If the application is found incomplete, written notice of the finding of incompleteness will be given to the applicant within fifteen working days of submission, detailing the points of incompleteness. Notice is
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-39
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
deemed effective when mailed or personally delivered. After notice of incompleteness, the applicant shall have thirty calendar days in which to resubmit the application, with all noted items of incompleteness cured. If the application is resubmitted within that time, no additional fee shall be required, and the application, if complete, shall then be processed in accordance with this Section. If no notice of incompleteness is timely provided, the application shall be deemed complete as of the last day on which the notice of incompleteness could have been given.
7. TIME FOR DECISION
a. The Zoning Administrator shall render a decision on each complete sign permit application within five working days of when the application was complete.
8. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT
a. All signs shall conform to the requirements of the permit, and all other applicable laws. Any sign not erected or constructed as represented on the application upon which the permit was issued shall not be construed as a hardship case, but shall be construed as a misrepresentation of facts on the application and a violation of this Article. Any noncomplying sign which is not removed or corrected within the required time shall be a deemed public nuisances and a violation of the zoning ordinance, and may be abated in the same manner as any public nuisance or zoning ordinance violation.
SECTION 14.17 APPEALS
A. Decisions on sign permit applications, as well as directives, orders, notices and all other sign-related decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
1. INITIATION OF APPEAL
a. An appeal under this Article may be initiated by following the procedures set forth in KRS 100.261, within the time allowed by that section.
2. HEARING ON APPEAL
a. Within 60 working days of timely receipt of a notice of appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall hear the appeal in an open, public, duly
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-40
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
noticed hearing. The appellant and all other persons wishing to be heard shall be allowed to present evidence and argument. The Board will base its decision on the law and the evidence presented at the hearing. The Board will issue a written decision within 30 calendar days of the hearing, and the written decision shall state the decision and the facts and law supporting the decision.
3. WAIVER OF TIME
a. Any of the timeliness requirements of this Section may be waived by the appellant.
4. JUDICIAL REVIEW
a. The decision of the Board of Adjustment is final. Further review may be had in Kenton County Circuit Court, pursuant to the Kentucky law of civil procedure.
5. STATUS PENDING APPEAL
a. While any sign related matter is on appeal, the status quo of the subject sign(s) shall be maintained, except when, by virtue of physical condition, the sign poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, in which case the threat may be abated in the same manner as any other immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 14.18 DEFINITIONS AND MEASUREMENTS
A. MEASUREMENTS
1. Area of Signs Other than Wall Signs
a. The gross surface area of a sign, except wall signs, is the entire area contained within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign. For detached signs composed of more than one sign cabinet or module, the gross surface area shall include the sum of the area in each cabinet or module only. If a sign has more than one face, the gross surface area shall be equal to the maximum area of the sign face or faces visible from any ground position along any public right-of-way at any one time.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-41
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
b. The perimeter of a sign will not include lighting fixtures, pole covers, landscaping, framing, decorative roofing, moldings or aprons or other architectural or decorative embellishments, provided they contain no written copy, logos or symbols.
2. Area of Wall Signs
a. The gross surface area of a wall sign is the entire area contained within a single continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure(s) which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message(s). If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, color or embellishment, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each symbol or letter. The combined area of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-42
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
3. Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs
a. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the face
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-43
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
4. Measurement of Height of Sign
a. Sign height shall be measured from the elevation at the base of the sign to the highest point of the highest element of the sign, excluding any incidental structural element, such as an uplift cable for a projecting sign. Where the sign is located on a hill, the average elevation of the land which the sign will be placed upon shall be used as a basis for measuring the height. A sign may be located on a mound or berm up to three feet in height without the mound or berm being counted towards the overall height of the sign.
SECTION 14.19 POLICIES AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
A. This Article shall be administered, enforced and construed in accordance with the following policies.
1. DISCRETIONARY REVIEW
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-44
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. When one or more signs are part of a project or development, or a variance, conditional use permit, exception or special use permit is sought for sign(s), which requires discretionary review, then the sign shall be reviewed without regard to the graphic design or visual image on the display face of the sign, and discretion shall be restricted to structural, location and other non-communicative aspects of the sign. This provision does not override the billboard policy.
2. MESSAGE NEUTRALITY
a. It is the City of Fort Wright policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner.
3. REGULATIONS ON OFF-SITE MESSAGES
a. This Article distinguishes in some cases between commercial messages that relate to products or services not offered at the location of the sign (“off-site commercial messages”). The purpose of that distinction is to acknowledge the need of businesses for identification and notice of their businesses at a business location while limiting the proliferation of commercial messages generally. There is no intent to limit noncommercial messages in any way with this distinction.
4. BILLBOARD POLICY
a. New billboards, as defined herein, are prohibited. The City of Fort Wright completely prohibits the construction, erection or use of any billboards, other than those which legally exist within the regulatory zoning jurisdiction of the City of Fort Wright, or for which a valid permit has been issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this provision is first adopted. No permit shall be issued for any billboard which violates this policy, and the City of Fort Wright will take immediate enforcement or abatement action against any billboard constructed or maintained in violation of this policy. In adopting this provision, the City of Fort Wright affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this billboard policy even if it were the only provision in this Article. The City of Fort Wright intends for this billboard policy to be severable and separately enforceable even if other provision(s) of this Article may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable.
5. MESSAGE SUBSTITUTION
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-45
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. Subject to the property owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted in whole or in part for the message displayed on any sign for which the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. In addition, any on-site commercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any other on-site commercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use; does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; and does not allow the substitution of an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message or a noncommercial message.
6. REGULATORY INTERPRETATIONS
a. All regulatory interpretations of this Article are to be exercised in light of the City of Fort Wright message neutrality and message substitution policies. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this Article, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a “structure” as defined in the building code then in effect, then the Zoning Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this Article, in light of the policies stated in this Section.
7. NONCOMMUNICATIVE ASPECTS
a. All rules and regulations concerning the non-communicative aspects of signs, such as location, size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation, etc., stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process.
8. MIXED USE ZONES AND OVERLAY ZONES
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-46
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
a. In any zone where both residential and non-residential uses are allowed, the sign-related rights and responsibilities applicable to any particular parcel or land use shall be determined as follows: (1) if specific sign regulations are provided in the zoning district, those regulations shall be applied; or (2) if no sign regulations are provided in the zoning district, residential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where a use of that type would be allowed as a matter of right, and nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a conditional use permit or similar discretionary process.
9. PROPERTY OWNER’S CONSENT
a. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, “owner” means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property. The signature of the property owner or authorized agent will be required on all applications for sign permits.
10. LEGAL NATURE OF SIGN RIGHTS
a. As to all signs attached to real property, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this Article attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, sign-related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this Article or other law), or the ownership of sign structures. This provision does not apply to hand held signs or other images which are aspects of personal appearance.
11. SEVERABILITY
a. Generally
(1) If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this Article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence,
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-47
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
phrase, clause, term or word of this Article, except as limited by Section 14.19, A., 11., b.
b. Severability Where Less Speech Results
(1) Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection A of this Section or elsewhere in this Article or this Code, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article is declared unconstitutional, such declaration shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise additional standards.
c. Severability of Provisions Pertaining to Prohibited Signs
(1) Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection A of this Section, or elsewhere in this Article or in this Code, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article or any other laws declared unconstitutional by valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign types prohibited and not allowed under Section 14.5 of this Article. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article or of any part of the Zoning Ordinance is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article, except as expressly provided in Section 14.19, A., 11., b.
d. Severability of Prohibition on Off-premise Signs
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-48
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
(1) If any part section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term or word of this Article and/or an other provisions of this Article or other provisions of Zoning Ordinance or this Code are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the limitations on off-premise signs as contained herein.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
ARTICLE XV
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL ZONES
SECTION 15.0 APPLICATION OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: After the effective date of this ordinance, any use established or changed to, and any building, structure, or tract of land, developed, constructed, or used for any permitted or permissible principal or accessory use in all industrial zones (I-P, I-1, I-2, I-4 and I-5), shall comply with all of the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved. If any existing use, or building, or other structure is extended, enlarged, or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged, or reconstructed portion, or portions, of such use, or building, or other structure.
SECTION 15.1 TIME SCHEDULE FOR COMPLIANCE OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Except for standards regulated and enforced by the state of Kentucky, compliance with the provisions of this article of the ordinance shall be according to the following time schedule:
A. All new installations shall comply as of going into operation.
B. All existing installations not in compliance, as of the effective date of this ordinance, shall be in compliance within one (1) calendar year of the effective date of this ordinance, unless the owner or person responsible for the operation of the installation shall have submitted to the zoning administrator a program and schedule for achieving compliance. Such program and schedule to contain a date on or before which full compliance will be attained and such other information as the zoning administrator may require. If approved by the zoning administrator, such date will be the date on which the person shall comply.
The zoning administrator may require persons submitting such program to submit subsequent periodic reports on progress in achieving compliance.
SECTION 15.2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. BUILDING ENCLOSURES: Except as herein provided, every use permitted in the I-P industrial district shall be operated in its entirety within a completely
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
enclosed building. In the I-1, I-2 industrial districts, permitted uses shall be operated either within a completely enclosed building or within an area screened from view at the nearest district boundary, according to Section 9.17 and Article XIV of this ordinance.
B. LANDSCAPING: In all industrial districts, all required yards shall either be open landscaped and grassed areas or be left in a natural state, if acceptable to the planning commission. If said area is to be landscaped, it shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, etc., according to the initially submitted plans which were first approved of for the development of such tract as a permitted use.
In areas to be used for off-street parking, the parking arrangement and surfacing must likewise have been approved of for the development of such tract as a permitted use. Any landscaped areas shall be poorly maintained thereafter in a sightly and well kept condition. Parking areas shall likewise be maintained in good condition. Any areas left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in a well kept condition.
C. NOISE: For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequencies of a sound, a type 1 or type 2 sound level meter shall be employed that conforms to specifications published by the American National Standards Institute (specifications for Sound Level Meters S1.4 - 1971, or the latest edition of such standards, shall be used). In the enforcement of the regulation, noises produced by the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities shall not be included in determining the maximum permitted decibel level. The sound pressure of noise radiated continuously from any activity shall not exceed the value given in Tables 1 and 2 of this section, at the location of any receiving land use. If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the corrections in Table 2 of this section shall be added or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table 1 of this ordinance.
In all districts, industrial noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness.
D. ODOROUS MATTER: No emission of odorous matter shall be allowed in excess of ambient air quality standards, as set forth by regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution, Cincinnati Air Quality Region.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
E. HUMIDITY, HEAT OR GLARE: In the I-P or I-1 districts, any activity producing humidity, in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not perceptible at any lot line. In the I-2 and I-5 districts, any activity producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not perceptible at or beyond any residential or commercial district boundary. Detailed plans for the elimination of humidity, heat, or glare may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
F. EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Any lights used for exterior illumination, except for overhead street lighting and warning, or traffic signals shall direct light away from the adjoining zones.
G. VIBRATION: Vibrations shall be measured at the lot line in the I-P and I-1 districts and at the nearest district boundary in the I-2, I-4 and I-5 districts. No vibration is permitted which is discernible to the human sense of feeling for three (3) minutes or more duration in any one (1) hour. Vibration shall not produce, at any time, an acceleration of more than 0.1 gravities or shall result in any combination of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe" range of Table 7, United States Bureau of Mines, Bulletin No. 442, "Seismic Efforts of Quarry Blasting", on any structure. The methods and equations of said Bulletin No. 442, or any subsequent revision or amendment thereto, shall be used to compute all values for the enforcement of these provisions. Detailed plans for the elimination of vibrations may be required before the issuance of any building permit.
H. EMISSIONS AND OPEN BURNING: No emission of particulate matter, sulfur, compound, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide, and open burning shall be allowed in all industrial zones in excess of regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution, Cincinnati Air Quality Region.
I. RADIATION: In all industrial zones, all sources of ionizing radiation shall be registered or licensed by the Kentucky State Department of Health and operated in accordance with their regulations.
J. ELECTRICAL RADIATION: In all industrial zones, any electrical radiation shall not adversely affect, at any point on or beyond the lot line, any operation or equipment, other than those of the creation of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from electrical radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operations is permitted.
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
K. STORAGE: In the I-1 and I-2 Zones, storage of materials, supplies, and products on the property outside the building, constructed thereon, is permitted to the side and rear of the property, providing that the storage of materials, supplies, and products are within an area screened from view at the nearest district boundary, in accordance with Section 9.17 and Article XIV.
L. FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS: In the IP and I-2 zones only, storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials which requires free burning and intense burning may be allowed if permitted in said zones, provided that said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system. In the IP and I-2 zones only, the storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids, or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, may be allowed if permitted in said zones, provided that storage, handling, and use shall be in accordance with Standards of American Insurance Association for Storage, Handling, and Use of Flammable Liquids, "American Insurance Association", Pamphlet No. 30, June 1959, or any subsequent revision or amendment thereto.
M. WASTE: Within the I-P zone, no waste material or refuse shall be dumped upon, or permitted to remain upon, any part of the part of the property outside of the buildings constructed thereon. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated and disposed of in such a manner so as to comply with the standards of the appropriate authority. All plans for waste disposal facilities shall be required before the issuance of any building permit. In the I-1, I-2, I-4 and I-5 zones, all waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the Solid Waste Regulations of the Kentucky Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.
N. MINING AND RECLAMATION: All methods of operation, construction of roads, back-filling, grading, blasting, water impoundments, treatment facilities, and reclamation must be in conformance with the regulations adopted by the Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Reclamation. Any excavation or processing operations shall be subject to the regulations of the Kentucky Water Pollution Control Commission.
O. BLASTING AND EXPLOSIVES: All blasting and the use of explosives must be conducted in accordance with the regulations set forth by the Department of Mines and Minerals, Division of Explosives and Blasting (pursuant to the authority of KRS 351.310 to 351.340 and 351.990) and in accordance with the
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
Standards of Safety for Explosives, for the state of Kentucky, prepared by the Department of Public Safety, Division of Fire Prevention (pursuant to the authority of KRS 227.300).
Article XV Performance Standards For Industrial Zones 15-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2017 PDS
TABLE 1
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (DECIBELS) AT SPECIFIED POINTS OF MEASUREMENT FOR NOISE RADIATED CONTINUOUSLY FROM A FACILITY
RECEIVING LAND USE
7:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M.
10:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.
Residential
55
50
Commercial and Industrial Park
60
55
Industrial
65
65
TABLE 2
CORRECTION IN MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL IN DECIBELS TO BE APPLIED TO TABLE 1
TYPE OF OPERATION OF CHARACTER OF NOISE
CORRECTION IN
DECIBELS
Noise source operates less than twenty (20)
percent of any one hour period
plus 5*
Noise source operates less than five (5)
percent of any one hour period
plus 10*
Noise source operates less than one (1)
percent of any one hour period
plus 15*
Noise of impulse character (hammering, etc.)
minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.)
minus 5
* Apply one of these corrections only
Article XVI Administration 16-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE XVI
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 16.0 ENFORCING OFFICER: A zoning administrator (official or officials appointed by the legislative body for carrying out the provisions and enforcement of this ordinance) shall administer and enforce this ordinance. He may be provided with assistance of such other persons as the legislative body directs.
If the zoning administrator finds that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall take such action as is permitted by law.
In addition to the foregoing, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, structures, signs, fences, or additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto, discontinuance of any illegal work being done.
All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts, as provided by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
It shall be illegal for any person or entity to interfere with the zoning administrator's performance of his duties, as defined herein.
SECTION 16.1 ZONING PERMITS: Zoning permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions:
A. ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED: No land shall be used, or building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, structurally altered, or changed from one permitted use to another, nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel of ground without a permit, issued by the zoning administrator. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, except after written orders from the board of adjustment.
B. APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMITS: All applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by:
1. A completed application form, provided by the zoning administrator (in duplicate - See Appendix A).
Article XVI Administration 16-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
2. The required fee for a zoning permit, as provided for in Section 19.0 of this ordinance.
3. An approved Development Plan or site plan, if required by this ordinance, or
4. A plot plan, in duplicate, drawn at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to fifty (50) feet, showing the following information as required by this ordinance.
a. The location of every existing and proposed building, including dimensions and height, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.
b. All property lines, shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
c. Lot width at building setback line.
d. Minimum front and rear yard depths and side yard widths.
e. Existing topography, with a maximum of five (5) foot contour intervals.
f. Total lot area, in square feet.
g. Location and dimensions of all access points, driveways, off-street parking spaces.
h. A drainage plan of the lot and its relationship to adjacent properties, including spot elevations of the proposed finished grade, and provisions for adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction.
i. All sidewalks, walkways, and open spaces.
j. Location, type, and height of all walls, fences, and screen plantings.
k. Location of all existing and proposed streets, including rights-ofway and pavement widths.
l. All existing and proposed water, and sanitary, and storm sewer facilities to serve the lot, indicating all pipe sizes, types, and grades.
C. ISSUANCE OF ZONING PERMIT: The zoning administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application following any required review by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative.
1. If disapproved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Disapproved" and shall indicate the reasons for such disapproval thereon. Such disapproval shall be attested by the zoning administrator's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the zoning administrator.
Article XVI Administration 16-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
2. If approved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant, marked "Approved". Such approval shall be attested by the zoning administrator's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall also issue a zoning permit to the applicant at this time and shall retain a duplicate copy for his records.
D. FAILURE TO COMPLY: Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
E. EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT: If a building permit, as required herein, has not been obtained within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days from the date of issuance of zoning permit, said zoning permit shall expire and be canceled by the zoning administrator and a building permit shall not be obtainable until a new zoning permit has been obtained.
SECTION 16.2 BUILDING PERMITS: Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions:
A. BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED: No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, except after written orders from the board of adjustment.
B. APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMITS: All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by:
1. A completed application form, provided by the building inspector.
2. An approved zoning permit.
3. The required fee for a building permit, as provided for in Section 19.0 of this ordinance.
4. An approved Development Plan or Site Plan, if required by this ordinance: or
5. Plans in duplicate approved by the zoning administrator and including any additional information required by the building code and/or building inspector, as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and
Article XVI Administration 16-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
provide for the enforcement of, the building code and the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
C. ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT: The building inspector shall either approve or disapprove the application. If disapproved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Disapproved" and shall indicate the reasons for such disapproval thereon. Such disapproval shall be attested by the building inspector's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building inspector.
If approved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Approved". Such approval shall be attested by the building inspector's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building inspector. The building inspector shall also issue a building permit to the applicant at this time and shall retain a duplicate copy for his records.
D. COMPLIANCE: It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit, or occupancy permit, to build, create, erect, change, alter, convert, or occupy any building or structure hereafter, unless a zoning permit has been issued in compliance with this ordinance.
E. BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THE ADOPTION OF THIS ORDINANCE: Building permits issued in conformance with the building code of the legislative body prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, whether consistent or inconsistent with this ordinance, shall be valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar days from time of issuance of the permit. If construction in connection with such a permit has not been started within such a one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar day period, the permit shall be void and a new permit, consistent with all provisions of this ordinance and the building code, shall be required. For purposes of this section, construction shall be deemed to have been started at the time of completion of the foundation.
F. EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT: If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building inspector and no construction shall be permitted until a new building permit has been obtained, except, an extension may be permitted if sufficient evidence can be demonstrated why the work described in the building permit was not begun.
For purposes of this section, construction shall be deemed to have been started
Article XVI Administration 16-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
at the time of completion of the foundation. If after the work described in the building permit has been started, the building permit shall expire after a period of eighteen (18) months, providing that an extension may be permitted if sufficient evidence can be demonstrated why the work described in the building permit was not completed as herein specified.
G. CONSTRUCTION AND USE: To be as provided in applications, plans, permits, zoning permits and building permits, issued on the basis of plans and applications, approved by the zoning administrator and/or building inspector, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided in Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
SECTION 16.3 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any building or land, or part thereof, hereafter created, changed, converted, or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a certificate of occupancy, which shall be a part of the building permit, shall have been issued by the building inspector. Such certificate shall show that such building or land, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that he has checked and is satisfied that the, building and the proposed use thereof, conform with all the requirements of this ordinance and the building code.
SECTION 16.4 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR EXISTING BUILDING: Upon written request from the fee owner, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or land existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance, certifying, after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or land, and whether such use conforms with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 16.5 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR LAWFUL NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES: A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by this ordinance. A fee, as provided for in Section 19.0 of this ordinance, shall be charged for said certificate.
Applications for such certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or lessee of the land or building occupied by such nonconforming uses within six (6) consecutive calendar months of the effective date of this ordinance. Failure to apply for such certificate of
Article XVI Administration 16-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
occupancy will place upon the owner and lessee the entire burden of proof that such use of land or buildings lawfully existed on the effective date of this ordinance.
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for lawful nonconforming uses upon application and such certificate shall identify the extent to which the nonconforming use exists at the time of issuance of such certificate.
SECTION 16.6 DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Except as herein stated, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and to plans for which the building permit was issued.
SECTION 16.7 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY RECORDS: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the offices of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary building affected by such certificate of occupancy.
SECTION 16.8 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS: Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and bases thereof, shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon, as provided by this ordinance and the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
SECTION 16.9 PENALTIES
A. Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS 100.201 to 100.347 or any of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto for which no other penalty is provided, shall upon conviction be fined not less than ten (10) dollars but no more than five hundred (500) dollars for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person who intentionally violates any provisions of KRS 100.3681 to 100.3684, Section 9.28 of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred (100) dollars nor more than five hundred (500) dollars.
C. A commission may appoint enforcement officers who shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this ordinance which the officer has observed, but shall not have the powers of peace officers to make arrests or carry deadly
Article XVI Administration 16-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
weapons. The defendant shall appear within a designated time pursuant to the citation.
D. The procedure for citations issued by an enforcement officer shall be as provided in KRS 431.015.
SECTION 16.10 INTENT CONCERNING DETERMINATIONS INVOLVED IN ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: It is the intent of this ordinance that:
A. Where investigation can be made by the zoning administrator, or other designated employee, using equipment normally available to the legislative body, such investigation shall be so made before notice of violation is issued.
B. Where technical complexity, nonavailability of equipment, or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, for the legislative body to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be established for:
1. Causing corrections in apparent violations of performance standards;
2. For protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations; and
3. For protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
C. If the zoning administrator finds, after investigations have been made by qualified experts, that there is a violation of the performance standards, he shall take, or cause to be taken, lawful action to cause correction to, within limits set by such performance standards.
SECTION 16.11 DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR REGARDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: If, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, there is probable violation of the performance standards as set forth, the following procedures shall be followed:
A. The zoning administrator shall give written notice, by registered mail or certified mail, to the person or persons responsible for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the
Article XVI Administration 16-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
zoning administrator believes there is a violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of such notification. The notice shall state that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice, constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this ordinance.
B. The notice shall further state that, upon request of those to whom said notice is directed, a technical investigation will be made by a qualified expert or experts and that, if violations as alleged are found, costs of such investigations shall be charged against those responsible for the violations, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation exists, the cost of the investigation will be paid by the legislative body.
C. If there is no reply within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice, but the alleged violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, he shall note "violation corrected" on his copy of the notice, and shall retain it among his official records, taking such other action as may be warranted.
D. If there is no reply within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice and the alleged violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator within the established time limit, he shall proceed to take, or cause to be taken, such action as is warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
E. If a reply is received within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice indicating that the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, but requesting additional time, the zoning administrator may grant an extension if he deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
F. If a reply is received within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days of receipt of said notice requesting technical determination as provided in this ordinance, and if the alleged violations continue, the zoning administrator shall call in properly qualified experts to investigate and determine whether violations exist.
If expert findings indicate violations of the performance standards, the costs of
Article XVI Administration 16-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
the investigations shall be assessed against the properties or persons responsible for the violations, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
If no violation is found, the cost of the investigation shall be paid by the legislative body without assessment against the properties or persons involved.
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
ARTICLE XVII
AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
SECTION 17.0 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
A. FILING OF AMENDMENT APPLICATION: All applications for amendments to this ordinance shall be filed with Planning and Development Services of Kenton County. Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff shall immediately notify the city promptly forwarding the application to the local planning commission. A public hearing shall be scheduled to be held within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of the application by Planning and Development Services of Kenton County. The fee required for applying for such amendment shall be as provided for by the local planning commission and/or the legislative body.
B. PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW REQUIRED: A proposal for a zoning map amendment to this ordinance may originate with the planning commission, any fiscal court or legislative body, or with an owner of the property in question. A proposal to amend the text of this ordinance may originate with the planning commission or with any fiscal court or legislative body. Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, it shall be referred to the planning commission for its action before adoption.
C. PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED, NOTICE GIVEN
1. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed amendment, at which hearing parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once, but may be published two or more times, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, provided that one publication occurs not less than seven (7) calendar days nor more than twenty-one (21) calendar days before the occurrence of such hearing.
2. In addition to the public notice requirements prescribed herein, when the planning commission, fiscal court, or legislative body originates a proposal to amend the zoning map, notice of the public hearing before the planning commission, fiscal court, or legislative body shall be given at least thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, to an owner of
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
every parcel of property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed. Records by the property valuation administrator may be relied upon to determine the identity and address of said owner.
D. OTHER HEARING REQUIREMENTS, ZONING MAP AMENDMENT: In addition to the public hearing notice required in Section 17.0, C., above, the following notices shall also be given when a proposal is submitted by a property owner to amend the official zoning map:
1. Notice of the hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed, for fourteen (14) consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Said posting shall consist of one or more signs, constructed of durable material, and clearly depicting the following information: the words "ZONING CHANGE" (three (3) inch high lettering); current zoning classification of property and proposed zoning classification (three (3) inch high lettering); date, place, and time of public hearing (one (1) inch high lettering); and address, including telephone number, of the planning commission where additional information regarding hearing may be obtained; and
2. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, with certification by the commission secretary, or other officer of the planning commission, that the notice was mailed to an owner of every parcel of property adjoining the property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed. Where said property adjoins a street or alley, property abutting the opposite side of such street or alley shall be considered adjoining property. It shall be the duty of the person(s) proposing the amendment to furnish to the planning commission the names and addresses of the owners of all adjoining property. Records maintained by the property valuation administrator may be relied upon conclusively to determine the identity and address of said owner. In the event such property is in condominium or cooperative forms of ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or chairperson of the owner group which administers property commonly owned by the condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be mailed to two or more coowners of an adjoining property who are listed in the property valuation administrator's records as having the same address.
3. If the property, the classification of which is proposed to be changed, adjoins property in a different planning unit, or property which is not part of any planning unit, notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, by first class mail, to certain officials, as follows:
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
a. If the adjoining property is part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to that unit's planning commission; or
b. If the adjoining property is not part of a planning unit, notice shall be given to the mayor of the city in which the property is located or, if the property is in an unincorporated area, notice shall be given to the judge/executive of the county in which the property is located.
4. All procedures for public notice and publication, as well as for adoption, shall be the same as for the original enactment of a zoning regulation, and the notice of publication shall include the street address of the property in question, or if one is not available, or if it is not practicable due to the number of addresses involved, a geographic description sufficient to locate and identify the property, and the names of the two (2) streets on either side of the property which intersect the street on which the property is located. If the property is located at the intersection of two (2) streets, the notice shall designate the intersection by name of both streets rather than name the two (2) streets on either side of the property.
E. FINDINGS NECESSARY FOR MAP AMENDMENT: Before any map amendment is granted, the planning commission, or legislative body, must find that the amendment is in agreement with the adopted comprehensive plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of the following apply, including the making of a written report, setting forth explicitly, the reasons and substantiation as to how each would apply, and such finding and report shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the planning commission or legislative body.
1. That the existing zoning classification given to the property is inappropriate and that the proposed zoning classification is appropriate; and
2. That there have been major changes of an economic, physical, or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the adopted comprehensive plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of such area.
F. MINIMUM SIZE OF NEW ZONES: No amendment to this ordinance shall be adopted whereby the zoning classification of an area is changed unless the total area being applied for meets the following requirements as to minimum size: the zoning map shall not be amended, changed, or modified in such manner as to create a free standing zone of less than five (5) acres, except where specific area restrictions are stipulated in this ordinance, or as outlined in the adopted
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
comprehensive plan by the planning commission. For the purpose of computing the total size of an area to be rezoned for compliance herewith, there shall be added to such area: (1) the area of public rights-of-way interior to the area being changed; (2) one-half the area of public rights-of-way abutting the area being changed; and (3) the area of any land which is contiguous to the area being changed (including land located outside the jurisdiction of the legislative body but contiguous thereto and which land already bears the zoning classification sought for the area being changed). For the purpose of this section, neither continuity nor abutment shall be destroyed by the existence of a street, alley, or city's corporation line.
G. PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION
1. MAP AMENDMENT: Following the public hearing held by the planning commission on a proposed map amendment, the commission shall, within sixty (60) calendar days from the date of its receipt, make findings of fact and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the proposed map amendment to the legislative body, including a statement setting forth explicitly the reasons and substantiation for such action and, in the case of a map amendment, the submission of a written report as required in Section 17.0, E., above. The findings of fact and recommendation shall include a summary of the evidence and testimony presented by the proponents and opponents of the proposed amendment. A tie vote shall be subject to further consideration by the planning commission for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, at the end of which, if the tie has not been broken, the application shall be forwarded to the fiscal court or legislative body without a recommendation of approval or disapproval.
2. TEXT AMENDMENT: Following the public hearing held by the planning commission on a proposed text amendment, the commission shall make a recommendation as to the text of the amendment and whether the amendment shall be approved or disapproved and shall state the reasons for its recommendation. In the case of a proposed text amendment originating with a legislative body or fiscal court, the planning commission shall make its recommendation within sixty (60) days of the date of its receipt of the proposed text amendment.
H. LEGISLATIVE BODY DISPOSITION
1. MAP AMENDMENT: The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the proposed amendment shall become final and the map amendment shall be automatically implemented subject to the provisions of KRS 100.347, as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations,
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning Commission:
a. Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
b. The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
The written request shall be filed with the Planning Commission staff prior to the end of business on the twenty-first day after the Planning Commission’s action. The written notice shall be either on the form provided by the Planning Commission’s staff or on a letter addressed to the Chairman of the Planning Commission. If a letter is sent, it shall be clearly marked on the exterior “Request under KRS 100.2111” and be delivered to the Planning Commission’s staff prior to the end of business on the twenty-first day after the Planning Commission’s action.
2. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body shall take final action upon a proposed zoning map amendment within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the Planning Commission takes its final action upon such proposal.
a. The legislative body shall not act upon a proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map until it has received the recommendation, written findings of fact, and the summary of evidence and testimony presented by the proponents and opponents from the Planning Commission.
b. It shall take a majority of the entire legislative body to override the recommendation of the Planning Commission and it shall take a majority of the entire legislative body to adopt a zoning map amendment whenever the Planning Commission forwards the application to the legislative body without a recommendation of approval or disapproval due to a tie vote.
Unless a majority of the entire legislative body votes to override the Planning Commission's recommendation, such recommendation shall become final and effective and if a recommendation of approval was made by the Planning Commission, the ordinance of the legislative body adopting the zoning map amendment shall be deemed to have passed by operation of law.
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
3. TEXT AMENDMENT: It shall take an affirmative vote of a majority of the legislative body or fiscal court to adopt a proposed text amendment.
I. SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN AS CONDITION TO COMMERCIAL, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, OR INDUSTRIAL ZONING MAP AMENDMENT: Any request for a zoning map amendment, excluding those submitted by the legislative body (other than for a zone change for land under city ownership that the city intends to develop) and the planning commission, to any commercial (i.e., NC, SC, HC, etc.) multi-family residential zone (i.e., R-2, R-3, etc.), or industrial zone (i.e., IP, I-1, I-2, etc.) shall be made in accordance with all applicable requirements of this ordinance, including the following:
1. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Application for a zoning map amendment shall be processed in two stages:
a. Application for a zoning amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator as required by Section 17.0, A., and shall include a Development Plan in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 9.20, A., of this ordinance. The zoning administrator may waive the submission of such data involving detailed engineering study until such time as the zoning amendment has been granted.
b. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed application and review said application with regard to the required elements of the Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon holding such a hearing, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval, approval with condition(s), or disapproval. The planning commission shall submit, along with their recommendations, a copy of the Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
c. The Planning Commission recommendation relating to the proposed amendment and Development Plan shall become final and the map amendment shall be automatically implemented subject to the provisions of KRS 100.347, as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations, unless within twenty-one (21) days after the final action by the Planning Commission:
(1) Any aggrieved person files a written request with the Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the appropriate legislative body; or
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
(2) The appropriate legislative body files a notice with the Planning Commission that the legislative body shall decide the map amendment.
d. If a request with the Planning Commission is filed, the legislative body shall, within ninety (90) consecutive days after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, review said recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove the proposed Development Plan. Such approval may incorporate any conditions imposed by the planning commission. However, should the legislative body take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and recommended by the planning commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the planning commission for further review and recommendations, in accordance with the process required for the initial review.
Approval of the zoning map amendment shall require that development be in accordance with the approved Development Plan. Additionally, upon approval of the zoning map amendment, the official zoning map shall be amended for the area as shown on the approved development plan.
e. The legislative body shall forward a copy of the approved Development Plan to the zoning administrator, or the city's duly authorized representative, for further processing, in accordance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance.
f. If the detailed engineering data required under Section 9.19 had been waived by the zoning administrator in the initial submission of the Development Plan, then such data shall be submitted for review in accordance with the requirement of Section 9.19 before a permit may be issued for construction.
The zoning administrator, in reviewing the Site Plan, may authorize minor adjustments from the approved development plan, provided that the adjustments do not affect the spatial relationship of structures, change land uses, increase overall density, alter circulation patterns (vehicular and/or pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Article XVII Amendment Procedure 17-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2018 PDS
2. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which may be permitted by the zoning administrator as noted above, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
3. EXPIRATION: The zoning map amendment shall be subject to the time constraints as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said zoning map amendment should revert to its original designation. A public hearing may be initiated if substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the Development Plan by the legislative body, provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved Development Plan obsolete. The amount of construction that constitutes initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the Development Plan.
SECTION 17.1 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OF KENTON COUNTY STAFF REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED PRIOR TO OR AT THE SCHEDULED PUBLIC HEARING: Planning and Development Services of Kenton County staff, pursuant to KRS 147.673, shall review and make recommendations upon all applications to the local planning commission and the applicant, along with supporting information and comprehensive plan documentation, prior to or at the scheduled public hearing.
SECTION 17.2 ACTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL UNITS TO BE FURNISHED TO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OF KENTON COUNTY: Pursuant to KRS 147.705, the legislative body shall, after final adoption of any zoning ordinance or resolution, including amendments thereto, furnish, or cause to be furnished, within sixty (60) days after adoption, a copy of same to Planning and Development Services of Kenton County.
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE XVIII
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION 18.0 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES; OATHS; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL; OFFICERS
A. A board of adjustment is hereby established.
B. The board of adjustment shall consist of either three (3), five (5), or seven (7) members, all of whom must be citizen members and not more than two (2) of whom may be citizen members of the planning commission.
C. The mayor shall be the appointing authority of the board of adjustment, subject to the approval of the legislative body.
D. The term of office for the board of adjustment shall be four (4) years, but the term of office of members first appointed shall be staggered so that a proportionate number serve one (1), two (2), three (3), and four (4) years, respectively.
E. Vacancies on the board of adjustment shall be filled within sixty (60) calendar days by the appropriate appointing authority. If the authority fails to act within that time, the planning commission shall fill the vacancy. When a vacancy occurs, other than through expiration of the term of office, it shall be filled for the remainder of that term.
F. All members of the board of adjustment shall, before entering upon their duties, qualify by taking the oath of office, prescribed by Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, before any judge, notary public, clerk of court, or justice of the peace, within the district or county in which they reside.
G. Reimbursement for expenses or compensation or both may be authorized for members on the board of adjustment.
H. Any member of the board of adjustment may be removed by the mayor, subject to the approval by the legislative body, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or conflict of interest. The mayor exercising the power to remove a member from the board of adjustment, shall submit a written statement to the planning commission setting forth the reasons and the statement shall be read at
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
the next meeting of the board of adjustment which shall be open to the general public. The member so removed shall have the right of appeal from the removal to the circuit court of the county in which he resides.
I. The board of adjustment shall elect annually a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary, and any other officers it deems necessary, and any officer shall be eligible for re-election at the expiration of their term.
SECTION 18.1 MEETINGS OF BOARDS; QUORUM; MINUTES; BYLAWS; FINANCES; SUBPOENA POWER; ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS
A. The board of adjustment shall conduct meetings at the call of the chairman, who shall give written or oral notice to all members of the board at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting, which notice shall contain the date, time, and place for the meeting, and the subject or subjects which will be discussed.
B. A simple majority of the total membership of the board of adjustment, as established by regulation or agreement, shall constitute a quorum. Any member of the board of adjustment who has any direct or indirect financial interest in the outcome of any question before the body shall disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself from voting on the question.
C. The board of adjustment shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep minutes and records of all proceedings including regulations, transactions, findings, and determinations and the number of votes for and against each question, and if any member is absent or abstains from voting, indicating the fact, all of which shall, immediately after adoption, be filed in the office of the board of adjustment. A transcript of the minutes of the board of adjustment shall be provided if requested by a party, at the expense of the requesting party, and the transcript shall constitute the record.
D. The board of adjustment shall have the right to receive, hold, and spend funds which it may legally receive from any and every source in and out of the state of Kentucky, including the United States Government.
E. The board of adjustment shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel witnesses to attend its meetings and give evidence bearing upon the questions before it.
F. The chairman of the board of adjustment shall have the power to administer an oath to witnesses prior to their testifying before the board on any issue.
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
G. A board of adjustment may appoint one (1) or more of its members to act as hearing examiner to preside over a public hearing or public meeting and make recommendations to the board based upon a transcript or record of the hearing.
SECTION 18.2 PROCEDURE FOR ALL APPEALS TO BOARD:
A. The Board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide cases where it is alleged by an applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning regulation. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days.
B. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an official action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days after the appellant or his agent receives notice of the action of the official to be appealed from, by filing with said zoning administrator and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and all parties of record. A fee, as required by Section 19.0 of this ordinance, shall also be given to the zoning administrator at this time. Said zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and shall be treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings. At the public hearing on the appeal held by the board, an interested person may appear and enter his appearance, and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
C. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice in accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as well as written notice to the appellant and the zoning administrator at least one (1) calendar week prior to the hearing, and shall decide on the appeal within sixty (60) consecutive calendar days. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or by attorney.
SECTION 18.3 APPEALS FROM PLANNING COMMISSION OR BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, OR LEGISLATIVE BODY: Any appeal from planning commission or board of adjustment or legislative body action may be taken in the following manner:
A. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the planning commission or board of adjustment shall appeal from the action to the circuit court of the county in which the property, which is the subject of the action
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
of the board of adjustment, lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days after the final action of the planning commission or board of adjustment. All final actions which have not been appealed within thirty (30) days shall not be subject to judicial review. The board of adjustment shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court.
B. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the planning commission shall appeal from the final action to the circuit court of the county in which the property, which is the subject of the commission's action, lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after such action. Such action shall not include the commission's recommendations made to other governmental bodies. All final actions which have not been appealed within 30 days shall not be subject to judicial review. Provided, however, any appeal of a planning commission action granting or denying a variance or conditional use permit, as provided in Section 17.0, J. of this ordinance, shall be taken pursuant to this subsection. In such case, the 30 day period for taking an appeal begins to run at the time the legislative body grants or denies the map amendment for the same development. The planning commission shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court.
C. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the legislative body of any city, county, or urban-county government, relating to a map amendment, shall appeal from the action to the circuit court of the county in which the property, which is the subject of the map amendment, lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the final action of the legislative body. All final actions which have not been appealed within thirty (30) days shall not be subject to judicial review. The legislative body shall be a party in any such appeal filed in the circuit court.
D. The owner of the subject property and applicants who initiated the proceeding shall be made parties to the appeal. Other persons speaking at the public hearing are not required to be made parties to such appeal.
E. For purposes of this ordinance, final action shall be deemed to have occurred on the calendar date when the vote is taken to approve or disapprove the matter pending before the body.
SECTION 18.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator from whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion,
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
cause imminent peril to life and/or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a court of record on application, or on notice to the zoning administrator from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
SECTION 18.5 POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: Upon appeals, the board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
A. To hear and decide on applications for variances.
B. To hear and decide appeals, where it is alleged, by the appellant, that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by a zoning administrator in the enforcement of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.
C. To hear and decide applications for conditional use permits to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which are specifically named herein, which may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain conditions are met, as specified in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
D. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, requests for interpretation of the official zoning map or for decisions upon other special questions upon which said board is authorized to act upon.
E. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the adopted comprehensive plan, requests for the change from one nonconforming use to another.
SECTION 18.6 VARIANCES; CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER; CONDITIONS GOVERNING APPLICATIONS; PROCEDURES
A. VARIANCES
1. Before any variance is granted, the board of adjustment must find that the granting of the variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, will not alter the essential character of the general vicinity, will not cause a hazard or a nuisance to the public, and will not allow an unreasonable circumvention of the requirements of the zoning regulations. In making these findings, the board shall consider whether:
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
a. The requested variance arises from special circumstances which do not generally apply to land in the general vicinity, or in the same zone;
b. The strict application of the provisions of the regulation would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land or would create an unnecessary hardship on the applicant; and
c. The circumstances are the result of actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation from which relief is sought.
2. The board shall deny any request for a variance arising from circumstances that are the result of willful violations of this ordinance by the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance from which relief is sought.
3. Such variance shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until:
a. A written application for a variance (including the required fee per Section 19.0 of this ordinance) and a Site Plan, subject to the applicable requirements of Section 9.19, are submitted.
b. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 18.1 of this ordinance.
c. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney.
d. Prior to granting a variance:
(1) The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance.
(2) The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
e. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-7
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 16.9 of this ordinance.
B. VARIANCE CANNOT CONTRADICT ZONING REGULATION: The board of adjustment shall not possess the power to grant a variance to permit a use of any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by this ordinance in the zone in question, or to alter the density of dwelling unit requirements in the zone in question.
C. VARIANCE RUNS WITH LAND: A variance applies to the property for which it is granted and not to the individual who applied for it. A variance runs with the land and is transferable to any future owner of land, but it cannot be transferred by the applicant to a different site.
D. CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without the specific approval of the board of adjustment, as provided herein.
1. The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide on applications to convert or change an existing nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, subject to the following:
a. A written application for a change from one nonconforming use to another (including the required fee as per Section 19.0 of this ordinance) and a Site Plan, if applicable, subject to the applicable requirements of Section 9.19, shall be submitted to the board.
b. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 18.1 of this ordinance
c. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney
d. Prior to granting a change from one nonconforming use to another, the board of adjustment shall find that the new nonconforming use is in the same or more restrictive classification of use as the prior nonconforming use. In the determination of the same or more
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-8
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
restrictive classification of use, the applicant shall establish and the board of adjustment shall find:
(1) That the new nonconforming use shall generate less vehicular traffic (automobile and truck) than the prior nonconforming use;
(2) That the new nonconforming use is of a nature which will emit less noise and air pollution than the prior nonconforming use;
(3) That the new nonconforming use will be more in character with the existing neighborhood than the prior nonconforming use, in that it is more in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan, and also, more in conformance with the uses permitted in the zone in which the use is located, than the prior nonconforming use.
e. Any change of nonconforming use granted by the board of adjustment shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, parking requirements, sign regulations and yard requirements, and all other pertinent ordinances of the legislative body.
f. The board of adjustment shall not allow the enlargement or extension of a nonconforming use beyond the scope and area of its operation at which time its use became nonconforming.
g. The board of adjustment, in granting a change of nonconforming uses, may attach such conditions thereto as it may deem necessary and proper; and the action, limitations, and conditions imposed, if any, shall be in writing, directed to the applicant, with a copy to be furnished to the zoning administrator.
h. The change of nonconforming use, as may be granted by the board of adjustment, applies to the property for which it is granted and not to the individual who applied and, therefore, cannot be transferred by the applicant to a different property.
i. In the case where the change of nonconforming use has not occurred within one (1) year after the date of granting thereof, the change of nonconforming use permit shall be null and void and reapplication to the board of adjustment shall have to be made.
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-9
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
SECTION 18.7 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS: Conditional use permits shall not be issued without the specific approval of the board of adjustment, as provided herein.
A. The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for conditional use permits, subject to the following:
1. A written application for a conditional use permit (including the required fee per Section 19.0 of this ordinance) and a Site Plan subject to the applicable requirements of Section 9.19, shall be submitted to the board.
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Sections 18.2 and 9.14, B., 6. of this ordinance.
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney.
4. Prior to granting a conditional use permit, the board of adjustment shall find that the application for a conditional use permit meets the requirements of this ordinance and Section 9.14.
SECTION 18.8 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. In exercising the aforementioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination as made by the zoning administrator, from whom the appeal is taken.
B. A simple majority of board members present and voting shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance.
C. The details of the decision of the board shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator.
SECTION 18.9 ACTIONS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO BE FURNISHED TO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OF KENTON COUNTY
Article XVIII Board Of Adjustment 18-10
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
Pursuant to KRS 147.705, the board of adjustment shall, after final approval of any variance, change from one nonconforming use to another, conditional use permit, and other appeal, furnish, or cause to be furnished, within sixty (60) days after approval, a copy of same to Planning and Development Services of Kenton County.
Article xix Schedule Of Fees 19-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
ARTICLE XIX
SCHEDULE OF FEES
SECTION 19.0: Fees shall be as provided by the legislative body.
Article XX Moratorium 20-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2003 PDS
ARTICLE XX
MORATORIUM
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING FOR A MORITORIUM ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND PROVIDING NO APPLICATION SHALL BE PROCESSED AND NO PERMIT ISSUED FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OR EXPANSION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO A SEX SHOP, LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO, SEXUALLY ORIENTED CINEMA, SEXUALLY ORIENTED CABARET, SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA OUTLET, OR BUSINESS CONTAINING A MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.
WHEREAS the Kenton County Planning Commission and the Fiscal Court of Kenton County, together with its several cities, have duly prepared a comprehensive plan in accordance with KRS Chapter 100, specifically “An Update 2000-2021: Northern Kentucky’s Future - A Comprehensive Plan for Development,” adopted by Planning and Development Services of Kenton County and the Kenton County Planning Commission on December 18, 2001;
WHEREAS, Kenton County, and the incorporated municipalities within it, have long sought to regulate sexually oriented businesses within the limits of the Constitution to protect the County’s many residential neighborhoods; and
WHEREAS, the adopted comprehensive plan provides the following policy guidance for regulating such businesses:
Furthermore, the Area-Wide Comprehensive Plan does not identify specific land uses, but instead, categorizes land uses using broad categories. Undesirable land uses, including adult-oriented business may be appropriate within more than one land use category identified within this Plan Update. The following criteria are presented to provide guidance for siting of these uses:
o They should not be near residential areas, schools, churches, child care facilities or other public or semi-public community facilities;
o They should not be within view of the interstate roads.
“An Update 2000-2021: Northern Kentucky’s Future - A Comprehensive Plan for Development,” pp. 5-30 – 5-31.
WHEREAS, recent reviews have found that several of the jurisdictions within Kenton County have no regulations whatsoever to deal with sexually oriented businesses as a specific land use; and
WHEREAS, there are already several sexually oriented businesses in Kenton County; and
Article XX Moratorium 20-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2003 PDS
WHEREAS, a new sexually oriented cabaret has recently opened in Wilder, which is directly adjacent to Kenton County; and
WHEREAS, planning and building staff in the jurisdictions in Kenton County have received several recent inquiries about the possibility of additional sexually oriented businesses opening in the County; and
WHEREAS, Kentucky Revised Statutes §100.201(1) specifically authorizes the adoption of Interim Zoning Regulations while the planning commission completes additional parts of the plan and/or completes the necessary regulations to implement the plan; and
WHEREAS, the city of Fort Wright finds that the adopted comprehensive plan does not provide adequate information to allow the Planning Commission to make recommendations for the appropriate regulation of sexually oriented businesses; and
WHEREAS, the Kentucky General Assembly has adopted and the Governor has approved Kentucky 2003 H.B. 268, “an act relating to licensing massage therapists”; and
WHEREAS, county officials have long noted a difference between legitimate massage therapists and some sexually oriented businesses which present themselves as “massage parlors” or similar establishments;
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission, acting on behalf of and with funding from the Fiscal Court and the several municipalities within the County, has hired national experts in the field as consultants to study the issues of regulating sexually oriented businesses in the County; and
WHEREAS, the consultants have represented to the Planning Commission and representatives of the Fiscal Court and cities that they will deliver their preliminary report within 4 to 6 months and specific regulatory recommendations shortly thereafter; and
WHEREAS, the city of Fort Wright finds that the completion of the study of sexually oriented businesses by national experts, and under the guidance of the Planning Commission, is essential to supplement the comprehensive plan; and
WHEREAS, the city of Fort Wright finds that it is essential to preserve the status quo and to avoid the addition of a new sexually oriented business in what may prove to be an inappropriate location until the Planning Commission and the city of Fort Wright have available to them the results of the study;
Article XX Moratorium 20-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2003 PDS
NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED by the Kenton County Planning Commission of Kenton County, Kentucky that:
SECTION 1. The following definitions are adopted for purposes of this Article, to supplement the definitions already contained in the zoning ordinances of the city of Fort Wright and its several cities within it:
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment or business which provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples or small groups in a room smaller than 600 square feet.
Massage means touch, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body (excluding an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment).
Massage therapy means the profession in which the practitioner applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well-being of the client, and may adjunctively (i) apply allied modalities, heat, cold, water and topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs, (ii) use hand held tools or devices designed as t-bars or knobbies, and (iii) instruct self care and stress management. "Manual" means by use of hand or body.
Media means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, cd-roms, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures.
Motion picture arcade booth means any booth, cubicle, stall or compartment which is designed, constructed or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, cd-rom, books, magazines or periodicals) for observation by customers therein. The term “booth,” “arcade booth,” “preview booth,” and “video arcade booth” shall be synonymous with the term “motion picture arcade booth”.
Article XX Moratorium 20-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2003 PDS
Primary live entertainment means that entertainment which characterizes the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances.
Sadomasochistic practices mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
Sex shop means a an establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests:
(1) It offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following categories: sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices, and the combination of such items make up more than ten percent (10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than 10 percent (10%) of its floor area; or,
(2) More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented toys or novelties; or,
(3) More than five percent (5%) of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually-oriented toys or novelties.
Sexual conduct means the engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact, or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttock or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person.
Sexual gratification means sexual conduct as defined herein.
Sexually oriented acts means sexual conduct as defined herein.
Sexually oriented business is an inclusive term used to describe collectively: sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented motion picture theater; motion picture arcade; bathhouse; massage parlor or shop; and/or sex shop. This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of the zoning code or other applicable ordinances.
Sexually oriented cabaret or sex oriented cabaret means a building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment which constitutes the “primary live entertainment” is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of “specific sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by customers therein.
Article XX Moratorium 20-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2003 PDS
Sexually oriented cinema, sexually oriented motion picture theater, or sex oriented cinema means a cinema or motion picture theater which shows hard-core features on more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers features described as “adult”, “XXX”, or sexually oriented.
Sexually oriented media means magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, cd-roms or other devices used to record computer images, or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (separately defined).
Sexually oriented media store or sex oriented media store means an establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets any of the following three tests:
(1) More than forty percent (40%) of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually oriented media; or
(2) More than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media; or
(3) It is advertised, marketed, or holds itself out in any forum as “XXX,” “adult,” “sex” or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business.
SECTION 2. That the authority of those persons within each jurisdiction in the city of Fort Wright authorized to accept applications and issue building permits is hereby limited as follows: no application shall be processed and no permit issued for the establishment or expansion of a sexually oriented business, including but not limited to a sex shop, lingerie modeling studio, sexually oriented cinema, sexually oriented cabaret, sexually oriented media outlet, or business containing a motion picture arcade.
SECTION 3. No permit, license or other authority shall be issued for the establishment of a massage parlor or similar establishment unless the applicant for such permit or license either: 1) has been licensed by the Kentucky Board of Licensure for Massage Therapy, or, 2) if such board has not been established or has not implemented its licensing procedure, can provide documentation that the applicant can substantially comply with the licensing requirements of Sections 9 and 11 of 2003 Ky. H.B. 268.
SECTION 4. These interim regulations shall go into effect upon adoption and remain in effect for a period concluding on May 15, 2004, or upon the adoption of a new ordinance in response to the study, whichever shall first occur.
SECTION 5. That any section or part of any section or any provision of this Article which is declared invalid by a Court of appropriate jurisdiction, for any reason, such declaration shall not invalidate, or adversely affect, the remainder of this Article.
Article XX Moratorium 20-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance August 2003 PDS
SECTION6. That this Article shall take effect and be in force when passed, published and recorded according to law.
Appendix A Specifications For Paving A-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
APPENDIX A
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PAVING OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING AREAS
All new off-street parking facilities shall be paved with asphalt or portland cement concrete and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and procedures herein established.
A. ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT
1. General Design Requirements
a. Asphalt concrete pavements shall consist of specified thickness of asphalt concrete surface course and a base course, or courses, all constructed on prepared subgrade. Required pavement thickness shall be determined from Table A-1 of the appropriate subgrade soil and traffic use.
b. Paved areas shall be so designed and constructed that water will quickly drain from the surface and be conducted away from the area through approved systems. Transverse and/or longitudinal slopes of not less than 5/8 inch in 10 feet shall be provided. For large paved areas, approved catch basins and storm drainage systems shall be provided.
c. When the pavement includes a granular base, and the pavement is not constructed over granular subgrade, perimeter subsurface drainage shall be provided to prevent lateral flow of water into the base course and to provide for removal of seepage water that may enter the base.
d. Successive layers of the pavement shall be offset from the edge of the underlying layer a distance equal to the course thickness of the lower layer, except when abutting existing construction. When the asphalt layers of the pavement abut a building foundation, barrier curb, or similar vertical surface, the abutting surface shall be heavily painted with asphalt prior to construction of the asphalt course. The surface course shall be finished 1/4 inch above adjacent flush construction to permit proper compaction.
Appendix A Specifications For Paving A-2
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
2. Construction Materials and Procedures
a. Base courses shall consist of the following materials. Construction procedures shall conform to the requirements applicable to the base course selected.
(1) Asphalt Concrete Base Course - Materials and construction shall conform to the current requirements of the Kentucky Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways', Specifications for Asphalt Concrete Base Course, Sections 401, 403, except as noted herein.
b. Crushed Stone Base Course - Crushed stone base course shall conform to all the current requirements of the Kentucky Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways, for Dense Graded Aggregate Base Course, Section 303.
c. Asphalt Concrete Surface Course - Materials and construction shall conform to the current requirements of the Kentucky Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways, for Asphalt Concrete Surface, Type B, State Highway Designation Section 401, 402.
d. Asphalt Prime and Tack Coat
(1) Asphalt Prime shall conform to the Kentucky Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways' requirements for Cutback Asphalt Emulsion Primer, Type L, as per Section 407. Prime shall be applied to the surface of granular base course at a rate of 0.25 to 0.50 gallons per square yard, as directed by the legislative body's engineer or inspector.
(2) Tack Coat (SS-1h) shall meet the requirements of the Kentucky Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways, as per Section 407. It shall be diluted with equal parts of water, when directed by the inspector. Tack coat shall be applied, upon direction of the legislative body's engineer, to the surface of asphalt courses that have become dusty or dry, at a rate of 0.10 gallons per square yard of the diluted SS-1h before the subsequent course is constructed.
B. CONCRETE PAVING FOR PARKING AND ACCESS DRIVE AREAS
Appendix A Specifications For Paving A-3
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
1. General Requirements - Thickness of concrete parking and access drives shall be:
a. A minimum of four (4) inches for driveways and parking areas serving single and two-family dwellings.
b. A minimum of five (5) inches for passenger cars and panel or pickup trucks serving industrial, commercial, and multi-family areas.
c. A minimum of six (6) inches for light trucks serving industrial, commercial, and multi-family residential areas.
d. A minimum of seven (7) inches for heavier commercial or industrial needs.
2. General Requirements - Concrete Paving
a. Minimum Cement Content - 564 lb./cu.yd. of concrete (6 U.S. bags).
b. Maximum Size of Aggregate - 1-1/4 inches.
c. Maximum Water Content - 0.49 lb./1 lb. of cement (5.5 gal./ bag).
d. Maximum Slump - five (5) inches when using hand-finishing techniques, three (3) inches when using a mechanical finishing machine.
e. Strength of Concrete - The concrete shall attain a minimum expected strength of concrete at 28 days of 3,500 pounds per square inch compressive strength and/or 550 pounds per square inch flexural strength "modulus of rupture".
f. Air Entrainment
Maximum Size
Entrained
Aggregate (inches)
Air (Percent)
1-1/4
5 + 1
3/4, 1
6 + 1
3/8, 1/2
7-1/2 + 1
Appendix A Specifications For Paving A-4
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
3. Construction Procedures
a. All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which will not compact readily when rolled or taped, shall be removed and replaced with suitable material, placed and compacted. The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted with suitable equipment so as to have uniform density at moisture contents of not less than standard optimum (AASHO-T98).
b. Longitudinal joint spacing shall not exceed 15 feet and be designed in accordance with the joint details in Figure A-2.
c. Transverse joint spacings shall be at regular intervals of twenty (20) feet.
d. All transverse construction joints shall be designed in accordance with the joint details in Figure A-2.
e. Form offsets at radius points shall be at least two (2) feet.
f. Pavement joints must be continuous through the curbs.
g. Where curbs are required, they shall be cast integrally.
h. The pavement shall be struck-off, consolidated, and finished, to the grades shown on the plans. All catch basins and manhole castings shall be boxed out and separated from the pavement with expansion joint material. All except premolded or sawed joints shall be edged with a tool having a maximum radius of 1/8 inch. Sawed and formed joints shall be cleaned and sealed before opening to traffic. Final surface texture shall be that obtained with a burlap drag. Curing shall be that obtained with a uniform coverage of white membrane curing compound or by seven-day coverage of white polyethylene or waterproof paper. The completed pavement shall be closed to traffic for at least fourteen (14) days or by the time it has attained a compressive strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch and/or 550 pounds per square inch flexural strength. This traffic restriction shall apply to the contractor's construction equipment and vehicles, as well as general traffic.
Appendix A Specifications For Paving A-5
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
Appendix A Specifications For Paving A-6
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance December 2000 PDS
TABLE A-2
JOINT DETAILS
Appendix B Summary Of Amendments B-1
Fort Wright Zoning Ordinance November 2018 PDS
APPENDIX B
SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS
ORDINANCE NUMBER PAGES AFFECTED DATE OF APPROVAL
Typed New Text - December 2000
13-01 Table Of Contents, Article VII, Article IX, Article X 11/28/01
3-02 Table Of Contents, Article VIII, Article X, Article XIV 4/10/02
6-02 Table Of Contents, Article X 5/8/02
14-02 Table Of Contents, Article XIV 12/11/02
13-03 Table Of Contents, Article VII, Article IX, Article X 8/27/03
14-03 Table Of Contents, Article XX 8/27/03
15-03 Article VII 9/17/03
10-04 Article X 10/27/04
11-05 Article X 9/7/05
14-05 Article X 9/7/05
3-06 Article X 2/1/06
6-06 Table Of Contents, Article XIV 3/7/06
7-06 Article X 4/5/06
8-06 Table Of Contents, Article IX 5/3/06
11-06 Table Of Contents, Article VIII, Article X, 7/5/06
Article XIII, Article XIV
7-07 Table Of Contents, Article IX 10/3/07
7-08 Article X 4/23/08
16-09 Article X 10/7/09
11-11 Article VII, Article X, Article XIV 1/11/12
2-15 Entire Ordinance 2/4/15
2-16 Table of Contents, Article VIII, Article IX 5/5/16
Article X, Article XI, Article XIII
Article XIV
9-2016 Article X 10/19/16
14-2016 Article X 1/4/17
10-2017 Article VII, Article X, Article XIV 6/7/17
14-2017 Table Of Contents, Article X, Article XV 11/1/17
9-2018 Table Of Contents, Article X, Article XVII 8/1/18
10-2018 Table Of Contents, Article VII, Article XIV 11/7/18


Kenton County, Kentucky
Subdivision Regulations
October 1, 2015
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Table of Contents.........................................................................................................................................................i
Article 1: Application and Authority........................................................................................................................1
Section 1.1: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.2: Title .............................................................................................................................................................. 1
Section 1.3: Authorization................................................................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.4: Citations of Kentucky Revised Statutes ........................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.5: Citations of these Regulations...................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.6: Jurisdiction................................................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.7: Statement of Severability.............................................................................................................................. 1
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards ...................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.9: Compliance Required................................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules ........................................................................................................................................ 2
Section 1.11: Penalties....................................................................................................................................................... 4
Section 1.12: Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, and Cross-References................................................................... 4
Section 1.13: Burden of Proof............................................................................................................................................ 4
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation .................................................................................................5
Section 2.1: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................ 5
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation.................................................................................................................. 5
Section 2.3: Definitions.................................................................................................................................................... 8
Article 3: Administration and Procedures .............................................................................................................31
Section 3.1: Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 31
Section 3.2: Review and Decision-Making Bodies......................................................................................................... 31
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements........................................................................................................... 32
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements.................................................................................................................... 37
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions..................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions..................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats........................................................................................................ 60
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff .......................................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations......................................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions ............................................................................................................................... 64
Section 3.11: Appeals of Planning Commission Actions.................................................................................................. 64
Section 3.12: Enforcement ............................................................................................................................................... 65
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure..........................................................................................................66
Section 4.1: Streets......................................................................................................................................................... 66
Section 4.2: Lot Layout .................................................................................................................................................. 89
Section 4.3: Public Utilities ........................................................................................................................................... 94
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses .............................................................................. 100
Section 4.5: Use of Aggregates Within the Right-of-way ............................................................................................. 104
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure ............................................................................. 104
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications ........................................ 113
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design ......................................................................................................... 119
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options ......................................................................................................127
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page i
Table of Contents
Section 5.1: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 127
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies............................................................................................................................... 128
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management .................................................................................... 128
Section 5.4: Criteria for Integrated Stormwater Management .................................................................................... 137
Section 5.5: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management allowed By-Right........................................................ 137
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements ..........................................138
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations....................................................................................................................... 138
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public
Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements ............................................................................................ 140
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies...........................................................................................................................147
Section 7.1: Purpose of the Traffic Impact Study......................................................................................................... 147
Section 7.2: Need for a Traffic Impact Study ............................................................................................................... 147
Section 7.3: Study Area ................................................................................................................................................ 148
Section 7.4: Study Requirements.................................................................................................................................. 149
Section 7.5: Mitigation................................................................................................................................................. 151
Section 7.6: Administration.......................................................................................................................................... 152
Article 8: Access Control Regulations ..................................................................................................................154
Section 8.1: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 154
Section 8.2: Applicability ............................................................................................................................................. 154
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points ......................................................................................... 154
Section 8.4: Traffic Control ......................................................................................................................................... 158
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes ........................................................................................................... 159
Section 8.6: Provision of Access Easement and Access Drives for Nonresidential Uses............................................. 161
Section 8.7: Pedestrian Access Points ......................................................................................................................... 161
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings...........................................................................................162
Appendix B: Surety Templates .....................................................................................................................194
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report........................................................................................200
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page ii
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.1: Purpose
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.1: Purpose
These regulations create the mechanisms, further define the powers and duties, and set forth the standards and
requirements necessary to administer responsibilities granted to local Planning Commissions by Chapter 100 of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS). In so doing, they assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive,
and aesthetically-pleasing development while also promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the Kenton
County public.
Section 1.2: Title
These regulations shall be known as the “Kenton County, Kentucky, Subdivision Regulations,” and may be referred
to as “these Subdivision regulations” or “these Regulations.”
Section 1.3: Authorization
These regulations are adopted pursuant to authority granted to local Planning Commissions by Kentucky Revised
Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through 100.292.
Section 1.4: Citations of Kentucky Revised Statutes
Whenever a provision of these regulations cites a provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS), and that
provision is later amended or superseded, these regulations shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
provision, or the provision that most closely corresponds to the superseded provision.
Section 1.5: Citations of these Regulations
Citations to provisions within these regulations shall be by article, section, subsection, and clause.
Section 1.6: Jurisdiction
These regulations shall be effective throughout Kenton County.
Section 1.7: Statement of Severability
The articles, sections, subsections and clauses of these regulations are severable. If any article, section, subsection,
or clause of these regulations is declared unconstitutional, or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction
in a valid judgment or decree, that unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining articles, sections,
subsections, or clauses as they would have been enacted without the incorporation into these regulations of the
unconstitutional or invalid article, section, subsection, or clause.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 1
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be viewed as minimum standards or requirements,
adopted for promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever these regulations conflict with a
requirement of any other lawfully-adopted rule, regulation, ordinance, order, or resolution, then the most restrictive,
or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Section 1.9: Compliance Required
Except as hereinafter specified, no Subdivision of land shall hereafter occur except in conformity with these
regulations.
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules
1.10-1 Effective Date
These regulations shall become effective at 12:01 AM EST on March 11, 2015 and replace any current
Subdivision regulations adopted pursuant to Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through 100.292.
1.10-2 Violations Continued
Any violation of the previous Subdivision regulations shall continue to be a violation under these
regulations and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes. Violations of these regulations shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.11: Penalties, and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or
statutes.
1.10-3 Completed Application Submittals
(A) Any Applicant that has submitted a complete set of Application requirements that was accepted as
complete before the effective date of these regulations, but are still pending final action as of that
date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the regulations in effect when the complete
Application submittal was accepted.
(B) Complete Application submittals shall be processed in good faith and shall comply with any time
frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the regulations in effect at the time
the submission was accepted.
(C) If any completed Application submission fails to comply with the required time frames, it shall
expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
(D) An Applicant with a pending Application accepted before the effective date of these regulations
may opt to have the proposed development reviewed and decided under the standards of these
regulations by withdrawing the pending Application and submitting a new Application in
accordance with the standards of these regulations.
(1) If an Applicant chooses to withdraw an Application and submit a new Application under
these regulations, such Applicant shall be subject to these regulations in full and may not opt
to go back to the previous set of standards after the original Application has been withdrawn.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 2
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules
(2) If an Applicant has a Preliminary Plat approval prior to the effective date of these regulations
but only certain phases of the Preliminary Plat have been developed, such Applicant may
request that all of the remaining phases of the Subdivision be reviewed under these new
regulations. In this case, the Applicant shall be required to submit a new Application for a
Major Subdivision review (including a new Preliminary Plat approval) for all of the
remaining phases of the development that have not already been approved and recorded.
Plat 1.10-4 Approvals / Transition Rules
(A) A development for which a Preliminary Plat or Identification Plat approval was granted prior to the
effective date of these regulations may be completed in accordance with the approved plat and any
other approved conditions, even if the development does not comply with the requirements
established in these regulations, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) If during subsequent review, the development subject to the Preliminary Plat fails to comply
with any time frames for review or conditions of approval, the preliminary approval shall
expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
(2) Improvement Drawing applications submitted after 90 days from the effective date of these
regulations shall be required to comply with the street design and earthwork requirements as
set out in Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section
4.7:Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications and Section
6.2:Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork
Within the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally
Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements of these regulations.
(3) Developments containing Streets within Improvement Drawings approved prior to the
effective date of the regulations or within 90 days from the effective date of the regulations,
where Streets have not yet been constructed by December 31, 2016, shall be required to
construct the Streets to comply with the Street design and earthwork requirements as set out
in Section 4.4:Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section
4.7:Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications and Section
6.2:Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork
Within the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally
Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements of these regulations.
If a development is subject to this condition, revised Improvement Drawings including
review fees shall be submitted and approved by Staff prior to construction of the street(s).
(4) Staff shall have the discretion to approve individual transitional design elements as submitted
by the Applicant on a case by case basis that occur between new Improvement Drawings
designed under these regulations and Improvement Drawings designed under the preceding
regulations.
(B) Any development for which a Final Plat for a Subdivision was approved prior to the effective date
of these regulations shall be permitted to develop, even if such development does not conform to
the provisions of these regulations.
(C) If the development for which the Final Plat for a Subdivision fails to comply with the time frames
for recordation or conditions of approval, such approval shall expire and future development shall
be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 3
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.11: Penalties
Section 1.11: Penalties
Pursuant to KRS 100.991, any person or entity who violates any of these regulations shall upon conviction, be fined
not less than 10 dollars but not more than 500 dollars. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1.12: Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, and Cross-
References
1.12-1 Where a conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration, or figure, the text shall control.
1.12-2 In some instances, cross-references between articles, sections, and subsections are provided that include
the article, section, or subsection number along with the name of the referenced article, section, or
subsection. Where a conflict may occur between the given cross-reference number and name, the name
shall control.
Section 1.13: Burden of Proof
The burden of demonstrating that an Application subject to these regulations complies with applicable review and
approval standards is on the Applicant. The burden is not on the Staff, the KCPC, or other parties to show that the
standards have been met by the Applicant or person responsible for the development.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 4
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.1: Purpose
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for
Interpretation
Section 2.1: Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide an explanation, and where appropriate, illustrations of terms, expressions,
and concepts used throughout this ordinance. It is intended to aid the reader in understanding the intention of the
Planning Commission in using specific terms within these regulations. By providing this explanation, it assures a
necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development and promotes the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kenton County.
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
2.2-1 For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, words, and phrases shall be
used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. Whenever words and phrases are not defined
here but are defined in Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) Chapter 100 and in any amendments to it, the
KRS statutory definition shall apply.
2.2-2 Whenever reference is made to a resolution, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a
reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, statute, regulation, or document, unless
otherwise specifically stated.
2.2-3 Additionally, the following rules shall be observed in the application and interpretation of these
regulations, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.
(A) The words “must,” “shall,” or “will” are mandatory. The word “may” is permissive. The word
“should” is suggestive but not mandatory.
(B) Masculine terms shall include the feminine and vice versa.
(C) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following words shall be interpreted as
follows:
(1) “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions apply;
(2) “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singularly or in any
combination; and
(3) “Either...or” indicates that the connected words or provisions apply singularly but not in
combination.
(D) The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words,
letters, or figures whether by printing or other form or method of writing.
(E) Words used and defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and/or derivative forms.
(F) Singular words shall include the plural and vice versa.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 5
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
(G) The word “including,” “includes,” “such as,” “additional,” or “supplemental” is illustrative and not
intended as an exhaustive listing, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
(H) The words “used” or “occupied” shall include the words “intended or designed to be used or
occupied.”
(I) Any reference to a specific member of Staff may be interpreted to include their designee.
(J) Headings are for convenience only and do not govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning, or intention of any portion of these regulations.
(K) Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
If a term used in these regulations is not defined in this article or 2.2-4 in the KRS, Staff shall have the
authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted sources, including but not
limited to, A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms, and A
Survey of Zoning Definitions, published by the American Planning Association.
2.2-5 Table 2.2-1 identifies common abbreviations used within these regulations and their associated meanings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 6
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
TABLE 2.2-1:COMMON ABBREVIATIONS AND MEANINGS
ABBREVIATION MEANING
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
ACI American Concrete Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
CBR California Bearing Ratio
CLSM Controlled Low Strength Material
ESAL Equivalent 18,000 pound Single Axle Load
FTP File Transfer Protocol
GIS Geographic Information Systems
GPM Gallons Per Minute
HCM Highway CapacityManual
HCS Highway Capacity Software
ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers
KAR Kentucky Administrative Regulations
KCPC Kenton County Planning Commission
KRS Kentucky Revised Statutes
KYTC Kentucky Transportation Cabinet
LOS Level of Service
MUTCD Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
NAD North American Datum
NFPA National Fire Protection Association
NTS Not to Scale
OKI Ohio Kentucky Indiana Regional Council of Governments
PAIKY Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
PCA Portland Cement Association
PDS Planning and Development Services of Kenton County
PHF Peak Hour Factor
PLS Professional Land Surveyor
PSI Pounds Per Square Inch
PVI Point of Vertical Intersection
PVT Point of Vertical Tangency
Q Peak StormWater Discharge
RODEL Roundabout Design Software
ROW Right-of-way
RTOR Right Turn on Red
SD1 Sanitation District No. 1
SPCS State Plane Coordinate System
SSEC Street Standards Engineers Committee
SSRBC KY Department of Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
TIS Traffic Impact Study
TSM Transportation SystemManagement
USGS United States Geodetic Survey
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 7
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-1 1993 AASHTO Rigid Pavement Structural Design
A set of empirical equations used to relate observed or measurable phenomena (pavement characteristics)
with outcomes (pavement performance). Test equations were developed which related loss in
serviceability, traffic, and pavement thickness.
2.3-2 AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials)
A standards setting body which publishes specifications and test protocols and guidelines which are used
in highway design and construction throughout the United States.
2.3-3 Access
Access means any Access Drive, Driveway, Private Street, or other vehicular connection providing for
the movement of vehicles to or from the Public Street system. See Figure 2.3-A.
Figure 2.3-A: Illustration of an Access Drive
2.3-4 Access Drive
An Access Drive is a vehicular way that affords direct access to abutting property from the Street system,
typically from the back or side of the property.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 8
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-5 Access Point
An Access Point is the point at which the centerline of any Access Drive, Driveway, Street, or other
vehicular connection intersects another Street system. See Figure 2.3-B.
Figure 2.3-B: Illustration of an Access Point
2.3-6 Access Point, Full
A Full Access Point is an access point that accommodates all possible turning movements. See Figure
2.3-C.
Figure 2.3-C: Example of a Full Access Point
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 9
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-7 Access Point, Partial
A Partial Access Point is an Access Point that accommodates left and right turn movements into an
Access Point, and right turn movements out of an Access Point but does not allow for left turn
movements out of the Access Point. See Figure 2.3-D.
Figure 2.3-D: Example of a Partial Access Point
2.3-8 Access Point, Restricted
A Restricted Access Point is an Access Point that only accommodates right turning movements into and
out of the Access Point. See Figure 2.3-E.
Figure 2.3-E: Example of a Restricted Access Point
2.3-9 Access Point, Unsignalized
An Unsignalized Access Point is an Access Point where traffic movements are not regulated by a traffic
signal.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 10
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-10 Access Throat
An Access Throat is the Access Drive or Driveway entry onto a private Lot that does not provide further
access to parking spaces or parking drives. See Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access
Points.
2.3-11 ACI (American Concrete Institute)
An organization involved in the development and distribution of consensus-based standards, technical
resources and educational programs for individuals and organizations involved in concrete design,
construction, and materials.
2.3-12 Applicant
An Applicant is person or entity who is authorized by the provisions of these regulations to file for
approval under these regulations.
2.3-13 Application
An Application is the completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees
required of an Applicant by Staff, the Planning Commission, or the applicable Legislative Body as part of
a submission for review.
2.3-14 Asphalt Concrete
Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) is a composite material commonly used in construction paving projects that
consists of asphalt (used as a binder) mixed with mineral aggregate place in layers and compacted.
2.3-15 ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials)
An international standards organization that develops and publishes voluntary consensus technical
standards for a wide range of materials, products, systems, and services.
2.3-16 Authorized Agent
An Authorized Agent is a person with express written consent to act upon another person’s behalf.
2.3-17 Bearing Ratio (CBR)
A penetration test for evaluation of the mechanical strength of Roadway Subgrades and basecourses
developed by the California Department of Transportation.
2.3-18 Bicycle Facilities
Bicycle Facilities shall mean bike trails, bike lanes and/or multi-use paths designed for the use of
bicycles.
2.3-19 Bioretention Swale
A Bioretention Swale (or biofiltration trench) is a bioretention system that is located within the base of a
swale and incorporates special types of landscaping and vegetation to enhance water quality and improve
overall stormwater management. See Figure 2.3-F.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 11
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Figure 2.3-F: Illustration of a Bioretention Swale
2.3-20 Certificate of Occupancy
A Certificate of Occupancy is a certificate that shall be obtained prior to the occupancy of any premises.
2.3-21 Channelization, Traffic
Channelization is the separation or regulation of conflicting traffic movements into definite paths of
travel to facilitate safe and orderly movements of both vehicles and pedestrians. See Figure 2.3-G.
Figure 2.3-G: Illustration of channelizing elements
2.3-22 Commission
See “Planning Commission” (Subsection 2.3-84: Planning Commission).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 12
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-23 Comprehensive Plan
The Kenton County Comprehensive Plan is a guide for public and private actions and decisions to assure
the development of public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. It shall contain, as
a minimum, the following elements:
(A) A statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies, and standards;
(B) A land use plan element;
(C) A transportation plan element;
(D) A community facilities plan element; and
(E) May include any additional elements such as, without being limited to, community renewal,
housing, Flood control, pollution, conservation, natural resources, regional impact, historic
preservation, and others.
2.3-24 Condominium Property Regime Plat
See “Plat, Condominium Property Regime” (Subsection 2.3-87: Plat, Condominium Property Regime).
2.3-25 Construction Materials Testing Agency
A Construction Materials Testing Agency shall be under the full-time technical direction of a registered
Professional Engineer in the state of Kentucky. The Engineer shall have at least five years’ experience in
construction materials testing. The testing laboratory shall maintain an accreditation for the test methods
performed. Appropriate accreditations are provided by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Accreditations at an equivalent level by another nationally
recognized organization are also acceptable.
2.3-26 Contractor
A Contractor is a person or firm engaged in construction related to the installation of Improvements and
infrastructure. A Contractor may be an “Applicant” or may be employed by an Applicant to install
Improvements as approved as part of the Subdivision process.
2.3-27 Controlled Low Strength Material
A fluid mixture of Portland Cement, fly ash, sand and water designed to be low strength to allow for
possible removal of the material at a later date.
2.3-28 County
County shall mean Kenton County in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-29 County Clerk
The County Clerk is the duly-elected clerk of Kenton County in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-30 Cul-de-sac
A Cul-de-sac is a Street having an outlet at one end with a permanent circular turnaround at the other
end.
2.3-31 Curb
A Curb is the concrete boundary at the edge of the pavement of a Street that may also include gutters.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 13
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-32 Curb Extension
A Curb Extension is an extension of the Sidewalk or Curb line into the parking lane to reduce the
effective Street width.
2.3-33 Curb, Integral
An Integral Curb is a Curb system that is constructed as an integrated part of the Street pavement.
2.3-34 Design Speed
Design Speed is the speed to which a Street is being or has been designed.
2.3-35 Developer
A Developer is a person who develops real estate by preparing a site for residential or commercial use.
2.3-36 Drainage
Drainage is the natural or artificial flow of surface and sub-surface water from an area.
2.3-37 Driveway
A Driveway is a privately owned vehicular way.
2.3-38 Easement
An Easement is an interest in real property, distinct from the fee ownership of the land, granting the legal
right to cross property with facilities such as, but not limited to, sewer lines, water lines, and transmission
lines, or the right, distinct from the fee ownership of the land, to reserve and hold an area for
conservation, Drainage or access purposes.
2.3-39 Engineer
An Engineer is a qualified registered Professional Engineer in good standing with the Kentucky State
Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
2.3-40 Final Plat
See “Plat, Final” (Subsection 2.3-88: Plat, Final).
2.3-41 Flag Stem
A Flag Stem is the narrow portion of a Flag Lot that provides the Lot with Frontage along a public or
Private Street.
2.3-42 Flood, Flooding, or Flood Water
The terms “Flood,” “Flooding,” or “Flood Water” reflect a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 14
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Flood 2.3-43 Plain or Flood Prone Area
Flood Plains and Flood Prone Areas are land areas susceptible to being inundated by Flood Waters from
any source. See Figure 2.3-H.
Figure 2.3-H: Illustration of a Flood Plain
2.3-44 Floodway, 100-year
A Floodway is the channel of a river or other Watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the 100-year Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot at any point. See Figure 2.3-I.
Figure 2.3-I: Illustration of a Floodway
2.3-45 Freeway
A Freeway or interstate is a controlled-access highway that has grade-separated interchange connections
with intersecting highways and Streets.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 15
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-46 Frontage
Frontage is all the property abutting on one side of the Right-of-way of a Street, measured along the
Right-of-way line of the Street between the intersecting Lot Lines. In no case shall the line along an
Access Drive be considered as acceptable for Frontage. See Figure 2.3-J.
Figure 2.3-J: Illustration of Frontage
2.3-47 Functional Classification
Functional Classification shall mean the categorization of Streets and roads based on their provided
mobility and access to adjacent land.
2.3-48 Guarantee
A Guarantee is a contract guaranteeing the Developer or Applicant’s obligation to the Planning
Commission to complete approved Subdivision Improvements.
2.3-49 Geotechnical Technician
A Geotechnical Technician shall be trained by, and under the full-time technical direction of, a registered
Professional Engineer in the state of Kentucky. The Engineer shall have at least five years’ experience in
construction materials testing.
2.3-50 Identification Plat
See “Plat, Identification” (Subsection 2.3-88:).
2.3-51 Improvement Drawings
See “Improvement Plans” (Subsection 2.3-52: Improvement Plans).
2.3-52 Improvement Plans
Improvement Plans are the engineering plans showing design layout, types of materials, and construction
details for the physical structures and facilities to be installed in, or in conjunction with a Subdivision.
The terms “Improvement Plans” and “Improvement Drawings” can be used interchangeably.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 16
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-53 Improvements
Improvements are physical changes made to raw land, and the structures placed on or under the land’s
surface, in order to make the land more usable for activities. Typical Improvements in these regulations
would be grading, Street pavement, Curbs, gutters, Drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, and
utility lines of all types.
2.3-54 Inlet Grates
An Inlet Grate is an opening in the pavement covered by a type of protective grate that allows for the
passage of stormwater.
2.3-55 Inspector
An Inspector shall be the person(s) responsible for inspecting Improvements pursuant to these
regulations. See also “Staff” (Subsection 2.3-108: Staff).
2.3-56 Joint, Construction
A stopping place in the process of concrete construction usually set to coincide with a Contraction Joint.
2.3-57 Joint, Contraction
A joint, tooled or cut into freshly placed concrete to induce cracking caused by drying and thermal
shrinkage at preselected locations.
2.3-58 Joint, Expansion
A concrete joint designed to allow for the horizontal movement of concrete due to the effects of thermal
expansion and contraction.
2.3-59 Joint, Longitudinal
A joint in concrete pavement running parallel to the centerline of the Street either tooled, sawn or formed.
2.3-60 Kenton County Planning Commission (KCPC)
The 20-member body appointed by the county judge/executive and mayors and their legislative bodies
that pursues and administers provisions of KRS Chapter 100.
2.3-61 Kentucky Transportation Cabinet (KYTC)
An executive branch agency responsible for overseeing the development and maintenance of a safe,
efficient multi-modal transportation system throughout the state of Kentucky.
2.3-62 KYTC Highway Design Manual
A manual that presents detailed or descriptive design information for Kentucky Road Projects based on
common practice and other resources.
2.3-63 Legislative Body
Legislative Body shall mean the elected board or body responsible for adopting law in the applicable
jurisdiction.
2.3-64 Lot
A Lot is a Parcel of land or any combination of several Lots of record occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or group of buildings, as permitted herein, together with their accessory
buildings or uses and such access, Yards, and open spaces required under these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 17
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-65 Lot Area
Lot Area is the total area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and Rear Lot Lines, but not
including any area occupied by rights-of-way. See Figure 2.3-K.
Figure 2.3-K: Illustration of Lot Area (hatched area)
2.3-66 Lot, Corner
A Corner Lot is a Lot situated at the intersection of two Streets or on a curved Street in which the interior
angle of such intersection or curved Streets does not exceed 135 degrees. See Figure 2.3-L.
Figure 2.3-L: Illustration of a Corner Lot
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 18
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-67 Lot, Double Frontage
A Double Frontage Lot is a Lot, other than a Corner Lot, that has Frontage on two Streets. See Figure
2.3-M.
Figure 2.3-M: Illustration of a Double Frontage Lot
2.3-68 Lot, Flag
A Flag Lot is a Lot that does not contain the minimum required Lot Width at the minimum required front
yard setback. See Figure 2.3-N.
Figure 2.3-N: Illustration of a Flag Lot
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 19
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-69 Lot, Triple Frontage
A Triple Frontage Lot is a Lot that has Frontage on three Streets. See Figure 2.3-O.
Figure 2.3-O: Illustration of a Triple Frontage Lot
2.3-70 Lot Line
A Lot Line is a line of record surrounding a Lot that separates one Lot from another Lot, a public Rightof-
way, or any other public or private space. For the purposes of these regulations, a “Lot Line” may also
be called a “property line.”
2.3-71 Lot Line, Front
A Front Lot Line is the common boundary line of a Lot and a Street Right-of-way line. In the case of a
Corner Lot or a Double Frontage Lot, the Front Lot Line is the common boundary line with that Street
Right-of-way line toward which the principal or usual entrance to the principal building faces. In the
case of a Flag Lot, the interior line most parallel to and nearest the Street Right-of-way line. See Figure
2.3-P.
2.3-72 Lot Line, Rear
A Rear Lot Line is the boundary line of a Lot which is most nearly opposite the Front Lot Line of such
Lot. In the case of a triangular or wedge shaped Lot, for measurement purposes only, a line 10 feet in
length within the Lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the Front Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-P.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 20
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-73 Lot Line, Side
A Side Lot Line is any boundary line of a Lot, other than a Front Lot Line or Rear Lot Line. See Figure
2.3-P.
Figure 2.3-P: Illustration of front, side, and Rear Lot Lines
2.3-74 Lot Width
The Lot Width is the horizontal distance of a Lot measured between the Side Lot Lines along the
building Front Setback line. See Figure 2.3-Q.
Figure 2.3-Q: Illustration of Lot Width
2.3-75 Median
A Median is a form of Channelization that physically separates traffic movements.
2.3-76 Mixed Use
Mixed Use is a single development containing both residential and nonresidential uses.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 21
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Multi-Family 2.3-77 Residential Dwelling
A building that contains three or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one
or more units. The land underneath the structure may or may not be divided into separate Lots. Multi-unit
buildings include structures commonly referred to as “apartments” and “condominiums.”
2.3-78 Parcel
See “Lot” (Subsection 2.3-64: Lot).
2.3-79 Parcel, Residual
A Residual Parcel is a piece of land that is leftover after Lots are laid out in a Subdivision that does not
meet the minimum requirements of the applicable zoning and is therefore inadequate for development.
2.3-80 Parking Area
A Parking Area is an open paved area which primarily affords for vehicular parking and corresponding
drive aisles.
2.3-81 PCA Design and Control of Concrete Mixtures
A reference manual developed by the Portland Cement Association that contains design and placement
specifications for concrete pavements.
2.3-82 Pedestrian Walkway
A Pedestrian Walkway is an improved path intended for pedestrian travel.
2.3-83 Permeable Pavement
Permeable Pavement is a pavement material that allows the infiltration of water through it to be
recharged into the ground below.
2.3-84 Planning Commission
The term “Planning Commission” shall mean the Kenton County Planning Commission in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-85 Planning Jurisdiction
The Planning Jurisdiction includes those areas of Kenton County, Kentucky, which fall under the
jurisdictional authority of the Kenton County Planning Commission, as provided by KRS 100.131.
2.3-86 Plat
A Plat is the map or drawing representing a Parcel of land, showing the location and boundaries of
individual Lots and Streets, created and approved through these regulations.
2.3-87 Plat, Condominium Property Regime
A Condominium Property Regime Plat is a drawing representing a proposed Subdivision of a building
into individual units and common areas as defined under Kentucky Condominium Law whereby the
ownership of each unit may be transferred independently of another unit.
2.3-88 Plat, Final
A Final Plat is the final drawing and documents pertaining to a proposed Subdivision of land which is
submitted formally by an Applicant following approval of the Preliminary Plat. Once approved and
recorded, the Final Plat becomes a lawful Subdivision.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 22
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-89 Plat, Identification
An Identification Plat is a drawing representing a proposed Minor Subdivision of land that does not
contain public Improvements as further defined in Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions.
2.3-90 Plat, Minor
See “Plat, Identification” (Subsection 2.3-89: Plat, Identification).
2.3-91 Plat, Preliminary
A Preliminary Plat is the preliminary drawings and documents pertaining to a proposed Subdivision of
land which is submitted formally by an Applicant for review under these regulations.
2.3-92 Plat, Record
A Record Plat is the Final Plat that is submitted to the Kenton County Clerk for recordation.
2.3-93 Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete)
Portland Cement Concrete is a composite material commonly used in construction paving projects that
consists of coarse aggregate (crushed stone and gravel), fine aggregate (such as sand), Portland cement
and water.
2.3-94 Preliminary Plat
See “Plat, Preliminary” (Subsection 2.3-91: Plat, Preliminary).
2.3-95 Pumping (or deflection)
Pumping is defined as movement or deflection of the Subgrade soil that extends beyond the limits of the
direct wheel load. Unless accompanied by Rutting (which is common), the pumping Subgrade soil may
rebound back to its original position after the wheel load passes. Pumping failures are typically caused
by Subgrade soils with higher than optimum moisture content located within a zone up to several feet
below the Subgrade surface.
2.3-96 Qualified Geotechnical Engineer
A Geotechnical Engineer who individually, or whose firm, has been accepted onto the City of
Cincinnati’s list of Qualified/Recognized Geotechnical Engineers.
2.3-97 Record Drawing
Redrawn Improvement Drawings after construction is complete that verifies the as-built condition of the
site Improvements.
2.3-98 Record Plat
See “Plat, Record” (Subsection 2.3-92: Plat, Record).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 23
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-99 ReSubdivision
A ReSubdivision is any change to an approved or recorded Plat that affects a Street layout or Lot Line, or
that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of regulations controlling
Subdivisions. See Figure 2.3-R.
Figure 2.3-R: Illustration of a ReSubdivision
2.3-100 Right-of-way
A Right-of-way is a strip of land used, occupied, or intended to be used or occupied by transportation and
public use facilities such as Streets, railroads, and utility lines. See Figure 2.3-S. The term Right-of-way
may be abbreviated as ROW or R/W.
Figure 2.3-S: Illustration of a Right-of-way
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 24
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-101 Roadway
See “Street” (Subsection 2.3-109: Street) and any variation of Street as the terms “Roadway” and
“Street” can be used interchangeably.
2.3-102 Rutting
Rutting is defined as imprints or depressions in the Subgrade caused by direct wheel loads. Rutting
failures are typically caused by inadequate compaction of near surface soils.
2.3-103 Setback
A Setback is the required distance between a side, rear or front property line and the exterior face of the
foundation of a building or structure as regulated by the applicable Legislative Body’s Zoning Ordinance.
2.3-104 Sidewalk
A Sidewalk is a Pedestrian Walkway within a Right-of-way of a Public Street or Access easement of a
Private Street but not on the Street surface.
2.3-105 Sight Distance
Sight Distance is the length of the Street or Roadway ahead that is visible to the driver.
2.3-106 Single-Family Residential Dwelling (Attached)
A single dwelling unit located on its own Lot that shares one or more common or adjacent walls with one
or more dwelling units. An attached house does not share common floor/ceilings with other dwelling
units. An attached house is also called a “townhouse” or a “rowhouse.”
2.3-107 Single-Family Residential Dwelling (Detached)
A detached house is a building containing a single dwelling unit (other than a mobile home or
manufactured housing unit) that is located on its own Lot and that is not attached to any other dwelling
unit. Detached houses are surrounded on all sides by open Yards and Setback areas.
2.3-108 Staff
Staff shall mean the Duly Authorized Staff of the Kenton County Planning Commission.
2.3-109 Street
A Street is a vehicular way that affords a means of transport and access to abutting property. Streets are
further classified by Functional Classification and Street type as defined in these regulations. A Driveway
or Access Drive shall not be classified as a Street.
2.3-110 Street, Arterial
An Arterial Street is a public Street which primarily serves through traffic and most of the trips
entering/leaving large urban areas and major traffic generators.
2.3-111 Street, Collector
A collector street which primarily serves to collect traffic from Local Streets and also connect smaller
urbanized areas and traffic generators. A collector street typically serves greater than 500 Lots.
2.3-112 Street, Local
A Local Street is a paved vehicular way which primarily serves to provide direct access to abutting
properties. Local Streets typically serve no more than 199 Lots.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 25
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-113 Street, Private
A Private Street is a paved vehicular way constructed or intended to be constructed within the boundaries
of a privately owned Parcel of land.
2.3-114 Street, Public
A Public Street is a paved vehicular way constructed or intended to be constructed within the boundaries
of a dedicated and accepted public Right-of-way.
2.3-115 Street, Subcollector
A Subcollector Street is a street which primarily serves to connect Local Streets with Collector Streets. A
Subcollector Street typically serves more than 200 Lots, but less than 500 Lots.
2.3-116 Street Name Sign
A Street Name Sign is a sign that identifies only the applicable Street name, including all prefixes and
suffixes, and which may include a logo of the community.
2.3-117 Subdivider
A Subdivider is the individual(s) or entity subdividing land.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 26
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-118 Subdivision
A Subdivision is the division of a Parcel of land into two or more Lots or Parcels for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, or if a new Street is involved, any
division of a Parcel of land; providing that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new
Street shall not be deemed a Subdivision. The term includes ReSubdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of Subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of
land into Parcels of less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division of the same land
shall be deemed a Subdivision within the meaning of these regulations. See Figure 2.3-T.
Figure 2.3-T: Illustration of the development spectrum of Subdivisions
2.3-119 Subdivision, Major
A Major Subdivision is a proposed Subdivision of land that contains public infrastructure Improvements
or the construction of a public or Private Street. See Figure 2.3-U.
Figure 2.3-U: Illustrative example of a Major Subdivision
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 27
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-120 Subdivision, Minor
A Minor Subdivision is a proposed Subdivision of land that does not contain public infrastructure
Improvements. See Figure 2.3-V.
Figure 2.3-V: Illustrative example of a Minor Subdivision
2.3-121 Subgrade
The Subgrade is the layer of soil or soil base that pavement or an improvement is constructed upon.
2.3-122 Surety
See “Guarantee” (Subsection 2.3-48: Guarantee).
2.3-123 Surveyor
A Surveyor is a registered professional Surveyor in good standing with the Kentucky State Board of
Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
2.3-124 Tract
A tract is a Parcel of land identified by letter or number, the boundaries of which are shown on a recorded
Plat. See also “Lot” (Subsection 2.3-64: Lot).
2.3-125 Traffic Control
Traffic Control shall mean signs or devices that regulate traffic movement.
2.3-126 Traffic Impact Study (TIS)
A traffic impact study is a study analyzing existing and anticipated Street conditions to determine traffic
impacts associated with potential development. See Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
2.3-127 Treelawn
A planting strip typically between the Sidewalk and the edge of the Street.
2.3-128 Watercourse
A permanent channel designed to carry concentrated stormwater flows without causing erosion.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 28
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-129 Yard
A Yard is a space on the same Lot or Parcel with the main building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed
by structures, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. See Figure 2.3-W, Figure 2.3-X, Figure
2.3-Z, and Figure 2.3-Y.
Figure 2.3-W: Illustration of yard areas (hatched area) on a typical Lot
2.3-130 Yard, Front
A Front Yard is an area between the front building line and the Front Lot Line, as defined herein,
extending from Side Lot Line to Side Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-X.
Figure 2.3-X: Illustration of a front yard (hatched area)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 29
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-131 Yard, Rear
A Rear Yard is an area between the rear building line and the Front Lot Line, as defined herein,
extending from Side Lot Line to Side Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-Y.
Figure 2.3-Y: Illustration of a rear yard (hatched area)
2.3-132 Yard, Side
A Side Yard is an area between any building and the Side Lot Line, as defined herein, extending from the
front to the Rear Yard or on through Lots or building sites from one Front Lot Line to the other Front Lot
Line. See Figure 2.3-Z.
Figure 2.3-Z: Illustration of side yards (hatched areas)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 30
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.1: Purpose
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.1: Purpose
3.1-1 This article fulfills the administration requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. It shall be the responsibility of Staff to administer these regulations, including performance of
all inspections on behalf of the Kenton County Planning Commission as provided for in these
regulations.
3.1-2 This article also fulfills the procedural requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273
through 100.292. By establishing these procedures, it assures a necessary component of harmonious,
progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development. Furthermore, these procedures promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this
article:
(A) Assures that land is divided according to policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan;
(B) Promotes the coordination of existing and proposed Streets, utilities, and community facilities;
(C) Assures each Plat conforms to the principles, design standards, and construction standards set forth
in these regulations; and
(D) Provides methods for making changes to recorded Plats and assures the changes conform to the
purposes and requirements of these regulations.
Section 3.2: Review and Decision-Making Bodies
3.2-1 Authority of the Planning Commission
Unless otherwise modified herein, the authority and duties of the Kenton County Planning Commission
as it relates to these Subdivision regulations shall be as established in KRS 100.133 through 100.182 and
KRS 100.273 through KRS 100.292.
3.2-2 Delegation of Responsibilities to Staff
Unless otherwise specified, the Planning Commission authorizes staff to administer these regulations
pursuant to KRS 100.281(1). This authorization shall include, but not be limited to, the following
responsibilities:
(A) To interpret these regulations, including the ability to determine appropriate review processes, and
the applicability and substance of design standards;
(B) To review, process, and make decisions on all Plats and Improvement Plans;
(C) To inspect all work required by these regulations;
(D) To be in receipt of and to distribute fees collected as a result of these regulations;
(E) To distribute Plats and plans to various governmental bodies for review; and
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 31
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(F) To assure compliance with these regulations that shall include the authority to:
(1) Notify any person(s) responsible for violating these regulations;
(2) Seek injunctions; and
(3) Institute any remedies permitted under KRS 100.
Authority 3.2-3 and Duty of Inspectors
Inspectors shall be members of Staff who are authorized to inspect all work performed and all materials
furnished in the following manner:
(A) Inspectors shall not revoke, alter, or waive any requirements of the approved plans, but call to the
attention of the Contractor and/or Project Engineer any failure of the work or materials to conform
to the approved plans and/or these Subdivision regulations.
(B) Any work determined by the Inspectors not to conform to the requirements of the approved plans
and/or these Subdivision regulations shall be suspended and such construction brought into
conformance with the approved plans and/or these Subdivision regulations.
(C) The Inspector’s authority includes the right to order items removed and replaced and/or additional
testing performed when work does not comply with the approved plans and/or these Subdivision
regulations, or when work was performed without the required notification or inspection.
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
The requirements of this section shall apply to all Subdivisions and Applications subject to review under these
regulations, unless otherwise stated.
3.3-1 Authority to File Applications
The person having legal authority to take action in accordance with the approval sought shall file an
Application for any review in accordance with these regulations. The person having legal authority shall
be the record owner or the duly Authorized Agent of the record owner and may be required to provide
proof of such authority at the time of application.
3.3-2 Application Contents
(A) Submittal Requirements
(1) Applications required under these regulations shall be submitted in a form and in such
numbers as established by these regulations. A list of the requirements shall be made
available to the public.
(2) The Applicant shall attest to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented
with the Application.
(B) Submission of Fees
(1) Applications shall be accompanied by a processing fee as established in the Planning
Commission’s by-laws.
(2) The Subdivider shall pay all fees due at the time of submittal.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 32
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(3) Processing fees are not refundable except where the Applicant withdraws the Application
prior to a complete review by Staff. If the Applicant requests the withdrawal of an
Application (in writing), Staff shall determine the amount of the submittal fee used for
review based on an hourly fee and shall refund any amount not already used for Staff review.
(C) Complete Application Submittal Determination
(1) Staff shall only initiate the review and processing of Applications submitted under this article
if such Application submittal is determined to be complete.
(2) Staff shall make a determination of Application submittal completeness within five business
days of the Application filing.
(3) If the Application submittal is determined to be complete, the Application shall then be
processed according to the procedures set forth in these regulations.
(4) If an Application submittal is determined to be incomplete, Staff shall provide notice to the
Applicant along with an explanation of the Application submittal’s deficiencies. No further
processing of an incomplete Application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
(5) If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied by an Applicant on an
Application, that Application shall be deemed incomplete.
3.3-3 Digital Submission Policy
(A) Purpose of the Digital Submission Policy
The purpose of this policy is to describe the content, format, and standards required for the digital
submission of Subdivision Plats and development plans.
(B) Applicability
All Preliminary Plats, Improvement Drawings, Final Plats, and Record Drawings that were
produced digitally shall be submitted digitally in accordance with this subsection.
(C) Minimum Required Content
All information submitted shall be at an accurate scale. The minimum information that shall be
submitted for each Plat or drawing shall include:
(1) Preliminary Plats
a) Exterior boundary lines of the property;
b) Proposed Lot Lines;
c) Proposed Street centerlines and rights-of-way;
d) A north arrow; and
e) All required annotations.
(2) Improvement Drawings
a) Exterior boundary lines of the property;
b) Proposed Lot Lines;
c) Proposed Street centerlines and rights-of-way;
d) Proposed edges of pavement;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 33
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
e) Proposed Sidewalks;
f) Proposed storm and sanitary sewers;
g) The proposed water system (e.g., water lines, hydrants, valves);
h) Existing utilities & Sidewalks; and
i) All required annotations.
(3) Final Plats
Digital files for a Final Plat shall provide a complete submission of all information outlined
in Subsection 3.6-6(E): Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats.
(4) Record Drawings
a) Platted property lines;
b) Lot numbers;
c) Right-of-way lines;
d) Easement lines;
e) As-built information of storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water system components
(e.g., hydrants and valves).
(D) Accepted File Formats for Digital Submissions
Files will be accepted and implemented into the Planning and Development Services (PDS)
Geographic Information System (GIS) using the following formats:
(1) Microstation drawings as stored in a design format with a .DGN extension generated by
Microstation up to release V8 2004.
(2) AutoCad drawings as stored in a proprietary drawing file format with the .DWG extension.
Files will be accepted generated by AutoCad release 12 and higher.
(3) ArcGIS Software that produces a shape file (.shp) or geodatabase (.mdb).
(E) Accepted Standards and Data Integrity Requirements
(1) A layer system should be utilized. Each unique feature should have its own unique layer as
illustrated in Figure 3.3-A.
(2) Data accuracy standards shall conform to the requirements of the official hard copy and 201
KAR 18.150 of the Standards of Practice for Professional Land Surveyors.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 34
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
Figure 3.3-A: Example illustration of layers properties for digital submissions
(F) Tie to Horizontal Control
The following standards apply to all digitally submitted Plats and drawings:
(1) The boundary of the submitted plan shall be tied into the NAD 1983 Kentucky SPCS North
FIPS 1601;
(2) A reference shall be made as to which monuments were used for control; and
(3) Upon review with the Applicant’s Surveyor/Engineer, Staff may grant a modification or
waiver to the above requirements providing the Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed development does not lie within one mile of a horizontal control monument
established in the Northern Kentucky Control Network. The one mile shall be measured
along existing Street centerlines to the nearest available monument.
(G) Media Requirements
(1) Digital submissions will be accepted using the following media and methods:
a) A readable compact disc (CD-R);
b) Email of file provided that file size does not exceed eight megabytes;
c) Iomega or WinZip files; or
d) Publication to a FTP site provided by PDS.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 35
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(2) All media submitted will provide labels or an attached transcript with the information as
illustrated the example provided in Table 3.3-1.
TABLE 3.3-1:LABEL INFORMATION FOR DIGITAL SUBMISSIONS
REQUIRED INFORMATION EXAMPLE
Project or Subdivision Name Sunny Acres
File Name sunnyacres.dwg
Date June 26, 2002
Company Name Bailey & Associates, Inc.
PLS/PE Joe Smith
Registration No. PLS 53405
Format DWG
(H) Availability of Information
Digitally submitted information shall not be available to the general public in the same digital
format in which it was delivered. The governing documentation will be in a hard copy format.
(I) Adjustments to Requirements
PDS reserves the right to waive or adjust requirements specified herein based on the continued
maintenance of the Kenton County GIS.
Examination and Copying of 3.3-4 Application and Other Document
Documents and/or records may be inspected and/or copied as provided for by state law.
3.3-5 Computation of Time
(A) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these regulations, the date of the
Application, act, decision, or event, from which the designated period of time begins shall not be
included. The last date of the period of time to be computed shall be included, unless it is a
Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which case the period runs until the end of the next day
which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday as observed by the Staff’s offices where the
offices are closed for the entire day.
(B) When the offices are closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day of the
period of time, then such Application, act, decision, or event may be performed on the next
succeeding days which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday observed by Staff in which
the Staff’s offices are closed for the entire day.
3.3-6 Subdivider and/or Contractor Construction Responsibilities
(A) The Subdivider and/or Contractor shall have a superintendent acting as the agent for the project
that shall have available at all times, a copy of all approved plans and specifications.
(B) The Subdivider’s and/or Contractor's superintendent shall be capable of reading and thoroughly
understanding the plans and specifications and shall always be available regardless of the amount
of work sublet.
(C) The name and contact information of the Subdivider’s and/or Contractor’s superintendent shall be
submitted to Staff prior to the beginning of any site work.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 36
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements
(D) The Contractor shall notify Staff and/or the Inspectors at least 24 hours prior to the time when the
work is to begin on each phase of construction including earthwork, utilities, Street paving,
Sidewalk, and all applicable testing.
3.3-7 Final Clean Up of Site
The Subdivider and/or Contractor shall remove all debris or excess materials in connection with the
completed work within the proposed street Right-of-way, prior to Final Plat approval.
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements
3.4-1 General Provisions
(A) A Subdivider may execute and file a written Guarantee with the Planning Commission in lieu of
actual installation or completion of the required public Improvements or Private Street construction
when requesting approval of a Final Plat.
(B) The amount of the Guarantee shall be based on a cost estimate provided by the Project Engineer or
Developer, approved by Staff, for the cost to complete the public Improvements contained on the
section(s) of Final Plat plus a 10 percent contingency fee.
(1) Where applicable, engineering, plan review, and construction review fees, etc., shall be
required to be a part of the cost estimate.
(2) After a period of two years from the date of submittal, Staff shall require that a revised
estimate and bond be submitted by the Developer or guarantor that reflects updated unit
prices if the unit prices have increased.
(C) Unit prices used in the cost estimate shall be based on R.S. Means Construction Cost Data, latest
edition.
(D) Guarantees shall be made payable to the Planning Commission and be acceptable to Staff and the
Planning Commission's legal counsel.
(E) Incomplete Improvements that Staff determines constitutes a safety hazard, is a maintenance issue,
or is necessary for the effective functioning of the infrastructure or Improvements, shall be required
to be completed prior to the approval of a Final Plat.
(F) The Guarantee shall have no expiration date and contain the condition that should the Subdivider
fail to complete all Guaranteed Improvements within 24 calendar months from the date of Final
Plat approval, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to claim the proceeds from the
Guarantee and use them to pay for the completion of all the Guaranteed Improvements.
(G) Should the Subdivider fail to complete the Guaranteed Improvements prior to 24 calendar months
from the date of Final Plat approval, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to claim the
proceeds from the Guarantee and use them to pay for the completion all of the Guaranteed
Improvements.
(H) Written verification shall be provided to the Subdivider by Staff when Guaranteed Improvements
have been completed in accord with the Subdivision regulations. Such written verification shall
constitute a release of any remaining Guarantee.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 37
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
3.4-2 Types of Guarantees
(A) A Guarantee shall be an assurance of faithful performance executed by the Subdivider for all
required uncompleted public Improvements and shall be in one of the following forms:
(1) Cash, check, cashier’s check, or money order;
(2) A Subdivision bond secured from an insurance company;
(3) An irrevocable standby letter of credit from a financial institution; or
(4) A certificate of deposit from a financial institution.
(B) Final Plats will not be released until checks, excluding cashier’s checks, have cleared the financial
institution.
(C) All Guarantees shall comply with the form and content contained in Section 3.4: Guarantees for
Improvements of these regulations.
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
3.5-1 Minor Subdivision Applicability
(A) In order to be subject to the Minor Subdivision review process, the proposed Subdivision of land
shall:
(1) Be located along an existing Public Street or Roadway accepted for maintenance by the
applicable Legislative Body if the proposed Lots will be used for building purposes;
(2) Not involve the creation of a new Street or the widening or extension of a public or Private
Street; and
(3) Contain no proposed public utility Improvements.
(B) The Minor Subdivision process may also be used for the attachment of
land to an adjacent Parcel or consolidation of two Lots.
3.5-2 Review Process for Minor Subdivisions
Minor Subdivisions shall require the approval of an Identification Plat or a
Final Plat. The review process for an Identification Plat is outlined in this
subsection. The review process for a Final Plat is found in Subsection 3.6-6:
Final Plat Review and Recordation.
(A) Step 1 – Application
The Identification Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements
of this section shall be submitted for review at the Planning Commission
offices.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Identification Plat and Application and
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Identification
Plats within 10 business days from the date the Plat and
Application is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-
2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this
Review Process for
Minor Subdivisions
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 38
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be made in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) An Applicant may appeal Staff’s decision in accordance with Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff
Actions.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved Identification Plats shall be forwarded by Staff to the Kenton County Clerk for
recordation. Such forwarding of the approved Identification Plat shall not result in the
recordation of the Plat.
(2) Recordation shall not occur until the Applicant, or the Applicant’s representative, formally
requests such recordation at the offices of the Kenton County Clerk. Approved Identification
Plats remain valid and available for recordation for two years from the date of Staff’s
approval.
(3) Approved Identification Plats not recorded within two years from the date of Staff’s approval
must be resubmitted for review and approval. Resubmitted Identification Plats shall require
the submittal of all new information and fees as required by these regulations
(4) Approved Identification Plats must be recorded before the property can be transferred.
Technical Requirements f 3.5-3 or Identification Plats
An Identification Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201 Kentucky
Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and:
(A) Drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 200 feet or greater;
(B) Contain a prepared date and signature from the Surveyor dated to within 90 days from the date of
submittal; and
(C) Submitted on two sets of paper that is no larger than 8.5 by 14 inches in size.
3.5-4 Additional Content Requirements for Identification Plats
An Identification Plat submitted for approval shall conform to the applicable zoning ordinance and shall
contain the following information, as applicable.
(A) A Right-of-way parcel measured from the centerline of the abutting Street indicating intent to
dedicate one half of the Right-of-way required for a new Street of the same classification. This
shall be accompanied by the following signed and notarized certificate of the owner(s) indicating
dedication of the required Right-of-way (See Figure 3.5-A and Figure 3.5-B.):
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 39
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat, dedicate the Right-ofway
as shown on the plat herein to public use and further certify that
the title to the property shown herein is part or all of the same
property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and recorded in Deed
Book______, Page _______ of the ____________ County records at
_____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature _____________ Date _____________
Figure 3.5-A: Dedication Certificate
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
County of ____________________
State of _____________________
I,__________________, a notary public in and for said county and
state, do certify that the foregoing instrument was acknowledged
before me this ____ Day of ___________, 200___By (Name of
Signer) , (Title) , (Company Name) .
Signed: __________________________
Notary Public State of ______________
My Commission Expires: ____________
Figure 3.5-B: Notary Acknowledgment
(B) Subdivisions of land that do not meet the minimum requirements for a buildable Lot shall contain
the following statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-C):
Subject parcel is a non-buildable parcel by itself and is approved for
attachment to adjacent land. This approval does not constitute a
guarantee that the resulting parcel complies with any other regulatory
agency’s requirements.
Figure 3.5-C: Non-Buildable Lot Statement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 40
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(C) Subdivisions of land within previously approved Preliminary Plats or Stage I Development Plans
shall contain the following statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-D):
Any development within or further Subdivision of the subject tract
shall comply with the previously approved preliminary plat (and/or
stage I development plan) on file at the Planning Commission
offices.
Figure 3.5-D: Previously Approved Preliminary or Stage I Plan Statement
(D) Sufficient information shall be included to locate the Parcel being subdivided in relation to
previously subdivided Parcels, as well as to their location within the original tract of land.
(E) The approval certificate illustrated in Figure 3.5-E.
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
Approved for attachment to deed and conveyance purposes by the
Kenton County Planning Commission. This approval does not
constitute a guarantee that the resulting parcel(s) complies with
any other regulatory agency’s requirements.
this ________day of _____________________, 20___.
By: _____________________________
_____________________________
Chair, Kenton County Planning Commission
Figure 3.5-E: Approval certificate for Identification Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 41
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(F) A Surveyor’s Certificate that indicates the following (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-F):
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the survey depicted by this plat was done by
persons under my direct supervision by the method of random
traverse with sideshots. The unadjusted precision ratio of the
traverse was 1:_______ and the directions and distances shown on
the plat are based on a traverse that (was/was not) adjusted. The
reference meridian basis shown hereon is
from_________________________. This survey is a
(Rural/Urban) Survey and the accuracy and precision of said
survey meets all the specifications of this class and complies with
201 KAR 18:150. )
Signature____________________PLS
#________Date___________
Figure 3.5-F: Surveyor’s Certificate
(G) An Owners Certificate that indicates the following (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-G):
OWNERS CERTIFICATE
We the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat and consent and
accept all easements and matters shown heron and further certify
that the title to the property shown hereon is part or all of the same
property conveyed to us by deed dated__________and recorded in
Deed Book________, Page_________of the ___________County
records at ______________KY.
Owners
Signature__________________________Date___________
Figure 3.5-G: Owners Certificate
(H) Subdivisions which will utilize on-site sewage disposal systems shall contain the following
statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-H):
Plat approval for building development and/or alteration of existing on-site systems on
each lot is contingent upon the issuance of a sewage construction permit and inspection
by the local and/or state health board or district.
Figure 3.5-H: On-Site Sewage Disposal Statement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 42
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(I) Plats in which no Subdivision of land is taking place and a plat is being requested for attachment to
a deed to clear up title confusion or otherwise shall contain the following statement (as illustrated
in Figure 3.5-I):
Survey plat represents all of the property conveyed
to_________________as recorded in O.R. C-xx, pg. xx. No new
subdivision of the property is shown. Plat approval indicates the
survey meets the requirements of 201 KAR 18:150 only.
Figure 3.5-I: Attachment or Title Confusion Statement
(J) All Easements that are to be established on the plat shall indicate the grantor of the Easement, the
recipient of the Easement and the purpose of the Easement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 43
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
3.6-1 Major Subdivision Applicability
Any Subdivision that does not qualify as a Minor Subdivision
(See Subsection 3.5-1: Minor Subdivision Applicability.) or a
Condominium Property Regime Plat (See Subsection 3.7-1:
Condominium Property Regime Plat Applicability.) shall be
subject to the Major Subdivision review process outlined in
this section.
3.6-2 Summary of Overall Major Subdivision Process
Major Subdivisions are reviewed in a four-step process that
includes the following steps that are further defined in the next
subsections:
(A) Preliminary Plat Review
(B) Grading Plan Review
(C) Improvement Drawings/Plan Review
(D) Final Plat Review and Recordation
3.6-3 Preliminary Plat Review
(A) Step 1 - Pre-application Meeting
(1) Attendance at a pre-application meeting(s)
between Staff and the Applicant is required prior
to submission of an Application for Major
Subdivision review. The purpose of this meeting
is to:
a) Acquaint the Applicant with the standards
and requirements of these regulations;
b) Review with the Applicant the required
procedures and Application requirements;
and
c) Allow Staff and other regulatory authorities
to identify problematic components of the
project and to suggest improvements that
will speed the approval process and avoid
future costly plan revisions.
i) The Applicant and/or their
representatives and their invitees,
Staff, regulatory agencies and public
utility agencies shall be permitted to
attend pre-application meetings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 44
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(2) The following provisions apply to required pre-application meetings:
a) Pre-application meetings are held weekly and do not require a formal Application or
payment of any fee.
b) Pre-application meetings may be scheduled with Staff at least 24 hours in advance of
the next regularly scheduled meeting.
c) Conceptual layouts of the proposed Subdivision (which are not required to be prepared
by design professionals) are encouraged. These layouts should include:
i) The proposed site;
ii) The proposed use;
iii) The proposed access; and
iv) The proposed density.
d) Discussion during pre-application meetings should focus on:
i) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
ii) Improvements needed for new and/or existing infrastructure (water, sewer,
traffic, Watercourse disturbance, etc.);
iii) Storm water management and tree canopy preservation;
iv) Spatial elements such as Street and Lot layout;
v) Connectivity to adjacent properties;
vi) Open space and recreation areas including maintenance and dedication options;
and
vii) Other issues that will facilitate design and development of a better Subdivision
such as issues of hillside disturbance and grading.
(3) Pre-applications are non-binding on Staff or the applicable Legislative Body and should not
be construed to be an approval of any type.
(B) Step 2 – Application
(1) The Preliminary Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements of this section shall
be submitted for review.
(2) Preliminary Plats may be submitted at any time following the required pre-application
meeting.
(3) Preliminary Plat submissions shall be forwarded to applicable regulatory authorities with a
request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(C) Step 3 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Preliminary Plat and Application and approve, conditionally approve,
or disapprove the Plat within 15 business days from the date the Plat and Application is
determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal
Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be made in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) Following Preliminary Plat approval, Applicants may proceed to grading plan and
Improvement Drawings review or may submit a Final Plat, as applicable.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 45
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(5) Approved Preliminary Plats remain valid for two years from the date of Staff’s approval.
(6) If public Street or utility Improvements are involved, the approval of each phase of
Improvement Drawings extends the Preliminary Plat approval an additional two years from
the date of the approval of Improvement Drawings.
(7) Approved Preliminary Plats shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(8) If public Street or utility Improvements are not involved, the approval of each section of a
Final Plat extends the Preliminary Plat approval an additional two years from the date of
Final Plat approval.
(9) An Applicant may extend Preliminary Plat approval for two years upon written request if
Staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the approved Preliminary Plat
have not occurred. This two year extension may be granted by Staff on no more than one
occasion.
(D) Technical Requirements for Preliminary Plats
A Preliminary Plat submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater and submitted in two formats:
(1) On paper no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches in size; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the Preliminary Plat was digitally generated.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Preliminary Plats
A Preliminary Plat submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The name and address of the Owner / Developer, date, north arrow, and an accurate graphic
and written scale;
(3) The name and address of the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the design of the
Preliminary Plat along with that professional’s stamp and signature. Where a Subdivision
proposal involves public infrastructure Improvements, the Preliminary Plat shall be prepared
by an Engineer;
(4) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area;
(5) The original parent tract deed book and page, group number, and remaining acreage;
(6) All proposed uses including the type of housing (e.g., single-family attached or detached,
townhouses, duplexes, etc.) and any public dedication or reservation of land;
(7) The outline of any existing buildings, Access Drives, or other Improvements and an
indication as to whether these are to be retained;
(8) The acreage of land to be subdivided, the total number of Lots, the numbering of each Lot,
and if applicable the approximate number of acres in open space or other public uses;
(9) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet to reflect the current topography of
the proposed Subdivision with elevations based on mean sea level (USGS data);
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 46
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(10) All landscaped areas within public rights-of-way along with provisions for their
maintenance. Drainage facilities shall be provided for landscape islands that contain
irrigation systems.
(11) The following regarding land within 100 feet of the Subdivision boundary:
a) Existing buildings;
b) Visible cemeteries;
c) Known historical landmarks or features;
d) Railroads;
e) Bridges;
f) All private/public utility facilities and Easements;
g) Water courses;
h) The names and deed book and page numbers for all adjoining property owners;
i) The numbering of all adjoining sections and Lots where the land has been subdivided;
and
j) The applicable zoning.
(12) A statement indicating the area of the smallest Lot in the Subdivision;
(13) A statement indicating the minimum Lot Width at the building Setback line;
(14) The layout of the following existing and proposed public/private utilities as well as a notation
as to whether they will be installed underground or overhead:
a) Storm and sanitary sewer lines;
b) Stormwater runoff control facilities;
c) Water lines;
d) Gas lines;
e) Telephone lines;
f) Electric lines; and
g) Cable service.
(15) Locations and widths of proposed Streets as well as a notation as to whether they are to be
public or private;
(16) The approximate boundaries of the 100-year Flood Plain based on National Flood Insurance
Program maps and the approximate boundaries of the 500-year Flood Plain if available;
(17) Known subsurface conditions that are not typical or which may cause problems (e.g. problem
soils, geological formations, wells, known mineral deposits, etc.); and
(18) The need for and scope of a Traffic Impact Study shall be determined by the traffic impact
study regulations contained in Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
(F) Revisions to Approved Preliminary Plats
An Applicant may find it necessary to make changes to the arrangement, size, number, or location
of individual Lots, Streets, or utilities after a Preliminary Plat has been approved. These changes
can be determined to be major or minor in nature by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 47
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(1) Changes that are minor in nature include those that:
a) Do not increase overall density more than 10 percent;
b) Do not significantly alter vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns;
c) Do not decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas more
than 10 percent;
d) Require submission of a revised Preliminary Plat and/or Improvement Drawings;
and/or
e) Can be processed administratively by Staff.
(2) Changes that are major in nature include those that:
a) Increase the overall density more than 10 percent;
b) Will significantly alter vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns;
c) Decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas more than 10
percent;
d) Will require a pre-application meeting and submission of a revised Preliminary Plat
and/or Improvement Drawings including Application and fees; and/or
e) Must be processed in accordance with Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions.
3.6-4 Grading Plan Review
(A) Step 1 - Application
(1) Grading plans may only be submitted after approval of a Preliminary Plat.
(2) Grading plan submissions shall be forwarded to the applicable Legislative Body with a
request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(3) Grading plan submissions may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g.,
public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order
to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the grading plan submission and approve, disapprove, or require revision
to the grading plan in writing within 15 business days from the date the plan submittal is
determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal
Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) Grading plans shall be generally consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat.
(5) Grading plans shall be approved by Staff prior to the commencement of any earthwork
operations and/or storm sewer installation. Failure to comply shall be considered a violation
of these regulations.
(6) Approved grading plans remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 48
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(7) The approval of each phase of an improvement drawing extends the grading plan approval an
additional year from the date of the improvement plan approval.
(8) Approved grading plans shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(9) An Applicant may extend the approval of the grading plan for two years upon written request
if staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the approved Preliminary Plat
have not occurred. This two year extension may be granted by staff on no more than one
occasion.
(C) Technical Requirements for Grading Plans
A grading plan submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or
greater and submitted in three sets on paper no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size unless another
scale is approved by Staff.
(D) Additional Content Requirements for Grading Plans
A grading plan submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The names and addresses of owner and Developer of the Subdivision and the Kentucky
Registered Professional Engineer responsible for the design of all Improvements. The plan
shall be certified with the seal and signature of the Engineer;
(3) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area, and the boundaries of the phase or phases under review relative to the entire
Subdivision;
(4) An accurate graphic and written scale shall be on each applicable sheet of the plan;
(5) The date shall be on the cover or first sheet of the plan, and a north arrow shall be on all
applicable sheets of the plan;
(6) The boundary of the Subdivision or section of Subdivision under review shall be indicated by
a heavy, solid line on one sheet of the plan at a standard scale to show the location of section
under review with other sections of the Subdivision. All Subdivision boundary lines shall be
labeled with the bearing and distance.
(7) The location and width of the following existing features:
a) Streets and/or Street Right-of-ways including Street names and classification of the
Street;
b) Railroads;
c) Public and private utility rights-of-way or Easements (including Drainage Easements);
d) Water courses (e.g., creeks, rivers, swales, Drainage ditches, etc.);
e) Public parks and open spaces;
f) Buildings (labeled "to remain" or "to be removed");
g) Legislative boundaries, County and state lines; and
h) Cemeteries and other historical landmarks or features.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 49
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(8) The location and sizes of all existing utility facilities (public and private) within or adjacent
to the Subdivision or development area;
(9) The location and identification of all existing zoning districts within or adjoining the
Subdivision or project area;
(10) A general location of any proposed Streets and detailed plans of any storm sewer to be
installed at the time of grading;
(11) Profiles of all proposed storm sewer including percent grade, pipe diameters, material of
pipe, pipe lengths, and invert elevations;
(12) Design calculations for all Drainage facilities including stormwater runoff control facilities,
sediment basins, storm water pipelines, and Drainage channels. These calculations shall be
provided by a Kentucky Registered Professional Engineer;
(13) Sight Distance plan views and profiles for both exiting and approaching vehicles;
(14) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet. Such contours shall be clearly
marked with elevation based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S. Data) and location and description
of the benchmark used;
(15) Proposed finished contours with intervals of not more than two feet;
(16) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities shall be shown on the plan, with
detail drawings of each type of facility being used;
(17) The approximate boundary of all areas that are to be left undisturbed;
(18) For Subdivisions planned with individual on-site sewage disposal systems, it is
recommended that the Applicant contact local and state health officials regarding the permit
process and preliminary soil testing.
Improvement 3.6-5 Drawing Review
(A) Step 1 - Application
(1) Improvement Drawings may only be submitted after approval of a Preliminary Plat (Grading
Plan can be part of an Improvement Plan).
(2) Improvement drawing submissions shall be forwarded to the applicable Legislative Body
with a request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(3) Improvement drawing submissions may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g.,
public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order
to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Improvement Drawings and approve, disapprove, or require revisions
to the Improvement Drawings in writing within 15 business days from the date the
Improvement Drawings submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C):
Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement
between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 50
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(4) Improvement Drawings shall be generally consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat.
(5) Improvement Drawings shall be approved by Staff prior to the construction and installation
of any utilities or Streets, or grading of any Parcel. Failure to comply shall be considered a
violation of these regulations.
(C) Effect of Staff’s Decision on Improvement Drawings
(1) Approved Improvement Drawings remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
(2) The approval of each section of a Final Plat extends the improvement drawing approval an
additional two years from the date of the Final Plat approval.
(3) Approved Improvement Drawings shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(4) An Applicant may extend the approval of the improvement drawing for two years upon
written request if Staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the overall
approved Preliminary Plat have not occurred.
a) This two year extension may be granted by staff on no more than one occasion.
(5) Site grading and utility and Street construction may begin, subject to the approval of other
applicable review authorities, following the approval of Improvement Drawings.
(D) Technical Requirements for Improvement Drawings
Improvement Drawings submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
or greater and submitted in two formats:
(1) Three sets on paper no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size unless another scale is approved
prior by staff; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the improvement drawing was digitally generated.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Improvement Drawings
Improvement Drawings submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and
information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The names and addresses of owner and Developer of the Subdivision and the Kentucky
Registered Professional Engineer responsible for the design of all Improvements. The plan
shall be certified with the seal and signature of the Engineer and the Surveyor;
(3) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area, and the boundaries of the phase or phases under review relative to the entire
Subdivision;
(4) An accurate graphic and written scale shall be on each applicable sheet of the plan;
(5) The date shall be on the cover or first sheet of the plan, and a north arrow shall be on all
applicable sheets of the plan;
(6) The boundary of the Subdivision or section of Subdivision under review shall be indicated by
a heavy, solid line on one sheet of the plan at a standard scale to show the location of section
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 51
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
under review with other sections of the Subdivision. All Subdivision boundary lines shall be
labeled with the bearing and distance.
(7) The location and width of the following existing features:
a) Streets and/or Street Right-of-ways including Street names and classification of the
Street;
b) Railroads;
c) Public and private utility rights-of-way or Easements (including Drainage Easements);
d) Water courses (e.g., creeks, rivers, swales, Drainage ditches, etc.);
e) Public parks and open spaces;
f) Buildings (labeled "to remain" or "to be removed");
g) Legislative boundaries, County and state lines; and
h) Cemeteries and other historical landmarks or features.
(8) The location and sizes of all existing utility facilities (public and private) within the
Subdivision or outside the Subdivision that will either impact or be impacted by the
Subdivision;
(9) The location and width of all public or private Sidewalks and Pedestrian Walkways including
ownership and maintenance of private Sidewalks and pathway systems.
(10) The location and identification of all existing zoning districts within or adjoining the
Subdivision or project area;
(11) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet. Such contours shall be clearly
marked with elevation based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S. Data) and location and description
of the benchmark used;
(12) Proposed finished contours with intervals of not more than five feet;
(13) The location, Right-of-way, and pavement width, and name of all proposed Streets and other
public utility Right-of-ways or Easements including the horizontal and vertical alignment of
Streets and typical cross-section details;
a) All landscaped areas within a proposed Public Street Right-of-way shall be shown.
Irrigated landscaped islands require permanent Drainage facilities that shall be shown
including details. Irrigation systems within the Right-of-way shall only be permitted if
written verification of approval from the authority designated by the applicable
legislative body is provided to staff.
b) The striping of Street lanes on Streets with more than two lanes shall be shown.
c) Street stations and points of vertical intersections (PVI's) shall be labeled on the
centerline of proposed Streets and correspond to profiles of said Street.
(14) The location and identification number of all Lots;
(15) The profile of each proposed Street with finish grades including all existing and proposed
underground public utility crossings with catch basins, junction boxes, and manholes and
existing private utility crossings including gas, electricity, and telephone.
a) The horizontal scale shall be the same as the plan scale, and the vertical scale not less
than one inch equal to 10 feet unless approved by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 52
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
b) Stationing shall be labeled and correspond to the plan view.
(16) Sight Distance plan views and profiles for both exiting and approaching vehicles; Sight
Distance plan views and profiles are not required if previously provided with a grading plan;
(17) The location of proposed sanitary, storm water, and water resource systems, including all
relating facilities such as manholes, pump stations, sewerage plants, catch basins, junction
boxes, headwalls, water valves, fire hydrants, stormwater runoff control facilities, etc.
Detailed drawings of all overflow facilities shall be shown and labeled including any
proposed connection to an existing facility;
(18) The location and identification of any Drainage facility (i.e., manmade dams) or natural
feature (i.e., lake or pond) on the site or within 100 feet of the Subdivision or development
boundary which has, or could have a significant impact on Drainage or siltation control;
(19) Profiles of all proposed stormwater and sanitary sewer pipelines, and facilities including
percent grade, pipe diameters, material of pipe, pipe lengths, and invert elevations.
a) Profiles shall show all existing and proposed public utility (e.g., water, storm and
sanitary sewer) crossings, and all existing private utility (e.g., gas, electric, telephone)
crossings.
b) Connections to existing pipelines or facilities shall be shown and labeled.
(20) The names of adjacent Street rights-of-way within 100 feet of the Subdivision boundary and
the names of the property owners of all adjoining properties. If the proposed Subdivision is
an additional section of an existing platted Subdivision, the plan shall show the numbering of
all adjoining sections and Lots;
(21) Lots in the proposed Subdivision that are intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the
Subdivision;
(22) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities with detail drawings of each type
of facility being used;
(23) For Subdivisions planned with individual on-site sewage disposal systems, it is
recommended that the Applicant contact local and state health officials regarding the permit
process and preliminary soil testing.
Final 3.6-6 Plat Review and Recordation
(A) Step 1 – Application
(1) A Final Plat may be filed under one of the following two conditions:
a) Immediately, without prior approvals, if the Subdivision qualifies as a Minor
Subdivision (See Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions.) and the Applicant opts to file a
Final Plat instead of an Identification Plat; or
b) Following the approval of the Improvement Drawings where there will be
infrastructure or other Improvements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 53
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(2) The Final Plat may contain only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the
Applicant proposes to record at the time.
(3) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private utilities,
County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input and
coordinate reviews.
(4) Where there will be infrastructure or other Improvements, the submitted Final Plats shall be
forwarded to Sanitation District No. 1 in order to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review, Field Inspections, and Decision by Staff
(1) Final Plats without Infrastructure Improvements
a) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private
utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input
and coordinate reviews.
b) For all Final Plats that do not include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall review
the Final Plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to the Final Plat within 10
business days from the date the Final Plat submittal is determined to be complete (See
Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time
is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
c) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar Final Plats may be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the Final Plat on a fixed line mylar
along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar Final Plat.
d) Approved mylar Final Plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis and distributed
to the Applicant.
e) Written documentation of the approved Final Plat shall be forwarded to the Applicant,
the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities (e.g., public/private
utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.).
f) Disapproved Final Plats shall be accompanied by written documentation of the reasons
for denial.
(2) Final Plats with Infrastructure Improvements
a) Final Plats with infrastructure Improvements may be submitted after approval of
applicable Improvement Drawings. The Final Plat may contain only that portion of the
approved Preliminary Plat which the Applicant proposed to record at that time.
b) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private
utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input
and coordinate reviews.
c) Staff shall perform a field inspection of Street or other infrastructure Improvements
within five business days (weather permitting) from the date the Plat and Application
is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application
Submittal Determination.), and prior to approval of the Final Plat, unless this time is
extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
i) Incomplete public Improvements shall be completed, or in the case of bondable
public Improvements, guaranteed in lieu of completion in accordance with
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 54
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements. Such Guarantee shall be submitted
prior to Final Plat approval.
ii) Results of the field inspection shall be forwarded to the Applicant's Design
Engineer and Applicant in writing.
d) For all Final Plats that include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall review the
Final Plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to the Final Plat within 12
business days from the date the Final Plat submittal is determined to be complete (See
Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time
is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
e) The Final Plat shall generally conform to the approved Preliminary Plat.
f) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar Final Plats may be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the Final Plat on a fixed line mylar
along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar Final Plat.
g) Approved mylar Final Plats shall be signed by the Chair or other KCPC officer and
distributed to the Applicant.
h) Written documentation of the approved Final Plat shall be forwarded to the Applicant,
the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities (e.g., public/private
utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.).
i) Disapproved Final Plats shall be accompanied by written documentation of the reasons
for denial.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved Final Plats shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s designated
representative for recordation.
(2) Approved Final Plats shall be recorded in the office of the Kenton County Clerk by the
Applicant or the Applicant’s representative before the property can be transferred.
(D) Technical Requirements for Final Plats
A Final Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201 Kentucky
Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and submitted in two formats:
(1) Three sets on paper no larger than 18 by 24 inches in size; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the Final Plat was digitally generated.
(3) Final Plats containing Lots having a minimum Lot Area of 80,000 square feet or greater shall
be drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 200 feet or greater. All other Final
Plats shall be drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 50 feet or greater.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats
A Final Plat submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision, as established by the improvement drawing;
(2) The date, north arrow, and a graphic and written scale;
(3) The area of the Subdivision or section of the Subdivision to the nearest 100th of a foot or
square feet to the nearest one foot;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 55
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(4) The area of each Lot in acres to the nearest 100th of a foot or square feet to the nearest one
foot;
(5) The location and Right-of-way width of all Streets and Easements that are to be dedicated or
reserved for public or private use;
(6) The names of Streets within or adjacent to the Subdivision;
(7) Centerline curve data for the Right-of-way of the Streets and Easements with the data to
include: central angle and radius, arc, length, long chord and tangent distances;
(8) Numbered Lots (corresponding to the approved Improvement Drawings) whose boundaries
are described by bearing and distance for each tangent course, and proper curve data (as
given above) for curve courses;
a) Side Lot Lines that are not radial with curved Street centerlines shall have a reference
tie to the tangent line of that centerline curve.
b) Lots that were subject to an Identification Plat shall be noted with dashed lines and
referenced by deed book and page number.
(9) The location of areas to be dedicated for public or common use, and conservation Easements,
riparian buffers and other areas to be set aside for environmental stewardship;
(10) A statement that describes the ownership and maintenance responsibilities for any public or
common use areas; and
(11) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-A for Plats without public Improvements.
OWNERS CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat and further certify that the title to the property
shown hereon is part or all of the same property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and
recorded in Deed Book______, Page _______ of the ____________ County records at
_____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature ___________________ Date _____________
Figure 3.6-A: Owners Certificate
(F) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-B for Plats with public Improvements.
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat, dedicate the Right-of-way as shown on the plat
herein to public use and further certify that the title to the property shown herein is part or all of
the same property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and recorded in Deed Book______, Page
_______ of the ____________ County records at _____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature ___________________ Date _____________
Figure 3.6-B: Dedication certificate.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 56
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(G) Both the owners certificate (Figure 3.6-A) and the dedication certificate (Figure 3.6-B) shall be
notarized with the acknowledgment illustrated in Figure 3.6-C.
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
County of ____________________
State of ______________________
I,__________________, a notary public in and for said county and state, do
certify that the foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this ____
Day of ___________, 200___By (Name of Signer) , (Title) ,
(Company Name) .
Signed: __________________________
Notary Public State of ______________
My Commission Expires: ____________
Figure 3.6-C: Notary acknowledgement
(H) The approval certificate illustrated in Figure 3.6-D.
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
Approved by the Kenton County Planning Commission. This approval
does not constitute a guarantee that the resulting parcel(s) complies
with any other regulatory agency’s requirements.
this ________day of _____________________, 20___.
By: _____________________________
_________________________________
Chair, Kenton County Planning Commission
Figure 3.6-D: Approval certificate for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 57
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(I) The County Clerk acknowledgment illustrated in Figure 3.6-E.
COUNTY CLERK ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I, ___________________, Clerk of Kenton County Court, do certify
that this plat of (Subdivision Name), (Section) was this day presented
to me at my office and was this day left for record. Whereupon same
has been duly recorded this ______________day of
________________, 20___.
Signed_____________________________
Figure 3.6-E: County clerk acknowledgement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
(J) The Surveyor certificate illustrated in Figure 3.6-F.
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the survey depicted by this plat was done by persons under
my direct supervision by the method of random traverse with sideshots. The
unadjusted precision ration of the traverse was 1:_______ and the directions
and distances shown on the plat are based on a traverse that (was/was not)
adjusted. The reference meridian basis shown hereon is
from_________________________. This survey is a (Rural/Urban) Survey and
the accuracy and precision of said survey meets all the specifications of this
class and complies with 201 KAR 18:150. )
Signature_______________________PLS #_________Date________________
Figure 3.6-F: Surveyor certificate for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
(K) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-G related to sanitary sewer Easements.
SANITARY SEWER EASEMENTS
The utility easements shown and described on this plat are dedicated to the use
and benefit of the named utility. The respective rights, duties and obligations of
the individual lot owner and the respective utility are set forth in separate
recorded document in the Kenton County Clerk’s Office. Terms and conditions
of the document listed below are incorporated by reference:
Sanitary Sewers Sanitation District No. 1 Misc. Book 431, Pg. 110
Figure 3.6-G: Sanitary sewer Easement statement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 58
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(L) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-H for Condominium Property Regime Plats that involve onsite
sewage disposal systems.
"Plat approval for building development and/or alteration of existing systems on
each Lot is contingent upon the issuance of a sewage construction permit and
inspection by the local and/or state health board or district."
Figure 3.6-H: Statement for Plats that involve on-site sewage disposal
(M) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-I for Condominium Property Regime Plats that involve
private, on-site sanitary sewage treatment plants.
"The sanitary sewer lines and the sewage treated at the plant
shall be owned and operated by . The sanitary sewer lines shall
be maintained by and the sewage treatment plant shall be
maintained by ."
Figure 3.6-I: Statement for Plates that involve private, on-site sanitary sewage treatment plants
(N) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-J for Condominium Property Regime Plats that contain
water mains installed on private property that are going to be maintained by the water district.
WATER MAIN EASEMENTS
The Water Main Easement(s) as shown on this plat are subject to the
DECLARATION OF MASTER WATER FACILITY EASEMENT AGREEMENT
as set forth in __________________________of the Kenton County Clerk’s
records
(Document Location) at Kenton County Courthouse, Ky.”
Figure 3.6-J: Water main Easement statement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 59
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
3.7-1 Condominium Property Regime Plat Applicability
(A) This section and review process shall apply to condominium property
regimes that do not include the Subdivision of land into individual Lots.
Condominium property regimes allow a unit within a building to be
individually conveyed and be the subject of ownership and other acts as
if it were solely and entirely independent of the other units in the
building(s) of which they form a part.
(B) In accord with the Horizontal Property Law (KRS 381), whenever an
owner or the co-owners of a building expressly declare through the
recordation of a master deed or lease, a condominium property regime
may be established.
3.7-2 Condominium Property Regime Plat Review and Recordation
(A) Step 1 – Application
(1) Condominium Property Regime Plats without infrastructure
Improvements do not require submittal of a Preliminary Plat.
(2) Condominium Property Regime Plats that include infrastructure
Improvements shall only be submitted after approval of an
improvement drawing.
(3) The Condominium Property Regime Plats may contain only that
portion of the approved plat that the Applicant proposes to record at the time of approval.
(4) The Condominium Property Regime Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements
of this section shall be submitted for review.
(5) Condominium Property Regime Plats and Applications may be forwarded to other regulatory
authorities (e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation
cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input and coordinate reviews. The Condominium Property
Regime Plat shall be forwarded to Sanitation District No. 1 in order to seek input and
coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review, Field Inspections, and Decision by Staff
(1) Condominium Regime Plats without Infrastructure Improvements
a) Submitted condominium regime plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities
(e.g., private utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to
seek input and coordinate reviews.
b) For all condominium regime plats that do not include infrastructure Improvements,
Staff shall review the condominium regime plat and approve, disapprove, or require
revisions to the condominium regime plat within 15 business days from the date the
condominium regime plat submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-
2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
c) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar condominium regime plats may
be produced.
Review Process for
Condominium
Property Regime
Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 60
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the condominium regime plat on a
fixed line mylar along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar condominium regime plat.
d) Approved mylar condominium regime plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis
and distributed to the Applicant.
e) Written documentation of the approved condominium regime plat shall be forwarded
to the Applicant, the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities
(e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet,
etc.).
f) Disapproved condominium regime plats shall be accompanied by written
documentation of the reasons for denial.
(2) Condominium Regime Plats with Infrastructure Improvements
a) Condominium regime plats with infrastructure Improvements may be submitted after
approval of applicable Improvement Drawings. The condominium regime plat may
contain only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the Applicant
proposed to record at that time.
b) Submitted condominium regime plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities
(e.g., private utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to
seek input and coordinate reviews.
c) Staff shall perform a field inspection of Street or other infrastructure Improvements
within 10 business days from the date the Plat and Application is determined to be
complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.),
and prior to approval of the condominium regime plat, unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
i) Incomplete public Improvements shall be completed, or in the case of bondable
public Improvements, guaranteed in lieu of completion in accordance with
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements. Such Guarantee shall be submitted
prior to condominium regime plat approval.
ii) Results of the field inspection shall be forwarded to the Applicant's Design
Engineer in writing.
d) For all condominium regime plats that include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall
review the condominium regime plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to
the condominium regime plat within 12 business days from the date the condominium
regime plat submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C):
Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
e) The condominium regime plat shall generally conform to the approved Preliminary
Plat.
f) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar condominium regime plats may
be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the condominium regime plat on a
fixed line mylar along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar condominium regime plat.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 61
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
g) Approved mylar condominium regime plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis
and distributed to the Applicant.
h) Written documentation of the approved condominium regime plat shall be forwarded
to the Applicant, the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities
(e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet,
etc.).
i) Disapproved condominium regime plats shall be accompanied by written
documentation of the reasons for denial.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved condominium regime plats shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s
designated representative for recordation.
(2) Approved condominium regime plats shall be recorded in the office of the Kenton County
Clerk by the Applicant or the Applicant’s representative before the property can be
transferred.
Technical Requirements for Condominium 3.7-3 Property Regime Plats
A Condominium Property Regime Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201
Kentucky Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and submitted in two formats:
(A) Three sets on paper no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches in size; and
(B) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection 3.3-3:
Digital Submission Policy if the Condominium Property Regime Plat was digitally generated.
3.7-4 Additional Content Requirements for Condominium Property Regime Plats
A Condominium Property Regime Plat submitted for approval shall conform to the applicable zoning
ordinance and shall contain the following information, as applicable.
(A) The proposed name of the Subdivision, as established by the improvement drawing;
(B) The date, north arrow, and an accurate graphic and written scale;
(C) The area of the Subdivision or section of the Subdivision to the nearest 100th of a foot or square
feet to the nearest one foot;
(D) The area of each Lot and/or unit in acres to the nearest 100th of a foot or square feet to the nearest
one foot;
(E) Floor plans of the building or buildings bearing the certification of a registered architect or
Professional Engineer;
(F) The location and Right-of-way width of all Streets and Easements that are to be dedicated or
reserved for public or private use;
(G) The names of Streets within or adjacent to the Subdivision;
(H) The centerline curve data for the Right-of-way of the Streets and Easements with the data to
include central angle and radius, arc, length, long chord, and tangent distances.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 62
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff
(I) Numbered Lots (corresponding to the approved Improvement Drawings) whose boundaries are
described by bearing and distance for each tangent course and proper curve data (as given above)
for curve courses.
(1) Side Lot Lines that are not radial with curved Street centerlines shall have a reference tie to
the tangent line of that centerline curve.
(2) Lots that were subject to an Identification Plat shall be noted with dashed lines and
referenced by deed book and page number.
(J) The location of areas to be dedicated for public or common use, and conservation Easements,
riparian buffers and other areas to be set aside for environmental stewardship.
(K) A statement shall appear on the Final Plat that describes the ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for any public or common use areas.
(L) All of the statements and certificates, as applicable, required for Final Plats and defined in
Subsection 3.6-6(E): Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats.
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff
3.8-1 Staff has been delegated certain discretionary judgment when minor deviations from the approved plans
and/or Subdivision regulations are observed in the field. No minor deviation shall be authorized by Staff
or an Inspector if it is:
(A) In conflict with the intent and purpose of these regulations;
(B) In dispute with generally accepted construction practices or industry standards; or
(C) Detrimental to the public interest.
3.8-2 Where minor deviations from the approved plans and/or Subdivision regulations have been identified,
Staff may require a warranty of up to 12 months for the work in question.
Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations
This section sets forth a procedure by which the Planning Commission may allow for waivers of these regulations.
The purpose is to allow some flexibility in dealing with unique issues that are outlined in Subsection 3.9-2(C)
below.
3.9-1 Step 1 – Application
(A) An Application requesting a waiver, the applicable fee, and any additional requirements of this
section shall be submitted for review.
(B) Waivers to lot size requirement or other regulations controlled by the zoning ordinance shall be
heard through the applicable waiver or variance procedure in the zoning ordinance.
3.9-2 Step 2 – Planning Commission Review and Decision
(A) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purposes of reviewing the requested
waiver.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 63
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions
(B) After the public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove a waiver to these regulations.
(C) The Planning Commission may grant a waiver to these regulations balanced against the public
interest, providing the Planning Commission finds that the waiver will not be detrimental to the
public interest and at least one of the following criteria applies:
(1) That unusual topographical or exceptional physical conditions exist; or
(2) That strict compliance with these regulations would create an extraordinary hardship in the
face of exceptional conditions; or
(3) That compliance with the regulations could cause an unsafe situation; or
(4) That the requested waiver would create a materially safer situation than complying with the
regulations; or
(5) That the requested waiver is not objectionable to the surrounding property or community and
does not materially change the intent of the regulations. If using these criteria as a basis for
waiver, the Applicant shall provide evidence from all adjoining property owners that they
have no objection to the requested waiver. Note that approval from adjoining property
owners is not intended to serve as approval by surrounding property owners or the
community as a whole.
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions
3.10-1 Any Subdivider or Applicant claiming to be aggrieved by any action of Staff may appeal such actions to
the Planning Commission.
3.10-2 Such appeal shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
3.10-3 Staff shall forward any applicable material of record to the Planning Commission.
3.10-4 The Planning Commission shall consider the appealed decision and make a decision to reaffirm or
overturn Staff’s decision.
Section 3.11: Appeals of Planning Commission Actions
3.11-1 Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the Planning Commission
may appeal from the action to the Kenton County Circuit Court. Such appeal shall be taken within 30
consecutive calendar days after the final action of the Planning Commission.
3.11-2 Final action shall not include the Planning Commission's recommendation made to other governmental
bodies.
3.11-3 All final actions which have not been appealed within 30 consecutive calendar days shall not be subject
to judicial review.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 64
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.12: Enforcement
Section 3.12: Enforcement
The following regulations comply with the authority granted to local Planning Commissions by Chapters 100.273
through 100.317 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS).
3.12-1 All Subdivisions of land shall receive final approval from Staff. No person or his agent shall subdivide
any land, before securing the approval from Staff of a Plat designating the areas to be subdivided, and no
Plat of a Subdivision of land within Kenton County shall be recorded by the County Clerk until the Plat
has been approved by Staff, and the approval entered thereon in writing by the Planning Commission
chairman.
3.12-2 No person owning land composing a Subdivision, or his agent, shall transfer or sell or agree to sell any
Lot or Parcel of land located within a Subdivision by reference to, or by exhibition, or by any other use of
a Plat of such Subdivision, before such Plat has received final approval from Staff, been signed by the
Planning Commission chairman, and has been recorded. Any such instrument of transfer, sale, or contract
shall be void and shall not be subject to be recorded, but all rights of such purchaser to damages are
hereby preserved. The description of such Lot or Parcel by metes and bounds in any contract or
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not
exempt the person attempting to transfer from penalties provided or deprive the purchaser of any rights or
remedies he may otherwise have.
3.12-3 No revisions shall be made to any Subdivision Plat after final approval has been given by Staff unless the
Plat is first resubmitted and the revisions are approved by Staff in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
3.12-4 After the applicable Legislative Body or fiscal court has adopted an official map, no board, public officer,
or authority shall accept, layout, improve, or authorize any Improvements to be constructed in any Street,
including rights-of-way, Watercourses, park and playgrounds, public school, or other public building
sites shown on the official map, except as provided for in KRS 100.293 through 100.317.
3.12-5 The Planning Commission shall have the power to apply for an injunction against any type of
Subdivision construction by the Subdivider or the landowner where the Subdivision regulations have
been violated or other remedies permitted under KRS 100.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 65
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. By establishing these Street standards as a factor in the development review process, it assures
a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development. It
contributes to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods where residents can live, work, shop, and play.
Furthermore, it promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the public in Kenton County. To
further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Establishes the adequacy of existing and proposed transportation elements as a factor to be
considered when reviewing proposed Subdivisions;
(B) Sets forth minimum standards for new Streets and the extent to which they shall be provided;
(C) Provides a Street system of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate satisfactory
access to police, firefighting, emergency medical services, snow removal, and maintenance
equipment; and
(D) Ensures an effective traffic circulation system by requiring that new Streets extend into adjoining
areas and that existing Streets interconnect from adjoining areas.
4.1-2 Street Names
The following shall apply to the naming of proposed Streets:
(A) The name of a new Street shall not duplicate existing or platted Street names within the County, or
approximate such names in spelling, sound, or pronunciation.
(B) The use of existing Street names differentiated by alternate prefixes (i.e., "North," "South," etc.), or
suffixes (i.e., "Lane," "Way," etc.) is prohibited.
(C) Street names shall not be objectionable or offensive.
(D) Street names shall be limited to no more than three words including any prefix or suffix, and shall
not contain more than 20 characters including spaces.
(E) Punctuation, such as apostrophes or hyphens, etc., or numerals including fractions, are prohibited.
(F) Streets in direct alignment that cross an intersecting Street should bear the same name.
(G) Street names shall be approved and/or reserved by Staff prior to approval of Improvement
Drawings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 66
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-3 Street Name Signs
The following shall apply to the installation of Street Name Signs:
(A) The Developer shall be responsible for the installation of Street Name Signs in conformance with
standards established by the applicable Legislative Body.
(B) Street Name Signs shall be installed prior to approval of a Final Plat. Temporary Street Name Signs
are permitted during construction until the permanent signs are erected.
4.1-4 Traffic Control Signs and Devices
Traffic Control signs and devices shall be the responsibility of the applicable Legislative Body.
4.1-5 Pavement Signing and Marking
(A) Pavement marking and signing shall be provided on all arterial and collector streets in accordance
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition.
(B) Marking and signing shall include centerline, edgeline, and lane use markings and all necessary
regulatory signing.
4.1-6 Addressing
(A) Addresses shall conform to a uniform County system and be assigned by Staff prior to approval of
an identification or Final Plat.
(B) Addresses shall be shown for each Lot or unit on the Plats prior to recording.
4.1-7 Street Lights
Street lights shall be the responsibility of the applicable Legislative Body.
4.1-8 Public Rights-of-Way
The following shall apply to public rights-of-way:
(A) The minimum public Right-of-way width for Streets shall comply with Table 4.1-1 of these
regulations.
(B) The required Right-of-way widths are based on development type and Functional Classification.
(C) Subdivisions platted along existing Streets shall dedicate additional Right-of-way, if necessary, to
meet the minimum Right-of-way requirements identified in Table 4.1-1. Such dedication shall be
in accord with the following:
(1) The minimum total Right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the proposed Subdivision is
on both sides of an existing Street.
(2) When the Subdivision is located on only one side of an existing Street, one-half (1/2) of the
required Right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the Right-of-way, shall be
dedicated.
(D) Proposed Streets shall be constructed dimensionally within the Right-of-way widths identified in
Table 4.1-1. The pavement shall be located centrally within the Right-of Way width.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 67
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(E) For developments containing only Multi-Family Residential Dwellings, the Right-of-way width
may be less than the minimum required width in Table 4.1-1 provided:
(1) The Right-of-way width is coupled with an ingress/egress and street maintenance easement
that when totaled, equals or exceeds the minimum Right-of-way width indicated in Table
4.1-1; and
(2) That the use of the narrowed Right-of-way width coupled with the ingress/egress and street
maintenance easement is approved by the authority designated by the applicable Legislative
Body in writing.
4.1-9 Pavement Widths
The following shall apply to the pavement width of Streets.
(A) The minimum pavement widths shall comply with Table 4.1-1.
(B) The required pavement widths are based on development type and Functional Classification.
(C) Pavement widths shall be measured from back of Curb to back of Curb. If no Curbs are required,
then pavement width shall include the entire paved surface of the wearing course. See Figure
4.1-A.
(D) Subdivisions located along existing Streets that contain pavement widths less than identified in
Table 4.1-1, may be required by Staff to construct additional pavement to comply with the
minimum widths contained in Table 4.1-1.
Figure 4.1-A: Illustration of pavement width measurements
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 68
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
TABLE 4.1-1: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
PAVEMENT
WIDTH [1]
(FEET)
CURB PARKING SIDEWALK/MULTIUSE
FACILITIES TREELAWN TYPE OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES
MEDIAN
WIDTH
ROW
WIDTH
(FEET)
CROSSSECTION
FIGURE #
RURAL
RESIDENTIAL[3]
Local (Serving under
50 lots) 17 No None No Side Ditches
Only None None 40 Figure 4.1-J
Local (Serving 50 to
199 lots) 20 No None 4 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 50
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots) 20 No None 4 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 60
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots) 22 No None 8 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 60
Arterial 24 No None 10 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-B
SUBURBAN
RESIDENTIAL
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes None 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
25 Yes One Side 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 50
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
35 Yes Both 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 60 Figure 4.1-G
22 Yes None 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes One Side 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 50
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
22 Yes None 10 feet wide [2] 4 feet wide Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-C
30 Yes One Side 10 feet wide [2] 4 feet wide Multi-use path None 60
Arterial 28 Yes None 12 feet wide [2] 10 feet wide Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-D
URBAN
RESIDENTIAL
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 46
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
25 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 43 Figure 4.1-H
30 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 48 Figure 4.1-I
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
30 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 50
44 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 64
Arterial
32 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 52 Figure 4.1-E
46 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 66
TRADITIONAL
NEIGHBORHOOD
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 46
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 69
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
TABLE 4.1-1: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
PAVEMENT
WIDTH [1]
(FEET)
CURB PARKING SIDEWALK/MULTIUSE
FACILITIES TREELAWN TYPE OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES
MEDIAN
WIDTH
ROW
WIDTH
(FEET)
CROSSSECTION
FIGURE #
RESIDENTIAL Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
25 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 43
30 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 48
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
40 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 10 feet wide 60
54 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 10 feet wide 74
Arterial
44 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 12 feet wide 64
58 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 12 feet wide 78 Figure 4.1-F
COMMERCIAL /
INDUSTRIAL
All Classifications 28
6”
Barrier
Curb
Only
None 5 feet wide Optional None None 60
ALL
DEVELOPMENT
TYPES
Access Drives 12 (20) No None None None None None N/A
NOTES:
[1] Total pavement width including amenities such as Medians, Bicycle Facilities and parking
[2] Sidewalk is required along only one side of the Street
[3] Development type determined by lot sizes and widths as indicated in Table 4.1-2; not by geographic area.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 70
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Allowable 4.1-10 Pavement Design
The allowable pavement design shall be permitted in conjunction with the appropriate development type
as identified in Table 4.1-2.
TABLE 4.1-2:ALLOWABLE PAVEMENT DESIGN
DEVELOPMENT TYPE
PAVEMENT DESIGN
TRADITIONAL
NEIGHBORHOOD
DEVELOPMENT
(TND)
URBAN SUBURBAN RURAL
Single-Family
and Two-Family
Residential [1]
Lot Widths equal to or greater
than 200 feet and Lot Sizes
equal to or greater than 2 acres
--- --- P P
Lot Widths 60 feet to 199 feet --- --- P ---
Lot Widths less than 60 feet P P P ---
Multi-Family Residential P [2] --- P ---
Special
Development
Zones
Agricultural Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 200 feet and lot
Sizes are equal to or
greater than 2 acres) [1]
Rural Commercial Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 200 feet and lot
Sizes are equal to or
greater than 2 acres) [1]
Institutional Zone --- --- P ---
Eco-Commerce Park Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 300 feet) [1]
Mixed Use Zone P [2] P [2] P ---
Specific Use
Regulations
Residential Cluster
Development or Planned Unit
Development Zone
P [2] --- P ---
Conservation Subdivisions --- --- --- P
Retirement Communities P P P P
Manufactured Home Parks P P P P
NOTES:
“---” Pavement design not permitted for specified development type.
“P” Stands for “Permitted”
[1] Minimum Lot Width along a Street excluding Flag Lots and Cul-de-sac Lots.
[2] Collector or Arterial Streets only
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 71
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-B: Typical cross-section of a rural development arterial street without parking
Figure 4.1-C: Typical cross-section of a suburban development collector street without parking
Figure 4.1-D: Typical cross-section of a suburban development arterial street without parking
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 72
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-E: Typical cross-section of an urban development arterial street without parking
Figure 4.1-F: Typical cross-section of a traditional neighborhood development arterial street with parking on both
sides of the street
Figure 4.1-G: Typical cross-section of a suburban development subcollector street with parking on both sides of
the street
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 73
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-H: Typical cross-section of an urban development subcollector street with parking on one side of the
street
Figure 4.1-I: Typical cross-section of an urban development subcollector street with parking on both sides of the
street
Figure 4.1-J: Typical cross-section of a rural development local street without parking
4.1-11 Sidewalks
The following shall apply to the installation of Sidewalks.
(A) Sidewalks shall be provided as indicated in Table 4.1-1, except as provided in this subsection.
(B) With the exception of a Rural Type Development where sidewalks may not be required at all,
sidewalks may be provided along one side of new Streets under the following circumstances:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 74
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(1) When residences are proposed only along one side of the entirety of the Street;
(2) When the development contains alternative Pedestrian Walkways (Subject to Subsection 4.1-
12: Alternative Pedestrian Walkways.) that constitute a pedestrian circulation system equal to
or exceeding Sidewalk on both sides of the Street; or
(3) When the Street serves as an entrance to a development and contains no residences or
contains residences along one side of the Street.
(C) Sidewalks shall be provided along existing Streets that abut the limits of a Subdivision shown on a
Preliminary Plat.
(D) Where Sidewalks are present, Curb ramps shall be installed at all Street intersections containing
Curb and gutter in accord with Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings.
(1) Curb ramps shall be required at the intersection of the sidewalk and curb when sidewalk
dead-ends into a t-type or hammerhead type turnaround.
(E) Sidewalks constructed closer than two feet from the edge of Street pavement, or back of Curb,
shall require the use of a barrier Curb along the Street.
(1) Sidewalks shall be permitted closer than two feet from the back of sloped Curb within multifamily
developments only.
(F) Concrete Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. See Figure 4.1-K.
(1) The thickness of concrete Sidewalks shall be increased to five inches when part of a
Driveway. See Figure 4.1-K.
Figure 4.1-K: Illustration of Sidewalk thickness for Sidewalks
(2) In commercial and industrial areas, Sidewalks within the Driveway apron shall have a
minimum thickness equal to the thickness required for the commercial or industrial
Driveway apron.
(G) In the case where Sidewalk Improvements have not been completed, a conditional Certificate of
Occupancy may be given provided it does not exceed six months.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 75
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(H) In the case where Sidewalks have not been installed fronting platted, but vacant Lots, such
Sidewalks shall be installed by the owner of the Lot(s) in question within six months from the date
when 75 percent of the Lots have been issued certificates of occupancy.
Alternative 4.1-12 Pedestrian Walkways
Alternative Pedestrian Walkways may be permitted in developments by choice of the Applicant and/or as
an alternative to Sidewalks identified in Subsection 4.1-11: Sidewalks.
(A) Pedestrian Walkways within the public Right-of-way shall be constructed of Portland cement
concrete.
(1) Multi-use paths (hiker-biker paths) referenced in Table 4.1-1 may be constructed of asphalt.
(B) Pedestrian Walkways located outside of the public Right-of-way that are intended to meet, in an
alternate way, the requirement of Table 4.1-1 may be constructed of asphalt.
(1) Asphalt walkways shall have a minimum width of five feet and a minimum thickness of five
inches consisting of a modified base mixture.
(2) The Subgrade for asphalt walkways shall be proofrolled prior to placement of the Sidewalk.
(3) Walkways constructed outside the public Right-of-way (See Figure 4.1-L.) shall only be
permitted within developments that contain a homeowners’ association with specific
maintenance and Easement agreements for the walk recorded at the County Clerk’s office.
Figure 4.1-L: Illustration of an alternative Pedestrian Walkway
(4) The recording of the maintenance and Easement agreements for the walkways shall occur
concurrently with the first Final Plat containing the walk.
(C) If the requirement for sidewalks in Table 4.1-1 have been met, either through the provision of: a)
Concrete sidewalks within the Right-of-way; b) a combination of Concrete sidewalks within the
Right-of-way and Asphalt sidewalks outside the Right-of-way; or c) Asphalt sidewalks outside the
Right-of-way, then any other sidewalk construction is not regulated in terms of materials used.
(1) Sidewalk construction where materials are not regulated by these regulations is still required
to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 76
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-13 Roadside Swales
The following shall apply to the installation of roadside swales.
(A) Curbs shall be provided along both sides of new Streets except within a Rural Type Development
and as herein provided.
(B) Roadside swales may be provided in the following circumstances:
(1) In developments that allow on-street parking and contain minimum Lot Widths that equal or
exceed 100 feet when used in conjunction with curb and gutter containing cut-outs and
flumes;
(2) Along streets that serve as an entrance to the development and contain no residences and no
parking.
4.1-14 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Curb Ramps
Where Sidewalks along Streets are required, Curb ramps shall comply with the U.S. Department of
Justice’s regulations for the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(A) Curb ramp installation shall prohibit stormwater from flowing onto the ramps.
(B) Curb ramps shall be installed at all new Street intersections in conjunction with construction of the
concrete Curbs and gutters.
(C) Curb ramps shall be required at the intersection of the Sidewalk and curb when Sidewalk dead-ends
into a t-type or hammerhead type turnaround.
4.1-15 Bicycle Facilities
If a Parcel or area is designated as an “Urban/Suburban Focus Area” in the Comprehensive Plan, Bicycle
Facilities shall be required in accordance with Table 4.1-1 of these regulations. See also Figure 4.1-M.
(A) Alternative Bicycle Facilities may be permitted provided they constitute a bicycle circulation
system equal to or exceeding the requirements of Table 4.1-1.
(B) Developments interfering with a bikeway planned by a Legislative Body shall reserve available
land and develop the bikeways as planned. These Improvements may serve as an alternative
bicycle facility to meet the requirements of this subsection.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 77
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-M: Illustration of a bicycle facility network
(C) All Bicycle Facilities shall be developed in accordance with the American Association of State
Highway Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities.
4.1-16 On-Street Parking
The following shall apply to on-Street parking:
(A) On Street parking may be provided as identified in Table 4.1-1 of these regulations.
(B) Lots that abut Streets which prohibit on-Street parking in residential developments shall contain
twice the off-Street parking that is required by the applicable zoning ordinance.
(C) Unless the water main changes to the opposite side of the street mid-street, on-Street parking lanes
shall not be shifted from one side of the Street to the other mid-Street, but can be shifted from
block to block as a traffic calming measure.
(D) Except for Streets that allow parking on both sides of the Street, the on-Street parking lane shall be
located on the opposite side of the Street from fire hydrants. See Figure 4.1-N.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 78
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-N: Illustration of on-Street parking
4.1-17 Off-Street Parking Areas
Off-street Parking Areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
zoning ordinance.
4.1-18 Geometric Design of Streets
The horizontal and vertical alignment of Streets shall be designed in compliance with the guidelines
established by the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHTO) manual “A Policy of the
Geometric Design of Highway and Streets, “(The Green Book) as summarized in Table 4.1-3. The
following issues shall also apply:
(A) When there is a change in the horizontal alignment of a Street along the centerline, a curve with a
minimum radius appropriate to the Design Speed of the Street as defined in Table 4.1-3 shall be
constructed.
(B) A tangent of at least 200 feet for Collector Streets shall be provided between reverse horizontal
curves.
(C) At intersections, the algebraic difference in cross slopes at the crown line of the intersected Street,
shall not exceed six percent. This standard shall apply to the centerline of all through travel lanes
at the intersection. See Figure 4.1-O.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 79
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-O: Illustration of cross slopes at an intersection
(D) The maximum grade of the centerline of the side Streets intersecting with the gutter line of the
through Street shall not exceed four percent for a distance of not less than 75 feet for Local Streets
and 150 feet for collector and arterial streets. See Figure 4.1-P.
Figure 4.1-P: Illustration of the maximum grades permissible along a Street
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 80
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(E) Descending centerline grades approaching the terminus of a Cul-de-sac shall be reduced within a
vertical curve to a maximum of four percent unless determination is made by Staff that a steeper
grade will provide adequate clearance for vehicles entering ascending Driveways. See Figure 4.1-P
and Figure 4.1-Q.
Figure 4.1-Q: Illustration of a descending centerline approaching the terminus of a Cul-de-sac
TABLE 4.1-3:GEOMETRIC DESIGN STANDARDS
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION DESIGN SPEED
HORIZONTAL
VERTICAL
GRADES (%)
CREST SAG
MINIMUM RADIUS
(FEET)
KFACTOR
MINIMUM
KFACTOR
MINIMUM
MAX MIN
Local and
Subcollector 25 100 15 15 12 (8) 1
Collector 35 400 30 35 10 1
Arterial 45 900[1] 61 79 7[1] 1
NOTES:
Numbers in parenthesis indicate values required for commercial/nonresidential uses.
[1] Under proposed standards, the Design Speed on arterial streets is 45 miles per hour.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 81
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Street Connectivity 4.1-19 to Adjoining Areas
The arrangement of Streets in new Subdivisions shall provide for reasonable access to adjoining tracts,
through connections between Streets, logical distribution of traffic patterns, and convenient and efficient
access for emergency vehicles, Street maintenance, school buses, postal delivery, and other essential
services.
(A) The public Right-of-way for a Street connection to adjoining property shall be platted when the
contributing Street in the Subdivision is within 150 feet of the connection to the adjoining property.
(B) No further Final Plat approvals will be granted until the condition in Clause 4.1-19(A) above is
satisfied.
(C) A Guarantee may be filed with the Planning Commission in lieu of the completion of the required
Street connection (See Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements.).
(D) Public Street rights-of-way not intended to dead-end permanently through the use of a Cul-de-sac
are required to extend to the abutting property line. Spite strips of land, defined as a piece of land
that limits or denies access to another Right-of-way for no legitimate reason, are prohibited by
these regulations.
(1) When the abutting property differs in elevation from the proposed Right-of-way the street
shall be constructed as close as practical, as determined by Staff, to the abutting property
line.
a) The distance between the end of the street and the elevation of the abutting property
line shall not result in a slope that exceeds 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
b) In those areas where the street was not able to be constructed to the abutting property
line, the section of unconstructed street shall not be required to be bonded.
c) The Engineer shall be required to provide on the Final Plat any grading easements
outside the Right-of-way necessary to accomplish constructing the unconstructed
section of street referenced above to the abutting property line when the adjacent
property develops.
4.1-20 Street Connectivity within a Subdivision
(A) The Street system shall be in compliance with the maximum intersection spacing identified in
Table 4.1-4. See Figure 4.1-R and Figure 4.1-S.
(B) Permanent Cul-de-sacs and dead end Streets may be provided in accordance with Table 4.1-4 of
these regulations unless topographic or other physical conditions render these provisions
impracticable as determined by Staff. See Figure 4.1-T.
TABLE 4.1-4: INTERNAL CONNECTIVITY STANDARDS BY DEVELOPMENT TYPE
DEVELOPMENT TYPE CUL-DE-SAC
PERMITTED
MAXIMUMCULDE-
SACLENGTH
MAXIMUM INTERSECTION
SPACING
Traditional Neighborhood NO N/A 600 Feet
Urban NO N/A 600 Feet
Suburban YES 1,200 Feet 1,200 Feet
Rural YES 1,200 Feet 1,200 Feet
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 82
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-R: Illustration of connectivity within a traditional neighborhood or urban development type Subdivision
Figure 4.1-S: Illustration of connectivity within a suburban or rural development Subdivision
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 83
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-T: Illustration of where Cul-de-sacs may be appropriate due to topographic conditions
Intersection 4.1-21 Design and Access Points
The design and spacing of intersections and Access Points shall comply with the access control
regulations contained in Article 8: Access Control Regulations.
(A) Centerlines of all intersecting Streets shall intersect at a 90 degree angle where possible and in no
case shall the angle of intersection be less than 75 degrees or greater than 105 degrees.
(B) Where ‘T’ type intersections are used, a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet for Access Points
along opposite sides of the Street shall be maintained on Local Streets. On collector and arterial
streets, a minimum centerline offset capable of accommodating required left and right turn lanes
shall be maintained. When no auxiliary turn lanes are required, a minimum centerline offset of 200
feet for Access Points along opposite sides of the Street on collector and arterial streets shall be
maintained.
(C) A Curb radius shall be constructed at intersections as shown in Table 4.1-5. The minimum radius
to be used shall comply with the standards for the Street with highest functional class at the
intersection and the adjacent land use. See Figure 4.1-U.
TABLE 4.1-5:CURB RADIUS (FEET)
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
LAND USE
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Local 25 30 40
Collector 30 40 50
Arterial 40 40 50
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 84
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-U: Illustration of applicable Curb radii based on land use and the Functional Classification of Streets
4.1-22 Sight Distance Requirements
(A) Minimum Sight Distances for vehicles entering and exiting an intersection shall be designed in
compliance with the guidelines established by the American Association of State Highway
Officials (AASHTO) manual “A Policy of the Geometric Design of Highway and Streets,” as
summarized in Table 4.1-6 and Table 4.1-7. See Figure 4.1-V and Figure 4.1-W.
(B) Sight Distance calculations and profiles shall utilize a driver’s eye height of 3.5 feet and an object
height of 2.0 feet.
TABLE 4.1-6: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXITING VEHICLES (FEET)
NO. OF LANES
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MILES PER HOUR)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2-Lane 230 285 340 400 455 510 570 625
4-Lane 245 305 365 425 485 545 605 665
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 85
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-V: Illustration of Sight Distance requirements for exiting vehicles
TABLE 4.1-7: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROACHING VEHICLES
(FEET)
NO. OF LANES
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MILES PER HOUR)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2-Lane 165 205 245 285 325 365 405 445
4-Lane 180 220 265 310 355 400 440 485
6-Lane 195 240 290 335 385 430 480 525
Figure 4.1-W: Illustration of Sight Distance requirements for approaching vehicles
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 86
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-23 Private Streets
Private Streets shall be designed, constructed, and inspected by Staff to ensure conformity with the same
standards as Public Streets.
4.1-24 Access Drives
(A) Access drives may be used to provide direct vehicular access to buildings and Parking Areas from
the side or rear of the property. See Figure 4.1-X.
(B) Access Drives may serve as the primary means of access for a maximum of four residential units or
four commercial Lots.
(C) Access drives may serve as the secondary means of access for an unlimited number of residential
units or commercial Lots when the primary means of access is provided by a Public Street system
accepted for maintenance by the appropriate governing body.
Figure 4.1-X: Illustration of an Access Drive
4.1-25 Temporary Turnarounds for Dead-End Streets
Temporary turnarounds shall be constructed at the terminus of all Streets.
(A) Temporary turnarounds constructed between phases within the same Preliminary Plat may be
constructed of Dense Graded Aggregate a minimum of eight inches in thickness.
(1) The missing asphalt or concrete turnaround is required to be bonded.
(B) Temporary turnarounds constructed at an abutting property line shall be constructed of either
asphalt of concrete in accord with the standards contained herein for street construction.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 87
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-26 DrivewayWidths
Driveways for residential areas shall be provided with a minimum width as identified in Table 4.1-8. See
Figure 4.1-Y.
TABLE 4.1-8:MINIMUM REQUIRED DRIVEWAY
WIDTHS
NO. OF RESIDENCES DRIVEWAYWIDTH
1 9 [1]
2 12
3 - 6 16
NOTE:
[1] Driveways longer than 150 feet shall have a minimum width
of 12 feet.
Figure 4.1-Y: Illustration of required Driveway widths based on number of residences served
4.1-27 Driveway Aprons
The following shall apply to Driveway aprons:
(A) Driveway aprons in residential areas shall have a minimum thickness of five inches.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 88
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
(B) Driveway aprons in commercial and industrial areas shall have a minimum thickness equal to the
thickness required for the commercial or industrial entrance.
(C) Driveway aprons shall be constructed in accordance with Figure A.1-U: Detail #19 and Figure A.1-
V: Detail #20.
Additional 4.1-28 Street Improvements
Improvements to the existing transportation network may be required to ensure adequate safety and
mobility of users on the Street system. The improvements shall be limited to the study area established
in a required traffic impact study and shall be consistent with the recommendations of the traffic impact
study that were identified to be necessary to maintain the pre-build level of service within the defined
study area.
4.1-29 Construction Details and Specifications
All infrastructure contained in this chapter shall conform to the standard construction drawings contained
in Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings.
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. These Lot layout standards assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and
aesthetically-pleasing development. They contribute to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods where
residents can live, work, shop, and play, and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public
in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Creates standards that result in the logical arrangement of Lots that are accessible and capable of
being built upon;
(B) Ensures that proper protection from Flood is provided to Lots, built structures and public
infrastructure;
(C) Sets forth minimum standards for utility and Watercourse Easements that will accommodate their
future maintenance needs; and
(D) Provides for the reservation of desirable recreational areas, school sites or other public grounds for
the potential purchase of such areas by the appropriate public body.
4.2-2 Easements
(A) The minimum width of Public utility Easements shall be as required by the applicable public utility
agency. The utilities shall be centrally located within the width of the Easement.
(B) Additional Easement width shall be required by Staff if Staff determines that such additional width
is necessary due to the depth the utilities must be buried or due to the proposed size and use of the
utilities.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 89
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-3 Watercourses
(A) The Subdivider shall provide Easements for storm Drainage purposes that conform to the lines of
any existing or proposed Watercourses which traverse the Subdivision.
(B) The Easement width shall be sufficient to provide for the maintenance of the Watercourse as
determined by Staff.
4.2-4 Natural Land Use
Subdivisions shall be encouraged to be designed to take advantage of the natural topography of the land,
to economize the construction of Drainage facilities, to minimize destruction of trees and topsoil, and to
preserve such natural features as Watercourses, unusual rock formations, large trees, sites for historical
significance, and other natural assets. See Figure 4.2-A.
Figure 4.2-A: Illustration of Subdivision design taking advantage of the natural topography
4.2-5 Flood Protection
The following shall apply to Flood protection:
(A) All Subdivision development shall comply with the Flood protection development controls
contained in the applicable zoning ordinance.
(B) All Streets and utilities constructed to serve a Subdivision shall be either Flood protected, or
constructed to a level of not less than two feet above the elevation of the 100-year Flood.
4.2-6 Lot Size
All proposed Lots shall conform to the minimum size requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
4.2-7 Lot Frontage
(A) All proposed Lots for building purposes shall front onto a Public Street system accepted for
maintenance by the applicable Legislative Body.
(B) The minimum Frontage for a single proposed building Lot along a Public Street system shall be 20
feet.
(C) The minimum frontage for contiguous Flag Lots along a Public Street system is 10 feet per flag.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 90
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
Double 4.2-8 and Triple Frontage Lots
(A) Lots shall not have Frontage onto more than one Street except:
(1) When a Lot is a Corner Lot;
(2) When the rear of a Double Frontage Lot abuts an arterial, Freeway, Access Drive, or
collector street; or
(3) When the rear of a Triple Frontage Lot abuts a Freeway, or Access Drive.
(B) Double frontage and Triple Frontage Lots shall be restricted to one Driveway on the Street with the
lowest Functional Classification.
(1) More than one Driveway may be provided for double and triple frontage lots that abut local
streets if permitted by the applicable zoning ordinance.
4.2-9 Flag Lots
The following shall apply to Flag Lots:
(A) Flag Lots shall only be used in those locations where due to geometric, topographic, or other
physical features, or the lack of economic feasibility in proportion to the size of the development, it
would be impractical to extend a publicly dedicated Street.
(B) Single Flag Lots shall have a minimum Frontage of 20 feet along a publicly dedicated and accepted
Street.
(C) Two or more contiguous Flag Lots shall each have a minimum Frontage of 10 feet onto a publicly
dedicated and accepted Street. Contiguous Flag Lots require the provision of a minimum 20-foot
wide ingress/egress Easement that provides for the permanent maintenance of the access way to be
located over the 10-foot Flag Stems. See Figure 4.2-B.
(D) Except in the unincorporated portion of Kenton County, access to the Lot(s) shall only be provided
from within the limits of the contiguous Flag Stem portion of the Lot(s) or from an existing, shared
driveway.
(E) In the case of new developments containing new Street only, no more than four Flag Lots are
permitted to be contiguous to each other at the street. Otherwise no more than two Flag Lots are
permitted to be contiguous to each other at the Street. See Figure 4.2-B.
(F) No more than 15 percent of Lots contained on a Preliminary Plat shall be Flag Lots.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 91
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
Figure 4.2-B: Illustration of Flag Lot requirements
4.2-10 Maximum Lot Depth
(A) The maximum depth of a Lot shall not be greater than four times the width of the Lot, except for
Flag Lots and Lots which contain over five acres of Lot Area. See Figure 4.2-C.
Figure 4.2-C: Illustration of maximum lot depth
(B) Individual site conditions and/or the proposed Lot layout and arrangement may require variation
from these requirements, as determined by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 92
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-11 Driveway Access
(A) The minimum width of a Driveway serving a single Lot shall conform to the applicable Zoning
Ordinance.
(B) The minimum width of a Driveway serving two Lots shall be 12 feet.
(C) The minimum width of a Driveway serving three to six Lots shall be 16 feet.
(D) Driveways shall serve no more than six Lots and/or residential dwellings.
4.2-12 Residual Parcels
No Residual Parcels shall be created which:
(A) Do not conform to the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which the Parcel is
located;
(B) Are not required for a private or public utility purpose; or
(C) Are not accepted by the applicable Legislative Body or any other appropriate public body.
4.2-13 Side Lot Lines
(A) Side Lot Lines shall be as close to right angles with the Street centerline as possible, or radial to
curve Street centerlines. See Figure 4.2-D.
(B) Lot Lines not at right angles with the Street centerline, and Lot Lines intersecting with curved
Right-of-ways shall have a reference tie to the tangent line of that centerline curve. See Figure
4.2-D.
Figure 4.2-D: Illustration of Side Lot Lines
4.2-14 Property Lines at Street Intersections
Property lines at Street intersections shall be provided from the same radius point necessary to establish
the pavement radius. See Figure 4.2-E.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 93
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Figure 4.2-E: Illustration of property line location at Street intersections
4.2-15 Public Sites
Where a proposed park, recreational area, open space, school site, or other public uses identified in the
Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part within a proposed Subdivision, Staff may require a
reservation for the purchase of such ground by an applicable public body not to exceed two years as a
condition precedent to Preliminary Plat approval.
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-1 Purpose
This chapter fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. These public utility standards assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and
aesthetically-pleasing development is addressed. They contribute to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods
where residents can live, work, shop, and play. Furthermore, they promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Establishes the adequacy of existing and proposed stormwater, wastewater and water supply
facilities as a factor to be considered when reviewing proposed Subdivisions;
(B) Sets forth minimum standards for stormwater Drainage systems, sanitary sewer and water systems,
and the extent to which they shall be provided;
(C) Ensures that new Lots are provided access to essential public utilities when they are available; and
(D) Promotes the ability of fire departments to fight fires by requiring minimum fire flows and
adequate provision of fire hydrants.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 94
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-2 Storm Water Drainage Systems
All storm water Drainage systems shall comply with the Northern Kentucky Regional Storm Water
Management Program Rules and Regulations of Sanitation District No. 1 (SD 1’s Storm Water
Regulations).
(A) Sanitation District No. 1 shall perform the plan review of the storm water Drainage system(s) and
issue the appropriate permit(s) for any development that disturbs one acre of land or greater, or for
disturbances of less than one acre when that disturbance is part of a larger overall development.
(B) Development that does not disturb one acre of land or greater will be subject to the requirement of
plan reviews and/or permits through these regulations and/or the applicable zoning ordinance.
(C) Any proposed Subdivision that requires submission of a grading plan or improvement drawing to
Staff shall receive grading plan or improvement drawing approval prior to the commencement of
any earth moving operations.
4.3-3 Inlet Grates
Except for inlets serving temporary silt basins, detention and/or retention basins, Inlet Grates shall not
allow a sphere with a diameter of six inches to pass through.
4.3-4 On-Street Inlet Location
Inlet spacing along Streets shall be based upon gutter and inlet capacity, Street slope, and contributing
Drainage area. In addition, inlet spacing shall not exceed the following spacing requirements unless
hydraulic calculations are submitted that indicate acceptable capacity:
(A) Along continuous grades less than two percent - 400 feet maximum;
(B) Along continuous grades two percent and over - 600 feet maximum;
(C) At sag locations less than two percent - 400 feet maximum between inlets or from a high point;
(D) At sag locations two percent and over - 600 feet maximum between inlets or from a high point;
(E) Inlets shall be placed immediately upstream of Pedestrian Walkways and designed to intercept 100
percent of the flow at the gutter line;
(F) Inlets placed at locations other than in Clause 4.3-4(E) above shall be designed to conform to
SD1’s Storm Water Regulations; and
(G) Roll type grate inlets shall be used in any location where a Driveway will intersect the Street.
4.3-5 Cul-de-sac Inlet Location
Special consideration should be given to storm Drainage entering Cul-de-sacs. In addition to an inlet
provided at the low point within the Cul-de-sac, two additional inlets shall be required along each Curb
prior to the entrance of the Cul-de-sac:
(A) For Street slopes eight percent and less draining more than 400 feet of pavement; and
(B) For all Street slopes more than eight percent and draining more than 300 feet of pavement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 95
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-6 Culverts and Pipe Types
Culverts and pipe types shall be designed in accord with SD 1’s Storm Water Regulations
(A) All pipe installations greater than 30 inches in diameter require full-time on-site inspections under
the direction of a Qualified Geotechnical Engineer of Firm.
4.3-7 Lot Grading and Drainage
The following shall apply to Lot grading and Drainage:
(A) Surface Drainage swales to accommodate individual Lot Drainage shall be constructed as part of
the final Lot grading and seeded and mulched.
(B) Surface Drainage swales shall have a minimum grade of two percent and shall be constructed so
that the surface water will drain onto a Street, storm inlet, natural Drainage area, or other Drainage
feature. See Figure 4.3-A.
Figure 4.3-A: Illustrations of Lot Drainage and Swales
(C) Roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, and sump pumps that are discharged above ground
shall be discharged onto the same Parcel of land from which the water is generated, as far from the
property line as practical and at least five feet from the residence.
(D) Roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, and sump pumps discharging toward the Street shall
be discharged onto a pervious area no closer than 20 feet from the edge of pavement or back of
Curb. See Figure 4.3-B.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 96
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
(1) The discharge of roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains and sumps directly onto an
impervious area that drains to the street is prohibited.
Figure 4.3-B: Illustration of Drainage on Lot
(E) The connection of roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, or sump pumps to the public storm
sewer system shall be prohibited unless approved by Sanitation District No. 1 in writing.
Waivers for Storm Water 4.3-8 Runoff Control Facilities
A waiver (See Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations.) of stormwater management control facilities
may be granted by Staff when the following criteria are present:
(A) Less than one acre of land is disturbed and the area is not part of a larger overall development;
(B) Less than ½ acre will be impervious area; and
(C) Drainage calculations indicate that the downstream Drainage facilities are adequately sized to
accommodate the additional stormwater runoff and that no pre-existing stormwater Drainage
problems in this watershed exist immediately downstream.
4.3-9 Sanitary Sewer System
The following shall apply to a sanitary sewage system:
(A) The sanitary sewage system shall comply with the Rules and Regulations of Sanitation District No.
1.
(B) In those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan within the "Urban/Suburban Focus Area", a
sanitary sewage system shall be provided to adequately serve all Lots in the Subdivision.
(C) The sanitary sewer system easements shall be required to be provided to adjacent property not
presently served by a sanitary sewer system.
(D) Where package sewage treatment plants are proposed, the sewage collection system shall be
designed for ultimate connection to the public system.
(E) Sanitary sewage treatment plants for any Subdivision shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from
any existing residence.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 97
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Individual On-4.3-10 Site Sewage Disposal Systems
Individual on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted in those areas identified in the Comprehensive
Plan within the "Rural Focus Area" and are required to be constructed in accordance with the current
standards and specifications of the state and local health department.
4.3-11 Water System
The following shall apply to a domestic water system:
(A) The water system shall comply with the applicable water district’s rules and regulations.
(B) In those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan as "Urban Service Area," a water system shall
be provided to adequately serve all Lots in the Subdivision.
(C) The water system easements shall be required to be provided to adjacent property not presently
served by a water system.
(D) The water system shall be required to interconnect with an existing water system where practical.
4.3-12 Fire Flow Requirements for Residential Development
The following shall apply to minimum fire hydrant flows within residential developments:
(A) The minimum fire hydrant flows shall be provided in accord with Table 4.3-1.
(B) The minimum fire hydrant flow is the quantity of flow in gpm (gallons per minute) at 20 psi
(pounds per square inch) residual pressure.
(C) In areas served by the Northern Kentucky Water District, minimum fire hydrant flows shall be
determined by the Design Engineer using Fire Flow Testing conforming to the standard procedures
contained in the National Fire Protection Association, (NFPA) Handbook and/or by hydraulic
modeling data provided by the Northern Kentucky Water District.
(D) In areas outside the jurisdiction of the Northern Kentucky Water District, minimum fire hydrant
flows shall be determined by a Fire Flow Test performed by the applicable water service district or
fire department and shall conform to the standard procedures contained in the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Handbook.
TABLE 4.3-1:MINIMUM FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPOSURE DISTANCES [1] MINIMUM FIRE FLOW
Over 100 feet None
100 feet or less 500 gpm
NOTE:
[1] Exposure distances are measured using the minimum allowable side yards
identified in the applicable zoning ordinance.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 98
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Fire Hydrant Locations for 4.3-13 Residential Development
The following shall apply to the location and spacing of fire hydrants for residential development:
(A) Water mains and fire hydrants shall be extended along any proposed Street where the existing
water system can support the extension and meet all of the Northern Kentucky Water District
Regulations.
(B) The maximum spacing of fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with Table 4.3-2. See also
Figure 4.3-C.
(C) Fire hydrant spacing shall be measured along the centerline of the Street and placed at proposed
Lot Lines where practical.
(D) A fire hydrant shall be located a maximum of 500 feet from the face of any building within
developments where a new Street is involved.
(1) Other Northern Kentucky Water District Regulations
TABLE 4.3-2:MAXIMUM SPACING OF FIRE
HYDRANTS
DEVELOPMENT TYPE SPACING
Single-Family 500 feet
Multi-Family 300 feet
Figure 4.3-C: Illustrations of fire hydrant locations for single-family and multi-family developments
4.3-14 Fire Hydrant Locations and Fire Flow Requirements for Nonresidential Development
Minimum fire hydrant locations and fire flows for nonresidential developments shall be as approved by
the applicable fire department in writing.
4.3-15 Telephone, Cable and Electric Utility Lines
All new telephone, cable and electrical utility lines shall be installed underground and be in conformance
with the appropriate utility company's policy and requirements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 99
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
Pavement Section 4.4: Design Method and Required Thicknesses
4.4-1 Pavement Design Method
AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1986 and 1993), published by The American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials is the design method used herein and is
specified as the design method to be used for any alternate pavement designs that are allowed or required
in this regulation. Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method sets
out the design parameters used herein for Kenton County Subdivision pavements. For definition and
explanation of the parameters shown here, see the above mentioned AASHTO guides, Section 4.8:
Pavement Performance and Design herein, and Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report. Project
specific pavement designs are required for residential streets serving over 1,000 residences or
commercial/industrial streets serving more than 3,500,000 ESALs or alternative pavement designs
proposed under Section 4.4-2: Required Thicknesses. Any project specific pavement designs are required
to use the design parameters identified in Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using
AASHTO Method.
TABLE 4.4-1: SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT DESIGN PARAMETERS USING AASHTOMETHOD
PARAMETER
DESIGN VALUES
CONCRETE ASPHALT
Design Life 20 years 20 years
Life Cycle Analysis 50 years 50 years
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 --
Reliability 80% 80%
Deviation 0.35 0.45
Initial Serviceability 4.2 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.5
Modulus of Rupture 600 psi --
Modulus of Elasticity 3,600,000 psi --
CBR, Minimum 2 (K=50 pci) 3 (MR=2700 psi)
Load Transfer 4.4 (no dowels) --
Load Transfer 3.2 (dowels) --
20 Year ESAL, Residential Local Street, = 199 lots served 81,000 81,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 203,000 203,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 406,000[2] 406,000[2]
20 Year ESAL, Commercial/Industrial Street 3,500,000[1] 3,500,000[1]
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Local Street, = 199 lots served 53,000 53,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 133,000 133,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 265,000[2] 265,000[2]
ESAL, Arterial Per KYTC Specification
Asphalt Surface Layer Coefficient 0.44
Asphalt Base Layer Coefficient 0.40
Crushed Stone Base Layer Coefficient 0.14
Crushed Stone Base with Tensar TX5 Geogrid Layer Coefficient 0.25 for CBR = 3
0.21 for 2= CBR < 3
Thickness conversion factor, 17 year old asphalt 0.7
Thickness conversation factor, 34 year old asphalt 0.6
NOTES:
[1] Engineer shall submit a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) documenting project-specific design ESALs for each
commercial/industrial Subdivision generating more than 100 vehicle trips per hour during the AM or PM peak period. If projectspecific
ESAL loading is greater than 3,500,000, a project-specific pavement design is required.
[2] Project specific pavement design required for residential streets serving more than 1,000 lots
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 100
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
4.4-2 Required Thicknesses
(A) Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses shows the required pavement thicknesses for
various Street classifications for Asphalt and Concrete Streets where in situ Subgrade soils can
meet the minimum required Subgrade CBR equal to 2 or greater for Concrete pavements or CBR
of 3 or greater for Asphalt pavements. These thicknesses were determined using the AASHTO
Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1986 and 1993) and the design parameters identified in
Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method. These values
meet requirements for a 50 year life cycle without replacement, assuming resurfacing at 17 and 34
years as shown in the example calculation in Figure C.1-A: Exhibit A.
(B) Wherever the minimum CBR values for Asphalt or Concrete pavements as defined in Table 4.4-1:
Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method cannot be provided by the in
situ Subgrade soils, the Engineer shall: 1) submit an engineered Subgrade improvement design
that increases the CBR value of the in situ Subgrade soils to the required minimum CBR values
for Asphalt and Concrete pavement in Subsection 4.4-1: Pavement Design Method; or 2) submit an
engineered alternate pavement design that takes into account the substandard CBR values.
TABLE 4.4-2:REQUIRED SUBDIVISION STREET THICKNESSES
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
WITH NUMBER OF
LOTS SERVED[5]
CONCRETE
CONCRETE
OVER 4”
CRUSHED
STONE
BASE
FULL-DEPTH
ASPHALT
ASPHALT OVER CRUSHED
STONE BASE (CSB)
ASPHALT OVER CRUSHED
STONE BASE (CSB)+
GEOGRID[6]
SURFACE BASE[1] SURFACE BASE CSB[1] SURFACE BASE CSB[1]
Residential Local
=199 Lots
7”[2] NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”[4] 1.5” 3” 7”[4]
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”[2] NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”[4] 1.5” 4” 7”[4]
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”[2] NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”[4] 1.5” 5.75” 7”[4]
Commercial/
Industrial Not Permitted 10”[3] Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7”[4] 1.5” 12” 7”[4]
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
[1]Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
[2] Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Figure A.1-N: Detail #12 and Figure A.1-O: Detail
#13).
[3] Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints (see Figure A.1-M: Detail #11).
[4] 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can be
replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses are
maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector, and 7.5
inches commercial/industrial
[5] Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where a
number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a Local
Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
[6] Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 101
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
(1) Engineered subgrade improvements may include:
a) Undercutting the substandard Subgrade soils and replacing them with documented
soils that provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
b) Providing a chemically stabilized Subgrade (usually lime stabilization) to effectively
provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
c) Utilizing crushed stone base with geotextile and/or Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid to
effectively provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
(2) Alternative pavement designs may be proposed for Asphalt pavement on subgrades with a
CBR value of 2, provided the pavement structure is shown to meet the structural number
requirements identified in Table 4.4-3: Structural Numbers For Alternative Asphalt
Pavement Designs (CBR =2). Alternative pavement designs are not permitted for Subgrade
soils with a CBR less than 2; rather, the subgrade soils shall be improved to CBR equal to 2
or greater, per Subsection 4.4-2(B)(1).
TABLE 4.4-3: STRUCTURAL NUMBERS FOR
ALTERNATIVE ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESIGNS
(CBR=2)
STREET CLASSIFICATION STRUCTURAL NUMBER
Local (<200 Lots) 4.09
Subcollector 4.92 (200-500 Lots)
Collector 5.60 (501-1,000 Lots)
Commercial/ 8.40 Industrial
(3) When chemically stabilized Subgrade demonstrates a documented CBR value greater than 3,
an alternative asphalt pavement design may be proposed to reduce pavement thickness,
provided the pavement structure is shown to meet the structural number requirements
identified in Table 4.4-4: Structural Numbers For Alternative Asphalt Pavement Designs.
TABLE 4.4-4: STRUCTURAL NUMBERS FOR
ALTERNATIVE ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESIGNS
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
STRUCTURAL NUMBER
CBR4 CBR5 CBR6 CBR7
Local
2.85 2.50 2.24 2.04
(<199 Lots)
Subcollector
3.52 3.14 2.84 2.60
(200-500 Lots)
Collector
(501-1,000 4.09 3.65 3.34 3.07
Lots)
Commercial/
6.47 5.92 5.47 5.12
Industrial
a) For full depth asphalt pavements, the maximum allowable reduction in asphalt
thickness over that identified in Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses
shall be 2 inches. Asphalt base shall be a minimum of 4” thick under the curb; if the
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 102
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
CBR of the subgrade is improved to 5 or higher, a 3” minimum thickness may be used
under the curb.
b) For Asphalt over Crushed Stone Base pavements, the crushed stone base may not be
reduced below the thicknesses shown in Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street
Thicknesses, and minimum total Asphalt thicknesses of 4.5 inches (local streets), 5.5
inches (subcollector streets), 6.5 inches (residential collector streets), and 7.5 inches
(commercial/industrial streets) shall be maintained.
c) There shall be no reduction in thickness for Concrete pavements below those shown in
Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses
d) Alternative pavement designs shall not be permitted for:
i) in situ soils with CBR values greater than 3;
ii) undercut and replaced subgrade soils; or
iii) crushed stone base and geotextile/geogrid subgrade improvements.
Pavement and Pavement Drainage 4.4-3 Construction Details
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings contains important construction details that are a part of
these specifications for the pavement, pavement Drainage system, and other utility construction within
the Right of Way that can impact pavement performance. Proper construction execution of the details in
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings is important to good pavement performance. For
discussion of the background of the reasoning behind these details, see Appendix C: Engineers
Committee Final Report.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 103
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.5: Use of Aggregates Within the Right-of-way
Use of Section 4.5: Aggregates Within the Right-of-way
4.5-1 Aggregate Specifications
Table 4.5-1 indicates the specifications for the various aggregate types and their uses in improvement
construction within the Street Right-of-way. All aggregates must pass all KYTC aggregate requirements
for their intended use as set out in Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
TABLE 4.5-1:AGGREGATE SPECIFICATION TABLE
KYTCSPECIFICATION USE WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY
Pipe Bedding Sand Bed and cover for deep sanitary sewer and storm sewer
Concrete Sand Concrete mix and bed and cover for waterline and power and
communication utilities
DGA Backfill for waterline and power and communication utilities under
the Street
No. 57 Crushed Limestone Concrete pavement aggregate and catch basins crossover
construction
No. 57 Gravel Allowable aggregate for all Concrete not used in Concrete pavement
and Concrete Curb and gutter
No. 8 Gravel Allowable aggregate for all Concrete
No. 467 Crushed Limestone Required aggregate for Concrete pavements
Crushed Stone Base Base material for Asphalt pavements with stone base
Asphalt Aggregates
See Table 4.7-1
Asphalt pavement aggregate must meet requirements in Section 400
of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition, except where
noted otherwise in this specification.
All aggregates must pass all KYTC aggregate requirements for their intended use as set out in Section
800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
4.6-1 General Requirement
(A) Materials
Portland cement, water, aggregates, air entraining agents, and admixtures to reduce water, retard
set, etc. shall satisfy the material specifications of, and be proportioned, batched, delivered, and
cured in accordance with, the Portland Cement Association (PCA), Design and Control of Concrete
Mixtures, latest edition, except as noted otherwise in these regulations.
(B) Mix Design
Concrete mix design will vary depending on the intended use, as spelled out in Subsections 4.6-
2(A), 4.6-3(A), and 4.6-4(A).
(C) Fly Ash
No fly ash is allowed in the Concrete mix.
(D) Strength
Finished Concrete shall attain a minimum compressive strength at 28 days of 4,000 pounds per
square inch.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 104
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(E) Ready Mix Suppliers
All Concrete Ready Mix must be provided by Ready Mix plants listed on the KYTC List of
Approved Materials (LAM) as a qualified producer. In the alternative, the Ready Mix supplier
must supply to the staff an executed original of KTC Form TC-64-764/09 2011 “Certification of
Compliance for Freeze Thaw Resistant Concrete Aggregate” for the aggregate used in Concrete
mixes prior to commencement of construction. All Ready Mix Concrete suppliers shall submit to
the Staff in January of each year mix design verifications for all Concrete mixes that will be
supplied during that year for use in Subdivision improvements.
(F) Delivery and Discharge
Concrete shall be delivered and discharged from a truck mixer or agitator truck within the periods
specified in Table 4.6-1. Delivery tickets shall have this time clearly shown and be checked for
conformance by the Staff. Delivery tickets shall also show the date of the delivery, the Concrete
mix supplied, and the design compressive strength. All delivery tickets shall be delivered to Staff.
Any Concrete which is not plastic and workable when placed shall be rejected.
TABLE 4.6-1:MAXIMUM CONCRETE DISCHARGE TIME
AIR TEMPERATURE MAXIMUM DISCHARGE TIME
Up to 85 degrees Fahrenheit 1.5 hours
More than 85 degrees Fahrenheit 1 hour
(G) Curing
Concrete shall be cured in accordance with Section 601.03.17 of the KYTC specification.
(H) Expansion and Isolation Joints
Expansion and Isolation Joint material used herein shall be preformed one inch thick material, the
full depth of the Concrete, and shall conform to KYTC specifications for use in Concrete
pavements.
Street 4.6-2 Pavement Requirements
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates for Concrete Street pavement shall be a blend of No. 467 crushed limestone, No.
8 gravel and concrete sand.
(2) The No. 467 crushed limestone aggregate shall meet the gradation limits shown in Table 4.6-
2.
TABLE 4.6-2:NO. 467GRADATION LIMITS
SIEVE SIZE PERCENT PASSING
2” 100
1½” 93-98*
1” ----
¾” 35-70
½” ----
?” 10-30
#4 0-5
#8 ----
*Note that the specified percent passing the 1½” sieve
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 105
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(3) Gradation of the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand shall meet the requirements of Section
800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
(4) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(5) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(6) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(7) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(8) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(9) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(10) Workability factor shall be between 38 high to 33 low.
(11) Coarseness factor shall be between 73 high to 68 low.
(B) Thickness Requirements
Pavement thicknesses for various classifications of Streets shall be as shown in Table 4.4-2:
Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses. Various critical Concrete pavement design and
construction details that shall be used in Concrete Subdivision pavements are shown in Appendix
A: Standard Construction Drawings.
(C) Testing Requirements
(1) One set of three test cylinders shall be made for each day’s placement of Street. An
additional set of three test cylinders shall be made for each additional 100 cubic yards of
placement. One slump, air entrainment and temperature test shall be performed for each set
of Concrete test cylinders.
(2) One cylinder shall be tested for compressive strength at no later than seven days and two
cylinders at 28 days.
(3) Part of the plastic Concrete sample used for the test cylinders shall be washed to visually
confirm that crushed limestone coarse aggregate was used in the Concrete mix.
(4) All Concrete testing shall be performed by a Qualified Materials Testing firm in accord with
applicable ASTM specifications, latest editions. The results of all Concrete testing are
required to be provided to Staff by the Developer prior to the approval of a Final Plat.
(D) Reinforcing Steel
The use of continuous reinforced concrete pavements is not required but can be considered for
streets serving commercial/industrial uses.
differs from Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge
Manual, latest edition, for No. 467 gradation. The No.
467 crushed limestone for Street pavement in the
Regulation must have 2% to 7% retained on the 1½”
sieve.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 106
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(1) Bent bars are not considered reinforcing steel in the contents of this section.
(2) The use of wire mesh in concrete pavements is prohibited.
(E) Placement
(1) Formwork
a) Fixed forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the thickness of the pavement.
b) Forms shall be of such cross-sections and strength and so secured as to resist the
pressure of the Concrete when placed, and the impact and vibration of any equipment
which they support, without springing or settlement.
(2) Setting
The Subgrade under the forms shall be compacted and shaped so that the form set shall
provide the specified elevation.
(3) Grade and Alignment
The alignment and grade elevation of the forms shall be checked by the Contractor
immediately ahead of Concrete placement and corrections made when necessary.
(4) Placement Method
a) All Concrete placement shall conform to ACI Specifications, latest edition.
b) The Concrete shall be mixed in quantities required for immediate use and shall be
deposited on the Subgrade to the required depth and width of the construction lane in
successive batches and in a continuous operation. The terminus of a continuous pour
shall be a Construction Joint per Figure A.1-N: Detail #12.
c) The Concrete shall be placed as uniformly as possible in order to minimize the amount
of additional spreading necessary.
d) The Concrete shall be vibrated and consolidated with suitable tools while being placed
so that the formation of voids or honeycomb pockets is prevented.
e) Concrete shall not be placed around manholes or other structures until they have been
brought to the required grade and alignment.
f) Additional tamping and compaction of surrounding fill material may be required after
raising manholes.
(5) Consolidating and Finishing
a) Concrete pavement shall be struck off and consolidated with a mechanical finishing
machine, vibrating screed, slipform paver, or by hand-finishing methods such that,
after consolidation and final finishing, it shall be at the elevation shown on the
approved plans.
b) The finishing method shall incorporate a screed, which will consolidate the Concrete
by pressure, vibration, or both.
c) The Concrete shall be brought to a true and even surface, free from rock pockets.
d) Hand-finishing tools shall be kept available for use in case the mechanical finishing
machine breaks down.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 107
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
e) When hand finishing, the pavement shall be struck off and consolidated by a vibrating
screed to the elevation as shown on the plans. When the forward motion of the
vibrating screen is stopped, the vibrator shall be shut off and not be allowed to idle on
the Concrete.
(6) Scraping and Straight Edging
a) The Inspector may require that the pavement be scraped with a straightedge with a
minimum width of six feet, equipped with handles long enough to permit it to be
operated from the edge of the pavement.
b) When irregularities with the surface elevation are discovered, they shall be corrected
by adding or removing Concrete. All disturbed areas shall be floated with a wooden or
metal float not less than four feet long and not less than six inches wide and straight
edged.
(7) Edging
Before final finishing is completed and before the Concrete has taken its initial set, the edges
of the slab and Curb shall be carefully finished with an edger.
(8) Final Surface Finish
a) The final surface of the Concrete pavement and Curb shall have a uniform gritty
texture at the grades and cross-sections shown on the plans.
b) A burlap drag or medium broom shall be used as the final finishing method for
Concrete pavement.
c) A burlap drag finish shall have a minimum width of at least three feet and have a
length that is long enough to cover the entire pavement width.
d) The burlap drag shall be pulled forward across the pavement in the direction in which
the pavement is being placed.
e) A broom finish shall be drawn transversely across the pavement using overlapping
strokes to produce surface corrugations of uniform appearance approximately 1/16
th
inch in depth.
f) Curbs shall be finished using the same method as the pavement.
(9) Integral Curb
a) Curbs shall be constructed monolithically with pavement extrusion equipment or hand
formed prior to the finishing operation.
b) The integral barrier and sloped Curb shall be constructed with or prior to the finished
paving operation. Special care shall be taken so that the Curb construction does not
create a “cold joint.”
c) Curbs placed immediately following the paving operation shall be sufficiently
consolidated with the paving slab and shall not contain voids within or along the back
face of the Curb.
d) Integral barrier Curbs along the edges of Street pavement shall contain depressed
Curbs not less than 1-3/4 inches above the gutter line at all Driveway entrances and at
such other locations as designed on the approved plans.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 108
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
e) When barrier Curb is used, the Curb may be sawed horizontally to facilitate residential
Driveways, approaches, and Sidewalks.
(F) Concrete Street Pavement Joints
(1) Contraction Joints
a) All Contraction Joints shall be placed a maximum of 15 feet on center. Commercial/
industrial Subdivision pavements shall have sawed transverse Contraction Joints with
steel dowels that are cut perpendicular across the pavement. All residential pavements
shall have tooled or sawed Contraction Joints without dowels. Residential pavement
transverse Contraction Joints shall be skewed (except at intersections, paired catch
basins and in Cul-de-sacs). See Figure A.1-O: Detail #13.
b) Sawed joints shall be equal to a depth of one-fourth (1/4) of the pavement thickness
continuous across the slab.
c) The timing of the installation of joints shall conform to ACI specifications, latest
edition.
d) Contraction Joints cut into fresh Concrete with a jointing tool shall be a minimum 1½
inches deep.
(2) Expansion Joints
There shall be no Expansion Joints in any pavements except at bridge abutments and where
required by construction details in Figure A.1-R: Detail #16, Figure A.1-S: Detail #17,
Figure A.1-T: Detail #18, Figure A.1-U: Detail #19, and Figure A.1-V: Detail #20.
(3) Longitudinal Joints
a) All pavements wider than 15 feet require Longitudinal Joints. Longitudinal Joints may
be Construction Joints or tooled/sawed joints.
b) Longitudinal Construction Joints will require 18 inches long #4 deformed bars
embedded into each slab at the mid-slab height, no more than four feet on center and
no closer than 18 inches to each Contraction Joint.
c) Bent bars may be inserted into fresh Concrete before its initial set.
d) Bent bars shall not be straightened until the Concrete has cured sufficiently to enable
bending without fracture of the Concrete slab.
(4) Other Pavement Joints
Other Contraction Joints and Isolation Joints shall be constructed per Figure A.1-N: Detail
#12.
(G) Manholes and On-Street Inlets
Manholes, on-Street inlets, and water valves encountered in the areas to be paved shall be raised or
lowered to the surface of the new pavement. On-Street inlets may be separated from the pavement
and Curb by boxing out around the inlet. Details for Joint construction at manholes and catch
basins are in Figure A.1-P: Detail #14, Figure A.1-Q: Detail #15, and Figure A.1-R: Detail #16.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 109
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(H) Protection and Opening to Traffic
(1) Traffic shall be prohibited from the pavement until the Concrete has attained a compressive
strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch.
(2) Prohibited traffic shall include Contractor’s vehicles.
(3) Prior to opening to public traffic, the Developer is responsible for completing, curing and
sealing the pavement, including box outs, backfilling the Street, sealing the joints and
cleaning the pavement of all debris.
(I) Concrete Pavement Lugs
The purpose of pavement lugs in Subdivision pavements is to provide some additional resistance to
Contraction Joints separating during repeated expansion and contraction cycles over the life of the
pavement in certain open ended and relatively steep downhill pavement conditions. In these open
ended and downhill conditions, resistance to pavement lengthening at contraction joints is
substantially reduced as compared to Contraction Joints in long stretches relatively straight
pavement. In the long, relatively straight streets, the repetitive adjacent slabs help keep the
contraction joints from separating during repeated expansion and contraction cycles. Those
conditions which shall require lugs are related to the geometry of the Streets and are as follows (see
Figure A.1-J: Detail #8, Figure A.1-K: Detail #9, and Figure A.1-L: Detail #10).
(1) The ends of Cul-de-sacs where the Street grade approaching the Cul-de-sac decreases more
than 20 feet vertically, at an average grade of more than six percent, before there is a change
in direction of Street Drainage. In this condition, install a lug near the end of the Cul-de-sac
across the extension of the two lanes of pavement.
(2) At T-intersections, place a lug on the intersecting street near the intersection, where grade on
the intersecting Street is going up from the intersection more than 20 feet vertically, at an
average grade of more than six percent, before there is a change in the Drainage direction.
(3) On the main line of a Street pavement where the pavement is going straight and downhill
more than 20 feet vertically, at an average grade of more than six percent and the direction of
centerline deflects horizontally by more than 30 degrees, place a lug just uphill of the start of
the horizontal curve.
a) Lugs shall be placed at least 20 feet uphill from any shallow utility excavation
transverse to the pavement.
(4) The Design Engineer may add other lugs in conditions he considers critical to Contraction
Joint integrity.
(5) Lug locations are to be shown on construction design and as-built drawings.
(J) Joint Sealing Compound
(1) Joint sealing compound shall conform to the following standard designations:
a) Hot-poured elastic type, as specified by AASHTO, latest edition; or
b) Silicone rubber sealant type (non-sag, self-leveling, or rapid cure) conforming to the
KYTC Department of Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition; or
c) An approved equal, as determined and approved by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 110
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(2) The application of joint sealant is prohibited at temperatures below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
Concrete Curb and Gutter Requirements 4.6-3 for Asphalt Streets
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates for Concrete Curb and Gutter shall be a blend of No. 57 crushed limestone, No. 8
gravel and concrete sand .
(2) Gradation of the No. 57 crushed limestone, the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand shall meet
the requirements of Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
(3) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(4) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(6) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(7) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(8) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(9) Workability factor shall be between 40 high to 35 low.
(10) Coarseness factor shall be between 63 high to 58 low.
(B) Curb Design
(1) 24-inch wide Concrete Curb and gutter shall be used for all Streets Types with Asphalt
pavements.
(2) The Developer may choose between using the sloped Curb or the six inch barrier Curb
profile shown in Figure A.1-H: Detail #7.
(3) All Streets serving industrial/commercial developments shall use the six inch barrier Curb.
(C) Concrete Curb over Asphalt Base
Concrete Curb over Asphalt base shall be a minimum of six inches thick at the Curb apron.
Concrete Curb over crushed stone base shall be a minimum of seven inches thick at the Curb
apron.
(D) Expansion Joints
(1) Expansion Joints shall be placed in Concrete Curbs at each side of Curb inlet catch basins.
(2) Two ¾-inch diameter, 18-inch long smooth dowels with expansion caps shall be placed in
each Expansion Joint location.
(3) Expansion material must go completely through the Curb cross section, preventing Concrete
to Concrete contact. See Figure A.1-R: Detail #16.
(E) Contraction Joints
Contraction Joints shall be installed in the Curb at a spacing of no more than 10 feet on center.
(F) Standard Details
Details for Concrete Curb and gutter are shown in the exhibits in Figure A.1-H: Detail #7 and
Figure A.1-I: Detail #7A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 111
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(G) Testing Requirements
(1) One set of three test cylinders shall be made for each day’s placement of Street. An
additional set of three test cylinders shall be made for each additional 100 cubic yards of
placement. One slump, air entrainment and temperature test shall be performed for each set
of Concrete test cylinders.
(2) One cylinder shall be tested for compressive strength at no later than seven days and two
cylinders at 28 days.
(3) Part of the plastic Concrete sample used for the test cylinders shall be washed to visually
confirm that crushed limestone coarse aggregate was used in the Concrete mix.
(4) All Concrete testing shall be performed by a Qualified Materials Testing firm in accord with
applicable ASTM specifications, latest editions. The results of all Concrete testing are
required to be provided to Staff by the materials testing firm prior to the approval of a Final
Plat.
Concrete Public Sidewalks, Pathways, Driveway Aprons a 4.6-4 nd Other Infrastructure Uses Not
Specified Elsewhere in These Regulations
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates shall be a blend of No. 57 gravel or crushed limestone, No. 8 gravel and concrete
sand .
(2) Gradation of the No. 57 gravel or crushed limestone, the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand
shall meet the requirements of Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest
edition.
(3) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(4) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(6) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(7) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(8) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(9) Workability factor shall be between 40 high to 35 low.
(10) Coarseness factor shall be between 63 high to 58 low.
(B) Subgrade
(1) Subgrade for Sidewalks, pathways, and Driveway aprons shall be non-organic and consist of
natural clay or sand soils.
(2) Clay soils must be knit together without any loose clay soils. Any material used to finish
grade Subgrade shall be bank run sand, KYTC crushed limestone DGA, or crushed recycled
Concrete.
(3) Any granular material in excess of two inches thick shall be compacted with a vibrating plate
compactor or equivalent.
(4) No gravel and no other crushed limestone gradation will be used for finish grade fill material.
(C) Thickness Requirements
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 112
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(1) Concrete for public Sidewalks and pathways shall be a minimum of four inches thick.
(2) Residential Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of five inches thick.
(3) Commercial and industrial Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of seven inches thick.
(D) Drive/Apron Requirements
Required Driveway apron layouts and construction details, including required Expansion Joint
thickness and location, are shown in Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings. Special care
must be taken during construction to make sure there is no Concrete-to-Concrete contact under all
Expansion Joints.
(E) Edge Drain Installation
When installing Driveway aprons, special care must be taken not to damage the edge drain
installed on the outside of the Curb. If the edge drain is damaged, the damaged section must be
properly replaced to assure water flow through the edge drain.
(F) Contraction Joint Spacing
For Sidewalks, the maximum spacing of Contraction Joints shall not exceed five feet, except when
the Sidewalk or pathway is wider than five feet when the spacing shall not exceed the width of the
slab.
Asphalt Section 4.7: Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and
Construction Specifications
4.7-1 General
(A) All Subdivision Streets in Kenton County Subdivisions shall be constructed in accordance with the
latest edition of the KYTC Roadway Manual, Division 400, except where noted otherwise in this
specification.
(B) All Contractors must be prequalified by KYTC or demonstrate experience and success on similar
projects in order to perform this work.
(C) All construction materials incorporated into the work shall conform to the requirements set forth in
the KYTC Roadway Manual.
(D) The Contractor shall notify Staff of the intent to start the project within 24 hours of beginning
production.
4.7-2 Mixture Designation and Design
(A) Volumetric Mix Design
The Contractor shall perform the volumetric mix design according to AASHTO R35 and
conforming to AASHTO M323 and utilize 50 gyrations.
(B) Mix Design Submittal
At least 72 hours prior to the start of production, the Contractor shall submit the mix design to the
Staff and the Applicant’s Qualified Material Testing Lab for review.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 113
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(C) Aggregate Gradation
Aggregate gradations for base, intermediate and surface mixtures shall conform to KYTC Roadway
Manual Division 400 and Table 4.7-1.
TABLE 4.7-1:AGGREGATE GRADATIONS
SIEVE SIZE 1.0BASE MIXTURE 0.75 INTERMEDIATE
MIXTURE SURFACE MIXTURE
1½” 100 -- --
1” 90-100 100 --
¾” <90 90-100 --
½” -- <90 100
?” -- -- 90-100
#4 -- -- <70
#8 19-45 23-49 25-55
#16 -- -- --
#200 1-7 2-8 2-10
(D) Voids in Mineral Aggregate (VMA), Asphalt Content (AC) and Air Voids (AV)
VMA, AC and AV for residential streets shall be as specified in Table 4.7-2 and for commercial /
industrial streets as specified in Table 4.7-3.
TABLE 4.7-2:VMA,ACAND AVFOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS
MINIMUM VMA MINIMUM AC AV
Base Mixture 12% 4% 4%
Intermediate Mixture 13% 4.3% 4%
Surface Mixture 14% 5.4% 3%
TABLE 4.7-3:VMA,ACAND AVFOR COMMERCIAL / INDUSTRIAL STREETS
MINIMUM VMA MINIMUM AC AV
Base Mixture 12% 4% 4%
Intermediate Mixture 13% 4.3% 4%
Surface Mixture 14% 5.4% 4%
(E) Remaining Mix Design
The remaining mix design shall conform to the applicable KYTC mix designations Class 2 BASE
0.75D PG64-22 or Class 2 BASE 1.0D PG64-22 “Base and Intermediate Mixture” and Class 2
SURF 0.38D PG64-22 “Surface Mixture”.
(F) Recycled Asphalt Pavement and Recycled Asphalt Shingles
Recycled Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be used but is limited to 25 percent of the mixture by
weight in the surface and 30 percent of the mixture by weight in the base. Recycled Asphalt
Shingles (RAS) may be used but is limited to 3.0 percent of the mixture by weight. However,
when combined, the total amount of RAP and RAS may not exceed 25 percent in the surface and
30 percent in the base with no more than three percent RAS. Warm mix Asphalt technology is
allowed on a permissive base similar to the KYTC Standard Specifications. See Table 4.7-4.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 114
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
TABLE 4.7-4:MAXIMUM RECYCLED RAP AND RASIN ASPHALT PAVEMENT
MAXIMUM RAP MAXIMUM RAS MAXIMUM RAPAND RAS
Base Mixture 30% 3% 30%
Intermediate Mixture 30% 3% 30%
Surface Mixture 25% 3% 25%
4.7-3 Plant Mix Operation
(A) Plant Requirements
(1) All Asphalt mixing plants shall conform to KYTC standards.
(2) Maximum asphalt temperature during plant operations is 330o F.
(3) Minimum asphalt temperature in the truck at the plant is 220o F.
(B) Plant Testing Requirements
(1) The Contractor shall monitor the plant production and perform quality control testing at the
Asphalt mixing plant.
(2) Staff shall be provided access to the facility during production and may be present to observe
sampling and testing by the Contractor personnel.
(3) A minimum of one test shall be performed per day of paving and additional tests shall be
performed for each 1,000 tons produced.
a) The Contractor may perform additional testing as desired to control mix properties.
b) When multiple test samples are obtained, the average value of those results shall be
used for acceptance.
c) At the start of production on the project, the first sample shall be obtained after a
minimum of 50 tons have been loaded.
d) Samples shall be tested for conformance to gradation and Asphalt content requirements
(AASHTO T164 & AASHTO T30).
e) Testing results from any offsite laboratory testing shall be reported to Staff, the
applicant and the Qualified Material Testing Lab within 24 hours.
4.7-4 Minimum and Maximum Lift Thicknesses
Minimum and maximum thicknesses for asphalt lifts are indicated in Table 4.7-5.
TABLE 4.7-5:MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIFT THICKNESSES
MINIMUM LIFT MAXIMUM LIFT
Base 3” 5”
Intermediate 2¼” 4½”
Surface 1¼” 1¾”
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 115
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
4.7-5 Placement Procedures
(A) General
(1) All Contractors must be prequalified by KYTC or demonstrate experience and success on
similar projects in order to perform this work.
(2) Immediately before placing Asphalt materials, remove loose and deleterious materials using
a power broom or street sweeping equipment.
(B) Subgrade
(1) Asphalt placement is prohibited on subgrade with free water on the surface.
(2) Pavement Subgrade cross slopes shall vary from 3.7 percent to 5 percent depending on the
applicable Street cross section.
(C) Overlay
(1) A tack coat shall be evenly applied across the width of the lane at a rate of 0.05 gallons per
square yard. Adjust spray bars as necessary to avoid streaks.
(2) A tack coat is not required when placing Asphalt base mixtures on granular base layers.
(3) When Asphalt surface abuts a barrier Curb or similar vertical surface, the abutting surface
shall be tack coated prior to construction of the Asphalt course.
(D) Equipment
(1) The Contractor shall furnish dump trucks with clean, smooth metal beds to transport
materials and shall use approved and environmentally friendly release agents.
(2) Use of diesel fuel is strictly prohibited in truck beds.
(3) Sufficient trucks should be scheduled to allow for a continuous paving operation without
significant delays between trucks.
(4) The Contractor shall furnish a self-propelled paver with the capacity of spreading and
finishing all courses to the indicated widths, depths, line, grade and cross section, with a
smooth finish, uniform in density and texture.
(5) Rollers must also be self-propelled and capable of reversing smoothly. Steel wheel rollers
must be equipped with adjustable scrapers, spray bars, and/or wetting pads to keep wheels
clean at all times.
(6) Hand tampers may also be used in tight areas inaccessible by rollers.
(E) Temperatures for Asphalt, Ambient Air and Subgrade
(1) Do not place Asphalt mixtures when the ambient air temperature and existing surface
temperatures on the project are less than those specified below or when weather conditions
otherwise prevent the proper handling or finishing of the Asphalt mixtures.
a) Minimum ambient air and existing surface temperature shall be 35o F (and rising) prior
to placement of Asphalt Base Mixture.
b) Minimum ambient air and surface temperature shall be 40o F (and rising) prior to
placement of Asphalt Surface Mixture:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 116
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(2) The maximum temperature of the mixture shall not exceed 330o F at any time, and the
minimum temperature (measured in the truck at the project site) shall not fall below 200o F
for all mixtures.
(3) Compaction efforts shall be completed before the Roadway mix temperature falls below 150o
F.
(F) Application of Asphalt Mixes
(1) All courses shall be placed and spread as continuously as possible, keeping the number of
joints to a minimum.
(2) The longitudinal joint in the final surface course shall be placed along the dividing line
between the lanes.
(3) Best paving practices shall be utilized to ensure the proper amount of material at the joint and
to make the same number of passes over the joint as the middle of the mat.
(4) The finished Joint shall be smooth and tight and free from voids or coarse material.
(G) Surface Course Application
(1) The surface course application shall be provided no later than 12 months from the date the
base Asphalt was placed.
(2) Prior to the surface course application, Staff shall inspect the Asphalt base course. Damage
to the Asphalt base course that will affect the structural integrity or future maintainability of
the pavement section shall be repaired prior to placement of the surface course.
(3) Damage to Curb and gutter sections identified by Staff that will affect the structural integrity
and/or future maintainability of the Curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced prior to
the placement of surface Asphalt course.
(4) The surface course shall be compacted to between ?” and ½” above adjacent Concrete Curb
apron.
(5) The pavement surface cross slope shall be three percent.
(6) The joint between Curb and gutter and Asphalt pavements shall be sealed in accord with
Subsection 4.7-7: Joint Sealing.
Density 4.7-6 Testing Requirements
(A) Sampling
All base and surface Asphalt and aggregate materials shall be sampled, tested, and reported by a
Qualified Material Testing Lab in accordance with the KYTC Roadway Manual Division 400.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 117
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(B) Testing Frequency and Results
(1) Density tests shall be performed at least every 150 feet along each lane of asphalt placed.
(2) At the discretion of Staff, a quality assurance check (including cores) of the sampling and
testing may be required if deficiencies are suspected.
(3) Asphalt base and surface courses shall be compacted to an average density of between 90 and
97 percent of solid volume.
(4) Density testing shall be per ASTM D2950 “Density of Bituminous Concrete In Place by
Nuclear Density Methods” or ASTM D7113 “Density of Bituminous Mixtures In Place by
Electromagnetic Surface Contact Methods”.
4.7-7 Joint Sealing
(A) Compound Material
The Joint Sealing Compound shall conform to the following standard designations:
(1) Hot-Poured Elastic Type, as specified by AASHTO, latest edition; or
(2) Silicone Rubber Sealant Type (Non-Sag, Self-Leveling, or Rapid Cure) conforming to the
KYTC Roadway Manual, latest edition; or
(3) An approved equal, as determined and approved by Staff.
(4) The use of AC-20 as joint sealant is prohibited.
(B) Air Temperature
The application of joint sealant is prohibited at air temperatures below 40o F.
(C) Application
(1) Joint Sealant shall be applied to all Joints abutting the Asphalt, which includes the Joint
between the base Asphalt and the Curb if the surface course is not going to be applied
immediately.
(2) Joint sealant shall be applied to the Curb line immediately upon placement of the surface
Asphalt.
4.7-8 Acceptance
(A) All Asphalt pavement materials shall be evaluated by the Staff, per the requirements set forth in
this specification and the KYTC Roadway Manual. Asphalt mixtures will be considered
acceptable if the test results determine the materials are within the acceptable limits, as shown in
Table 4.7-6 and Table 4.7-7. Any materials deemed to be outside of these ranges shall be re-tested
for compliance.
TABLE 4.7-6:ACCEPTABLE RANGES FOR ACAND DENSITY
ASPHALT CONTENT DENSITY
±0.6% 90% - 97%
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 118
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
TABLE 4.7-7:ACCEPTABLE GRADATION RANGES
SIEVE SIZE
ACCEPTANCE RANGES PERCENT PASSING
1.0BASE MIXTURE 0.75 INTERMEDIATE
MIXTURE 0.38 SURFACE MIXTURE
1½“ 94-100 -- --
1” 84-100 94-100 --
¾“ <90 84-100 --
½“ -- <90 94-100
?” -- -- 84-100
#4 -- -- <90
#8 14-50 18-54 32-73
#16 -- -- --
#200 1-10 1-10 1-10
(B) When test results are in the “Acceptable Ranges,” the material will be accepted. Staff shall require
the Applicant to “Remove and Replace” the materials when the test results indicate they are outside
the limits of the “Acceptable Ranges”.
(C) The surface of each course shall be inspected for uniformity and adequate thickness. Base courses
shall be placed within a ½ inch tolerance and surface courses within ¼ inch tolerance. All
irregularities exceeding the allowable tolerances must be repaired as directed by the Staff.
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
NOTE: THIS SECTION IS NOT REGULATORY BUT SETS OUT IMPORTANT PAVEMENT
FACTS AND SUPPORT FOR HOW THE REGULATIONS REGARDING STREET PAVEMENT
AND EARTHWORK WERE DERIVED AND INCORPORATED INTO Article 4: Public and Private
Infrastructure AND Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements.
4.8-1 Purpose
Pavement in Public Streets, including Subdivision Streets, is one of the largest physical assets by dollar
value owned by various Kenton County legislative bodies (city/county). The purpose of this section is
twofold. The first is to inform all in Kenton County who have responsibilities in the design, construction
and maintenance of Subdivision Streets of important facts about the nature of pavements and their
individual responsibilities in obtaining good long-term pavement performance in new Kenton County
Subdivisions.
The second is to set out some of the critical engineering analysis and reasoning used to establish the
pavement, pavement Subgrade, and pavement Drainage specifications for future Subdivision pavement
contained in Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure, Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and
Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction
Specifications, and Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements of
these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 119
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Existing Subdivision Pavement 4.8-2 Performance Analysis
During the process of reviewing this 2014 update of the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations there
was a substantial community discussion on Subdivision pavement design, construction and performance.
During the late stages of this community discussion, at the suggestion of the Kenton County Judge
Executive and several city Mayors, and authorization of the Planning Commission Chairman, a
committee of five local pavement professionals with extensive and long-term experience in the design,
construction, and maintenance of Subdivision pavements was formed. This committee was asked, as a
voluntary community service, to do the following: analyze existing Subdivision pavement performance,
evaluate that performance compared to reasonable expectations for pavement performance, and make
recommendations that would improve pavement customer value in future Subdivision pavements. All
earlier community discussion on pavement performance was to be considered as input into their process.
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report contains this committee’s final report to the Planning
Commission in this regard. The recommendations of this report were an important source of information
that was used in the formation of these Subdivision pavement regulations.
4.8-3 Important Pavement Facts
There is no perfect pavement, no pavement lasts indefinitely, and all pavements require maintenance,
repair and refurbishment on a timely basis in order to minimize long term pavement costs. All
professional pavement design procedures recognize that all pavements will eventually fail, regardless of
how well they are built, either by the impacts of weathering, the impacts of repetitive heavy vehicle axle
loads, or both. Professional engineering pavement design also recognizes pavement will have local
failures during its life because of the imperfect nature of the natural soil Subgrade, pavement materials,
and construction techniques. Pavements designed by pavement professionals are, therefore, designed
with assumptions and calculations of the need for maintenance, repair of isolated failures, and
refurbishment during the pavement life. All pavement literature recognizes that the three essential
components of good pavement performance are (A) proper pavement design for the in situ conditions,
(B) proper construction consistent with the design, and (C) proper and timely maintenance and repair.
Failure in the proper execution of any one of these three components will lead to very substantial
increases in long term pavement cost and/or inadequate pavement serviceability. These three
components are discussed further below.
(A) Pavement Design
The following is a discussion of certain important elements of the engineering approach taken to
establish the pavement design, materials and construction methods specified for Subdivision
Streets in Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7:
Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications, and Article 6:
Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements.
(1) Proper pavement engineering design requires economic analysis of pavement design
alternatives. For an in-depth discussion of the engineering economics of pavements, see
Chapter 3 of the AASHTO ’93 Pavement Design Manual. The economic engineering design
objective used herein is to minimize pavement 50 year net present value life cycle costs to
the pavement Customer while maintaining adequate pavement serviceability. The pavement
“Customer” is defined as the amalgamation of the Subdivision Lot/home purchaser,
occupant, tax payer and citizen. There is no attempt to differentiate any of these Customer
subgroups. Collectively, they are the pavement Customer.
The Customer pays all of the costs of pavement through Lot/home purchase price, rent, and
various forms of taxes.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 120
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Pavement cost over the pavement life cycle includes construction costs; maintenance, repair
and refurbishment costs; and costs related to the time value of money (thus net present
value). These various costs include any overhead and profit that is related to the goods and
services provided.
A 50 year life cycle was chosen for the analysis period because there is substantial local
experience that demonstrates Subdivision pavements, when properly designed, built,
maintained, and resurfaced, can last 50 years or more. A longer analysis period was not
chosen because transportation modes and pavement loading, maintenance and repair methods
and materials, and all sorts of other related factors, are simply not foreseeable beyond 50
years. Pavement designs herein are also designed with a 20 year design life or performance
period, defined as the time that an initial pavement will last before it needs rehabilitation.
Pavement designs presented herein are designed to last at least 50 years, as long as properly
constructed, maintained, and resurfaced over the 50 year period as shown in Subsection 4.8-
3(C): Pavement Maintenance herein. Figure A.1-AA: Detail #25 also shows a method of
extending the pavement life past 50 years using existing refurbishment and resurfacing
methods.
Any alternate pavement design submitted for a particular Subdivision by a pavement design
professional must also include a 20 year design life and a 50 year life cycle maintenance,
repair, and resurfacing analysis, including relevant traffic loading.
(2) The pavement Subgrade is the soil directly under the pavement. Pavements rely on the
Subgrade for structural support. Subgrades must, therefore, be constructed of soils with
adequate load bearing capacity, properly prepared.
Portland Cement Concrete (“Concrete”) is a rigid pavement and spreads traffic loads over a
larger Subgrade area as compared to Asphalt Cement Concrete (“Asphalt”) pavement which
is a flexible pavement. Because of this wheel load distribution difference in the nature of
these two pavement types, Asphalt pavements require a higher minimum Subgrade bearing
capacity than Concrete pavements.
Pavement specifications herein require Subgrade soils that, when properly prepared, will
produce a bearing capacity or California Bearing Ratio (“CBR”) of 2 or greater for Concrete
pavement and CBR of 3 or greater for Asphalt pavement.
A substantial majority (not all) of potential future Subdivision sites in Kenton County have
natural soils that, when properly prepared, will produce an adequate Subgrade bearing
capacity to support Concrete or Asphalt, but not necessarily both. For Subdivision locations
with in situ soils that will not produce these minimum bearing capacities for the pavement
type that the Developer selects, properly designed and built Subgrade improvements will be
required.
Quality control of as-built Subgrades is a very important component of assuring the expected
pavement design performance.
(3) The repetition of Equivalent 18,000 Pound Single Axle Loads (“ESALs”) going over the
pavement during its life is one mode of eventual pavement failure. Therefore, estimates of
ESALs are required to properly design pavements. Pavement designs herein include ESAL
loading estimates during land development construction, building construction, and traffic
activity after full building occupancy. The estimate methods and quantities are shown in
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 121
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Figure C.1-A: Exhibit A. Any alternate pavement designs must be based on these ESAL
estimates, or greater.
(4) Pavement surface and subsurface storm water conditions are another important consideration
in pavement design. The primary engineering design methods for minimizing the negative
effects of storm water on pavement and pavement Subgrades are (1) preventing water from
entering the pavement, (2) providing Drainage that quickly removes excess water that enters
the pavement, and (3) building the pavement strong enough to resist the combined effects of
wheel load and water. Because Asphalt is more porous and has higher reliance on Subgrade
strength as compared to Concrete pavement, accounting for the potential negative effects of
water entering Asphalt pavements and pavement Subgrade is more critical for Asphalt
pavements.
The design features specified in these regulations use all three methods listed above to
minimize the negative effects of storm water on Subdivision pavement.
The primary pavement requirements used in these regulations for effective storm water
surface and subsurface management are as follows:
a) Rural Development Streets
i) Three percent surface cross slope, as shown in Figure A.1-E: Detail #5 and
Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
ii) Subgrade cross slope of three percent for Concrete Streets and three percent +2
inches for Asphalt Streets, as shown in Figure A.1-C: Detail #3, Figure A.1-D:
Detail #4, Figure A.1-E: Detail #5, and Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
iii) Drainage ditches on both sides of the Street where the ditch depth is always
deeper than the Subgrade at the outside edge of pavement, as shown in Figure
A.1-E: Detail #5, and Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
b) Suburban and Urban Streets
Most Subdivision pavements likely to be built in Kenton County will be classified as
urban or suburban. These Streets are built with curb and gutter. The pavement with
curb and gutter serves as a surface storm water conduit which is designed to collect
surface storm water off the Street and off adjoining Subdivision lots and transport that
storm water to Street catch basins which connect to storm sewers. Street design
requirements herein are designed to get and keep storm water in the gutter flow line of
these Streets as much as practical.
i) All Streets
a) Curb and gutter and three percent surface cross grade to get and keep storm
water in the gutter line until it is collected at catch basins (see Figure A.1-C:
Detail #3 and Figure A.1-D: Detail #4.
b) Build Public Sidewalk so that the edge nearest the Street is built six inches
above the adjacent Curb on sloped Curbs and three inches above the Curb on
Barrier Curbs. This maintains positive street Drainage even after multiple
pavement overlays (see Figure A.1-C: Detail #3 and Figure A.1-D: Detail
#4).
c) Install continuous edge drain at the outside edge of the pavement on both
sides of the Street, as shown in Figure A.1-C: Detail #3, Figure A.1-D:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 122
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Detail #4, Figure A.1-X: Detail #22, and Figure A.1-Y: Detail #23. This
edge drain will help drain the Subgrade, help keep surface water from the
outside edge of the pavement out of the Subgrade, and will help drain Joints
in Concrete and the Asphalt/Concrete Curb and gutter interface.
d) Provide for Subgrade Drainage and edge drain Drainage at all paired catch
basins, as shown on the Required Street Cross Section Construction at Catch
Basin Crossings in Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
ii) Concrete Streets
a) All pavement Joints are properly sealed with joint sealing compound to
minimize water penetrating those Joints and getting into the Subgrade.
b) All pavements are built with a three percent Subgrade cross grade (see
Figure A.1-C: Detail #3 and Figure A.1-E: Detail #5) continuous from
centerline to edge of Curb, which will help any water that gets into the
Subgrade to the outside of the Curb and to the edge drain.
iii) Asphalt Streets
a) The surface course of Asphalt has been designed to minimize the water that
will penetrate the pavement and get into the Subgrade.
b) The finish course of Asphalt is built ¼ inch above the Curb apron to force
any surface water toward the gutter line rather than allow the water to lay out
in the pavement surface for extended periods of time.
c) The Curb apron is built with a six percent cross pitch to keep water in the
gutter line.
d) The Asphalt Joint at the Concrete Curb apron is sealed with Joint sealer to
keep water from penetrating through that Joint into the Subgrade.
e) The Subgrade is built with a three percent plus two inch cross slope and is
built continuously from the centerline to the outside of the Curb to help drain
the Subgrade and help minimize the potential for water penetrating into the
Subgrade from the outside edge of the pavement.
f) The first course of pavement base (Asphalt or KYTC crushed stone base) is
continuous from the centerline to the outside edge of the pavement, and the
Concrete Curb and gutter is built on top of the first course of base, which
will help keep water from penetrating the Subgrade at the outside edge of the
pavement and will help support the Curb and reduce potential for Curb
breakage.
In regards to “…building the pavement strong enough to resist the combined effects of wind
and water,” the Subgrade design parameters used in Table 4.4-1 account for substantial
Kenton County seasonal variability in Subgrade support consistent with substantial change in
water content of Subgrade soils season-to-season.
(5) There are many other design, material, and construction method details set out in Section 4.4:
Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete
(Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications, Article 6: Geotechnical
Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements, and Appendix A: Standard
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 123
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Construction Drawings that are important to good pavement performance. Because these
details are not discussed here does not diminish their importance.
(B) Pavement Construction Quality Control
Construction quality control, which means building the pavement with good construction practices
and in substantial conformance with these Subdivision regulations and the approved construction
design drawings, is the responsibility of the Subdivision Developer and its agents who are the
Engineers and construction Contractors hired by that Developer to design and build that
Subdivision’s improvements. The Planning Commission’s role in construction quality control is,
through its Staff or other quality control service provider, to confirm and document that the
Subdivision design drawings satisfy these regulations and that the in-place Subdivision
improvements are built in substantial accordance to these Subdivision regulations and the
Subdivision design drawings.
(C) Pavement Maintenance
The need for and benefit of timely and adequate maintenance by the Street pavement’s owners is
documented throughout the pavement literature. Failure to properly and timely maintain
pavements will lead to substantially increased Customer pavement costs and/or diminished
pavement serviceability.
(1) Recommended 50 Year Life Cycle Maintenance
The following is a schedule for maintenance, repair, and resurfacing that can be expected in
an effort to minimize Customer 50 year life cycle costs for Subdivision pavements.
a) Recommended Asphalt Pavement Owner Maintenance
Minor Maintenance:
• Joint and crack seal every three years
• Spot Curb repair
• Spot pavement repair
Major Maintenance:
• At approximately +17 years:
- Spot Curb repair, as necessary
- Spot base repair
- Mill Asphalt two inches deep at the Concrete Curb apron to zero inches at
six feet out from the Curb Apron
- Install new two inch Asphalt surface with a four percent Curb apron to
centerline cross slope.
- Seal the Asphalt/Curb Apron interface
• At approximately +34 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot base repair
- Pavement fabric over joint between Asphalt and Curb
- New two inch Asphalt surface overlay
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 124
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
b) Recommended Concrete Pavement Owner Maintenance
Minor Maintenance:
• Joint and crack seal every three years
• Inspect Driveway apron expansion material for signs of pavement lengthening;
take remedial action as necessary (See Subsection 4.8-3(C)(1)c): Management
of Concrete Pavement Lengthening, below.)
• Localized failure repairs
Major Maintenance:
• At approximately +17 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot slab repair
• At approximately +34 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot slab and Joint repair
- Inspect for erosion (tunneling) under pavement, mud jack as necessary
- Mill Concrete two inches deep at or near the Concrete gutter line to zero
inches deep six feet out from the gutter line.
- Install Asphalt skim coat and Stress Absorbing Asphalt Membrane
Interlayer (SAMI) over the width of the pavement.
- Install 1½-inch deep Asphalt surface overlay with a four percent gutter line
to centerline cross slope.
c) Management of Concrete Pavement Lengthening
Concrete pavements can expand in length later in the pavement’s life as described on
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report - Problem #12(b). While the
pavement design features incorporated into this regulation along with proper owner
pavement maintenance will minimize this lengthening, the potential for lengthening
and the related potential negative impacts cannot be eliminated.
The design feature incorporated into these regulations which will allow for the
identification and management of any potential negative impacts to improvements on
private property is the placement of a total of three inches of expansion joint material
within the Street Right-of-way at each Driveway apron, as shown in Figure A.1-T:
Detail #18, Figure A.1-U: Detail #19, and Figure A.1-V: Detail #20.
The pavement owners’ regular inspection (every three years) of the expansion material
to see if the three inches of expansion material has “closed up” to two inches or less is
required. If the expansion material has “closed up” to two inches or less, remedial
action consisting of saw cutting the Driveway apron next to the Curb to allow for
additional expansion is required.
The preceding is one set of proven long-term pavement management strategies that
have been used on Northern Kentucky Subdivision Streets. There are others that have
been effective. When these strategies are properly and timely executed on pavement
designs in these regulations (properly constructed), the result should be satisfactory
pavement performance for at least 50 years without pavement replacement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 125
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
As new, more cost effective maintenance and repair strategies are developed over time,
they should be adopted for use.
(2) Extending Pavement Life Beyond 50 Years
Figure A.1-AA: Detail #25 shows a methodology of extending pavement life that should
allow most Subdivision pavements, properly built and maintained under these regulations, to
have their life extended beyond 50 years without replacement. Obviously, many things can
and likely will change over the next 50 years that will substantially change the best course of
action for refurbishment or replacement of these Subdivision pavements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 126
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.1: Purpose
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.1: Purpose
5.1-1 Green infrastructure uses natural processes to ameliorate the negative effects of urban development,
including reducing heat island effects, air pollution, water pollution and excess storm water runoff.
Integrated stormwater management is a subset of green infrastructure. The use of integrated stormwater
management is encouraged because of its connection to effective development practices and
environmental quality. The influence of the natural flow regime (hydrology) of a given watershed on
overall stream integrity (chemical, physical, biological) is well established, and as such, maintaining the
natural flow regime is a priority for stormwater managers. The proper use of integrated stormwater
management practices can achieve this goal and dramatically improve stormwater runoff quality,
decrease runoff volume, reduce infrastructure costs, protect the integrity of downstream streams and
rivers, and create more interesting places to live. Stormwater management practices include a broader
understanding of watershed management and ecosystem function, coupled with overall site design and
layout, and implementation of an impervious area reduction strategy. The creation of impervious
surfaces on a site can dramatically impact a community’s watersheds, wastewater treatment systems, and
water supplies by altering the landscape’s inherent ability to slow, filter, and absorb stormwater runoff
(i.e. alters the natural flow regime). Development or redevelopment of a site can be accomplished while
reducing the overall negative impact to receiving streams, by applying carefully considered stormwater
management techniques which mimic natural hydrology. To further these more general purposes, this
article:
(A) Establishes site design components to promote more effective use of individual stormwater
management techniques to prevent negative impacts rather than mitigating them;
(B) Provides the ability to utilize simple, nonstructural methods for stormwater management that are
lower cost and lower maintenance than structural controls;
(C) Encourages the management of stormwater as close to the point of origin as possible and
minimizes collection and conveyance, establishing a strategy to determine what portions of
stormwater are to be filtered into the ground on site and what portions of stormwater are to flowthrough
the site for management elsewhere;
(D) Provides benefits to the environment as well as to the development community by improving water
quality and restoring aquatic habitats while controlling flooding. This approach can increase
rainfall infiltration and groundwater recharge with potentially large environmental benefits and
potentially lower net costs – both to the environment and to the Developer. The integrated
stormwater management techniques provide innovative options for Developers to rethink overall
site design and layout to utilize a site more efficiently while providing better stormwater
management opportunities than traditional gray infrastructure;
(E) Uses multiple impervious area reduction techniques within the context of an overall site design to
reduce the negative runoff impact created with the development or redevelopment of a site and
ideally reduce the amount of underground pipe infrastructure necessary on a site;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 127
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies
(F) Promotes the aesthetic value of integrated stormwater management. In addition to the benefits of
maintaining healthy waterways and the multiple environmental benefits supporting healthy
communities found in the use of integrated stormwater management, the use of these techniques
can provide aesthetic value to a community with the use of added vegetation to the landscape. By
integrating natural processes into the built environment, these techniques provide stormwater
management, Flood mitigation and control, and air quality management with more aesthetic appeal
than standard gray stormwater infrastructure.
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies
5.2-1 Overall site layout strategies are encouraged to be incorporated into an integrated stormwater
management plan. Site layout strategies are the first step in managing stormwater in a way that mimics
natural hydrology. Using land more efficiently for development, preserving critical ecological areas, and
reducing runoff through better site design are vital to maintaining a healthy watershed. Stormwater
management works most effectively in conjunction with an overall site design strategy which identifies
how the stormwater impacts created by the development will be addressed.
5.2-2 A site design strategy should include identification of which portions of expected stormwater will be
managed using either infiltration methods, retention methods, or flow-through methods. Shifting the
focus toward the utilization of rainwater as a resource that should be managed as close to where it falls as
possible and away from addressing rainwater solely as a waste that should be removed from a site will
increase the efficiency of stormwater management.
5.2-3 Effective stormwater management will utilize multiple methods aimed at managing runoff through both
infiltration into natural systems as well as use of management methods which remove water from the site
through piping infrastructure without adding significant impacts to local waterways and watersheds. The
elements work collectively to lessen the negative impacts to nearby waterways and watershed systems.
5.2-4 Efficiently designing a site should include conscious efforts to minimize the impervious areas created by
new streets, pedestrian pathways, parking Lots, and/or buildings.
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
5.3-1 The following elements are examples of integrated stormwater management which, when used in
coordination with effective site design strategies, can aid in lowering the negative impact to local
waterways and watersheds. Once a strategy has been established to minimize collection and conveyance,
these elements can be utilized, in varying combinations, to successfully implement stormwater to be
filtered into the ground on site and stormwater to flow-through the site for management elsewhere.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 128
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(A) Narrower Right-of-way Widths
Whether used in conjunction with narrower pavement widths or traditional width pavements,
narrowing the Right-of-way established within a site is a significant opportunity to reduce the
quantity and increase the quality of storm water runoff by allowing structures to be set closer to the
street. Because of the topography that is typical for this region, many developments involve land
that includes ridge tops, hillside slopes and headwater streams. As such, development plans often
include streets and structures constructed along ridge tops with back yards that extend down the
hillside slopes and into headwater streams. Placing structures closer to the ridge top lessens the
need for earthwork and tree removal along these hillside slopes which keeps more undisturbed land
on the slopes and near the headwater streams. In addition to the added benefit of helping to ensure
hillside stability, lessening hillside disturbance and tree removal will result in a lesser impact to the
natural flow regime, and therefore a lesser impact to water quantity and water quality in these
headwater streams as well as the corresponding receiving streams downstream of the site. See
Figure 5.3-A.
Figure 5.3-A: Illustration of Narrower Right-of-way Widths
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 129
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(B) Grassy Swales (Bioretention Swales) Without Curb and Gutter and Grassy Swales With
Curb and Gutter Containing Cut-outs and Flumes
Swales are long and narrow depressions in the landscape which incorporate vegetation to gradually
move stormwater through a site by use of gentle slopes to guide runoff through the system. Swales
are primarily used to slow the speed of stormwater runoff as it moves through a site though some
infiltration can occur when slopes (less than five percent) and soils are favorable. The vegetation
used within swales typically requires lower ongoing maintenance than that of traditional
landscaping. When used in combination with Curb and gutter containing cutouts and flumes, the
swales provide the same benefit as traditional swales without Curb and gutter by collecting
stormwater outside of traditional gray infrastructure associated with the site and decreasing the
impacts of development to the overall man-made stormwater management system. However this
system offers the added benefit of providing Curb and gutter along the edge of streets to help
buttress asphalt pavements, create a well-defined pavement edge and increase the overall pavement
edge lifespan. See Figure 5.3-B and Figure 5.3-C.
Figure 5.3-B: Illustration of a Grassy Swale without Curb and Gutter
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 130
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-C: Illustration of a Grassy Swale with Curb and Gutter
(C) Infiltration Gardens (Biofiltration Swales or Rain Gardens)
Infiltration gardens are shallow depressions in the landscape which provide larger, often unused or
left-over areas on a site to filter stormwater into the natural soils and groundwater system. Use of
infiltration gardens can significantly lessen the amount of stormwater collected into piping
infrastructure. The vegetation used within infiltration gardens typically requires lower ongoing
maintenance than that of traditional landscaping. See Figure 5.3-D.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 131
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-D: Illustration of an Infiltration Garden
(D) Pedestrian Walkways as a Design Element
Alternative pedestrian ways which are outside of the requirements set forth in Table 4.1-1 can be
created to constitute a pedestrian circulation system equal to the level of effectiveness that
traditional Sidewalk on one or both sides of the street would provide. Rather than including
Sidewalks only within the Right-of-way along the Street, integrating a well thought out pedestrian
circulation system throughout a site can reduce impervious surface while potentially lowering the
construction cost and raising the stormwater management benefits of the overall site. Incorporating
a strategic system of Pedestrian Walkways linking key destinations within a site (in conjunction
with aligning connections for travel outside the site) will increase usability of walkway networks.
Additionally, incorporating materials such as mulch, gravel, or other pervious material can further
reduce the hard surface runoff. When adding Sidewalks to one or both sides of every street, often
important pedestrian connections are not made, the Sidewalks themselves are under (if-at-all)
utilized, and excessive impervious surfaces are created.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 132
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-E: Illustration of Pedestrian Walkways as a Design Element
(E) Planter Boxes
Planters are long narrow, often rectangular landscaped areas with vertical walls and flat, unsloped
bottoms, and are able to store a greater volume of water than swales, because they are typically
deeper, and provide more capacity. Water flows into the planter, absorbs into the topsoil and
plants, fills to a predetermined overflow elevation, and discharges into the overflow system
provided. Two types of planters are used for stormwater management.
(1) Flow-through Planters
Flow-through planters have a sealed bottom and sides and absorb only as much water as the
soil and plants in the planter can accommodate. They allow water to slowly travel through
the soil profile prior to overflowing into a subsurface underdrain system. See Figure 5.3-F.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 133
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-F: Illustration of a Flow-Through Planter Box
(2) Infiltration Planters
The bottom of an infiltration planter is open to the native soil. Water in the planter is
absorbed by topsoil, and infiltrates into native soils below. See Figure 5.3-G.
Figure 5.3-G: Illustration of Infiltration Planter Box
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 134
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(F) Permeable Pavement
If underlying soils allow for the natural infiltration of rain water, constructing pavement using
permeable materials can allow for stormwater to filter through the pavement and into the natural
ground water system while still providing the structural integrity necessary for the site’s
automobile and pedestrian traffic. The use of Permeable Pavement can mitigate the overall impact
of the development to the piping infrastructure systems while maintaining full functionality of the
developed site. See Figure 5.3-H, Figure 5.3-I, and Figure 5.3-J.
Figure 5.3-H: Illustration of Permeable Pavers
Figure 5.3-I: Illustration of Permeable Pavement
Figure 5.3-J: Illustration of Permeable Pavement with an Underdrain
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 135
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(G) Preserving Existing Trees and Planting New Trees
Preserving trees and planting new trees on a site adds to the ability to effectively slow, absorb, and
filter rainwater. Trees naturally work to physically slow the flow of water through a site by
intercepting stormwater on their leaf surfaces as well as through their root structure. Not only do
trees collect water for their growth, their physical presence on the landscape intercepts the flow of
water downhill and slows its movement. See Figure 5.3-K.
Figure 5.3-K: Illustration of Preserving Existing Trees and Planting New Trees
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 136
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.4: Criteria for Integrated Stormwater Management
Criteria for I Section 5.4: ntegrated Stormwater Management
5.4-1 Staff will approve the use of Integrated Stormwater Management provided the following criteria have
been substantiated:
(A) The Integrated Stormwater Management is proposed to utilize the landscape’s ability to reduce,
slow, filter, and/or absorb stormwater runoff from Streets, parking lots, and buildings by
maintaining key elements of the natural flow regime and minimizing impacts to receiving streams.
(B) The Integrated Stormwater Management is consistent with Sanitation District No. 1’s Stormwater
Rules and Regulations.
(C) The Integrated Stormwater Management has been designed by a Professional Engineer.
(D) For Integrated Stormwater Management within the public Right-of-way, the element(s) shall be
approved by the authority designated by the applicable Legislative Body in writing.
Section 5.5: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management allowed
By-Right
5.5-1 The following two Integrated Stormwater Management elements are permitted to be used in two separate
and distinct methods. These elements are permitted to be used as elements of Integrated Stormwater
Management anywhere in Kenton County when the criteria outlined in Section 5.4-1 have been
substantiated. However, the “by-right” use of the following Integrated Stormwater Management
elements can be utilized without requiring that any special conditions be met, as long as the element is
being used in the specific applications outlined as follows:
(A) Narrower Pavement Widths
Narrowing pavement widths is a significant opportunity to reduce stormwater runoff by reducing
the total amount of impervious surface and therefore, reducing the amount of stormwater requiring
collection into pipe infrastructure for maintenance off-site. The use of narrower pavement widths
is allowed by-right when used in conjunction with a Rural Development type. Rural Development
types are single and two-family residential developments that contain lot widths equal to or greater
than 300 feet and contain no on street parking. See Subsection 4.1-10: Allowable Pavement
Design.
(B) Grassy Swales and Shoulders Without Curb and Gutter
Swales are long and narrow depressions in the landscape which incorporate vegetation to gradually
move stormwater through a site by use of gentle slopes to guide runoff through the system. Swales
are primarily used to slow the speed of stormwater runoff as it moves through a site though some
infiltration can occur when slopes (less than five percent) and soils are favorable. When used
without curb and gutter systems, swales can more easily collect stormwater uninhibited by the
physical barriers created by traditional Curbs. Additionally, without the traditional gutter system,
stormwater can more easily flow directly into swales (infiltration systems) rather than into manmade
stormwater management system. Grassy swales and shoulders without curb and gutter is
allowed by-right when used in certain situations such as: (1) in developments that prohibit on-street
parking and contain minimum Lot widths that equal or exceed 300 feet; or (2) along streets that
serve as an entrance to the development and contain no residences and no parking. See Subsection
4.1-13: Roadside Swales.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 137
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and
Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
6.1-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292 by determining that: (1) important in situ Subdivision soils and geologic features that will impact
the functional use of public and private improvements have been identified; and (2) that soils and
geologic aspects of the design and construction of public and private improvements within the Public
Street Right of way or Private Street easements meet the support requirements of their intended use.
(A) All earthwork and geotechnical exploration requirements within Article 6 shall apply to areas
within the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements, and areas structurally
supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements;
(B) All Geotechnical Engineering and Geotechnical Technician work and reporting required under this
Article shall be provided by the Applicant of the proposed Subdivision. The Geotechnical
Technician must be under the direction and control of the Geotechnical Engineer who has been
employed by the Applicant for the proposed Subdivision. The proposed Subdivision’s
Geotechnical Engineer shall have substantial professional engineering discretion to determine
when the Geotechnical Engineering intent of the requirements of this Article is being met.
(C) The Applicant shall submit all Geotechnical Engineering and Geotechnical Technician reports and
testing results to staff at the appropriate submittal time, as noted in this Article.
6.1-2 Geotechnical Explorations Outside of the Public Right-of-Way, Private Street Easements, and
Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements
(A) Prior to the approval of the preliminary plat, a geotechnical engineer shall complete a preliminary
report that addresses the soil and bedrock types and any existing slope stability issues that are
expected in the proposed Subdivision.
(1) The Geotechnical Engineer’s preliminary report will render a preliminary engineering
opinion about the suitability of those soil and bedrock types and existing slopes to provide
the necessary support for the intended private property use of the Subdivision.
(2) The opinion of expected soil and bedrock types and opinion of soil support suitability can be
based on the Geotechnical Engineer’s local soil and bedrock knowledge, USGS maps, and a
visual field reconnaissance.
(B) The requirement for preliminary and final geotechnical explorations outside of the Public Right-ofway
may be further regulated by the applicable legislative body’s zoning ordinance.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 138
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
Geotechnical Explorations Within the Public Street Right-of-Way, 6.1-3 Private Street Easements, and
Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements
(A) Preliminary Geotechnical Exploration
(1) Prior to the approval of the preliminary plat a geotechnical engineer shall complete a
preliminary geotechnical exploration report. The report will address the soil and bedrock
types that are expected on the project site, and present an engineering opinion about the
suitability of the soil and bedrock types—when properly prepared and constructed—to
provide adequate proposed Public Street Right-of-way structural support, including the
minimum required CBR (subgrade support) values for asphalt and/or concrete pavements
described herein.
(2) The opinion of expected soil and bedrock types and opinion of Subgrade support suitability
can be based on the Geotechnical Engineer’s local soil and bedrock knowledge, USGS maps,
and a visual field reconnaissance.
(3) Kenton County soil types that may require replacement or other form of remediation during
Subgrade construction in order to provide the minimum required CBR values for Concrete
and Asphalt pavement designs shown in Table 4.4-1 are non-plastic silts (soils that classify
ML according to the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS)) and highly plastic silts and
clays (MH and CH soils) with standard Proctor maximum dry densities less than 100 pounds
per cubic foot and plasticity indices greater than 30 percent.
(B) Final Geotechnical Exploration
Prior to approval of the Improvement Plans or Grading Plans a Geotechnical Engineer shall
complete a final geotechnical exploration report that identifies the soil and bedrock types present
on the project site covered by the Improvement Plans or Grading Plans and presents a written
engineering opinion about the suitability of the soils and bedrock to provide stable Right of way
earthwork construction, and to provide the minimum CBR values for Asphalt and Concrete
pavement.
(1) This written report shall be submitted to staff and be based on the results of soil borings, test
pits, field and laboratory soil testing, etc. that are sufficient for the Geotechnical Engineer to
render his/her engineering opinion.
(2) If the soils are not suitable to provide the minimum CBR values, the Geotechnical Engineer
shall include recommendations in the written report for subgrade improvement or alternate
pavement designs.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 139
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
Earthwork Specifications, Section 6.2: Evaluation, Material Testing
and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas
Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way
and Private Street Easements
6.2-1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish the appropriate earthwork specifications and material testing
requirements so that the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements have adequate
earthwork structural support and the required pavement subgrade support.
6.2-2 Earthwork Excavations
The following shall apply to earthwork excavations other than trenches or temporary excavations:
(A) All topsoil shall be stripped from proposed cut, fill and pavement areas.
(B) Excavations shall be made to approximate grade or Subgrade elevations consistent with approved
plans.
(C) Final cut slopes shall not be steeper than a slope of 3.0 horizontal to 1.0 vertical unless otherwise
designed by a Geotechnical Engineer, but in no case shall be steeper than 2.0 horizontal to 1.0
vertical.
(D) Any spongy, unstable, or organic material that is exposed at the finished Subgrade level must be
removed to expose stiff, non-yielding, non-organic soils and the excavated material replaced with
soils capable of producing the required Subgrade CBR for the pavement design being used for the
project (see Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses of these regulations).
(E) When excavating at the cut/fill transition during earthwork, remove spongy or unstable material,
organic matter, or other unsuitable materials that are exposed. The Contractor shall remove same
to expose stiff, non-yielding, non-organic soils and shall replace with approved materials, placed
and compacted in accordance with these regulations and the recommendations of the geotechnical
engineer.
(F) Excavations can be backfilled with the same soils that were removed, provided they meet the
requirements of Subsection 6.2-3: Controlled Fill, Subsection 6.2-4: Trench Backfill, Subsection
6.2-5: Shallow Trench Backfill, and Subsection 6.2-6: Deep Trench Backfill.
6.2-3 Controlled Fill Other than Trench Backfill
(A) Construction of controlled fills shall be observed and tested by a Geotechnical Technician. Density
testing and reporting is required at a minimum frequency of one density test per 500 cubic yards.
(B) Organic or vegetative soils shall not be used in the construction of the controlled fill.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 140
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(C) Controlled fills shall be constructed of natural soils or bedrock to approximate Subgrade elevation
in level lift thicknesses that are approved by the Geotechnical Engineer. All shale used in
controlled fills shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned the same as
a soil. Limestone shall be laid flat and shall be broken up and dispersed in the fill so that it does
not nest or impede compaction. The incorporation of limestone floaters in the fill shall be in
accordance with the recommendations of the Geotechnical Engineer.
(D) Except for the top one foot of earthwork finished grades, which is the pavement subgrade,
controlled fills shall be constructed with soils that are within two percent below to three percent
above their optimum moisture content and compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition and to dry
densities at least 95 percent of the maximum dry density, as determined by the standard Proctor
moisture-density test (ASTM D698, latest edition), or 87 percent of maximum dry density as
determined by the modified Proctor moisture-density test (ASTM D1557, latest edition).
(E) Clean granular soils that do not exhibit a well-defined moisture-density curve shall be compacted
to a firm, non-yielding condition and to at least 75 percent relative density as determined by the
testing methods contained in ASTM D4253 and D4254, latest edition.
(F) Controlled fill slopes shall not be steeper than 3.0 horizontal to 1.0 vertical unless otherwise
designed by a Geotechnical Engineer. See Figure 6.2-A. In no case shall unreinforced fill slopes
be steeper than 2.5 horizontal to 1.0 vertical.
Figure 6.2-A: Illustration of the maximum slope for controlled fills
(G) Lime stabilization in controlled fills is prohibited unless designed and approved by a Geotechnical
Engineer.
(1) Prior to using lime stabilization, staff shall approve the recommended lime stabilization
specifications from a Geotechnical Engineer.
(2) The Geotechnical Engineer shall be required to monitor the lime stabilization process in the
field to determine that it is consistent with their recommended specifications.
(3) A letter from the Geotechnical Engineer shall be submitted to staff confirming that the lime
stabilization process used in the field was consistent with their written recommendations.
(H) Heavy equipment used for compaction shall be capable of producing the required controlled fill
densities without lamination.
(1) Cohesive soils shall be compacted with kneading type compaction equipment.
(2) Cohesionless soils shall be compacted with smooth face vibratory equipment.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 141
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
6.2-4 Trench Backfill
The following general information shall apply to all trench backfill:
(A) Trench backfill is defined as the backfill material used to refill the trench excavation above the
initial utility conduit bedding and cover that is a part of underground utility installation.
(B) Natural non-organic soils, bedrock, approved aggregates, and Controlled Low Strength Material
shall be used to backfill utility trenches as defined herein.
(C) Backfill shall not be flushed with water to obtain compaction.
(D) A Geotechnical Technician shall observe, test and report on the trench backfill compaction at least
once per day when said trench backfill operations are occurring.
6.2-5 Shallow Trench Backfill
The following shall apply to shallow trench backfill:
(A) Shallow trenches are defined as the utility trenches where the backfill material (the material above
the granular utility conduit bedding and cover material) is less than three feet deep to finish
earthwork grade.
(B) Shallow trench backfill under the pavement and within a 1 horizontal to 1 vertical projection
downward from the bottom edge of curb shall be dense graded aggregate (DGA), No. 57 crushed
limestone (only when connected to a Drainage structure) or controlled low strength material
(CLSM) as set out in Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2. Aggregates shall be
compacted as shown in the above noted details.
(C) Shallow trench backfill within the Right of Way but outside of the pavement and beyond a 1.0
horizontal to 1.0 vertical projection downward from the bottom edge of curb shall be natural, nonorganic
soil or bedrock (no pieces of limestone thicker than six inches or more than 12 inches
long/wide or specified aggregates as set in Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
(1) All shale shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned as a soil.
(2) All limestone shall be laid flat, broken up, and dispersed so it does not nest or impede
compaction.
(3) All backfill shall be moisture-conditioned to within two percent below to three percent above
the optimum moisture content for compaction, shall be placed in layers of 8 to 10 inches in
thickness, and each lift shall be thoroughly compacted to densities not less than 90 percent of
the standard Proctor maximum dry density, or 82 percent of the modified Proctor maximum
dry density for that soil.
(4) Backfill method shall be either a sheepsfoot roller attachment on a track mounted excavator
or a self-propelled kneading-type compactor operating longitudinally in the trench
excavation.
6.2-6 Deep Trench Backfill
The following shall apply to deep trench backfill:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 142
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(A) Deep trench backfill is defined as any trench with backfill deeper than shallow trench backfill.
(B) Deep trench backfill shall consist of natural non-organic soil or bedrock (no pieces of limestone
thicker than six inches or more than 12 inches long/wide) or specified aggregates as set out in
Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
(1) All shale shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned as a soil.
(2) All limestone shall be laid flat, broken up and dispersed so that it does not nest or impede
compaction.
(3) All backfill shall be moisture-conditioned to within two percent below to three percent above
the optimum moisture content for compaction.
(4) Backfill lifts shall be 10 inches thick or less (unless otherwise specified by the Geotechnical
Engineer), and compacted to not less than 95 percent of the standard Proctor maximum dry
density for that soil.
(5) Backfill method shall be either a sheepsfoot roller attachment on a track mounted excavator
or a self-propelled kneading-type compactor operating longitudinally in the trench
excavation.
(C) Where depths of trenches are more than four feet and worker safety is at risk, the technician shall
observe the compaction process in layers with an appropriate type of compaction equipment and
document observations until worker safety is assured when compaction testing, as required, is
resumed.
6.2-7 Street Pavement Subgrade
(A) Subgrade Preparation During Excavation
Subgrade is defined as the top one foot of the soils under the pavement. The pavement Subgrade
must provide adequate support for the pavement structure as defined in these regulations.
(1) During earthwork and initial pavement subgrade preparation, the Geotechnical Engineer or
Geotechnical Technician shall evaluate in situ pavement subgrade materials on the site and
develop an opinion about their suitability to provide the minimum CBR values when
compacted to the required densities at the specified moisture contents.
(2) Any soils identified as unsuitable to prove the minimum CBR values will be removed from
the subgrade and replaced with suitable soils, or otherwise improved as recommended by the
Geotechnical Engineer.
(B) Final Subgrade Preparations and Testing
(1) At the time of final Subgrade preparation, density testing and proofrolling before paving, the
Subgrade shall be within two percent of its optimum moisture content and compacted to a
firm, non-yielding condition and to dry densities at least 98 percent of the maximum dry
density, determined by the standard Proctor moisture-density test (ASTM D698, latest
edition) or 89 percent of the maximum dry density as determined by the modified Proctor
moisture-density test (ASTM D1557, latest edition). Cohesive Subgrade material shall be
properly knit together and free of loose, dry, crumbly, baked or crusted soil material.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 143
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(2) The Subgrade shall consist of cohesive soils, clean #57 crushed limestone, crushed stone
base, or Controlled Low Strength Material (CLSM). Any aggregate material used to replace
part of the cohesive Subgrade soil must be drained, per Figure A.1-W: Detail #21 so that no
standing water can collect and be held in the aggregate Subgrade.
(3) Clean granular soils that do not exhibit a well-defined moisture-density curve shall be
compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition and to at least 80 percent relative density as
determined by the testing methods contained in ASTM D4253 and D4254, latest edition.
(4) The Subgrade shall be shaped to plan elevation and cross-section and checked by the Staff
inspector for conformity with the cross section shown on the approved Improvement
Drawings immediately prior to placing the pavement. Pavement shall not be placed on any
part of the Subgrade which does not conform to the cross section shown on the approved
Improvement Drawings.
(C) Final Subgrade Proofrolling
(1) Proofrolling is the final test to be performed immediately prior to beginning the paving
operations.
(2) Prior to the placement of pavement materials and after confirming proper density and
moisture content of the Subgrade soils, all Street Subgrades shall be proofrolled to test the
stability and uniformity of Subgrade materials.
(3) Proofrolling shall be performed with a dual axle dump truck fully loaded with clayey soils or
aggregate.
(4) Proofrolling shall be performed at walking speed with at least two passes made in each drive
lane direction with the outside wheel generally traveling along the inside line of the future
Curb during one pass, and the wheel-paths offset one-half of the truck width during the
second pass to maximize subgrade coverage. Extra proofroll passes shall be made at the
discretion of the Staff inspector.
a) Where proofrolling indicates areas of soft or unsuitable Subgrade soils or areas of nonuniform
Subgrade stability, the area shall be delineated and repaired.
b) Areas of soft or unsuitable Subgrade soils or areas of non-uniform Subgrade stability
shall be identified by observing Pumping and/or Rutting (See Definitions Subsection
2.3-95: Pumping (or deflection) and Subsection 2.3-102: Rutting).
c) Rutting in excess of one inch in depth shall be deemed a Subgrade failure requiring
Subgrade repair.
d) Pumping or deflection of less than one inch is acceptable so long as the Subgrade soil
rebounds back to its original position after the wheel load passes. Pumping or
deflection greater than one inch or areas of permanent deflections shall be deemed a
Subgrade failure requiring Subgrade repair.
e) For larger areas of subgrade proofroll failure, the alternative pavement design
procedures in Subsection 4.4-2(B) can be implemented by the Applicant.
(5) Subgrade repairs shall be performed by scarifying, aerating and recompacting the Subgrade
soils. As an alternative, the failed Subgrade soils can be removed and replaced with properly
compacted soils capable of producing the required CBR value.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 144
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(6) In all cases, repaired areas shall be retested for compaction and proofrolled again before
proceeding with the placement of pavement materials. Rutting can typically be repaired by
scarifying, aerating, and recompacting, while areas of pumping will more likely require a
more significant repair with depth often including the removal and replacement of unsuitable
Subgrade materials.
(D) Final Subgrade Inspection Testing and Reporting Requirements
(1) Both the Staff inspector and the Geotechnical Technician have final Subgrade review,
testing, and reporting responsibilities.
(2) The Geotechnical Engineer shall provide soil testing to develop an opinion of adequate
bearing characteristics of the final Subgrade soils. Those tests will include, but are not
limited to, moisture content testing, density testing, and verification of soil types being
adequate to produce the required CBR values for the pavement. Moisture content testing,
density testing, and verification of soil types being adequate to produce the required CBR
values for the pavement shall be performed by the Geotechnical Engineer at intervals no less
than one test per 100 lineal feet of Street for Streets of 500 lineal feet or less, or one test per
200 lineal feet for Streets over 500 lineal feet.
(3) The Geotechnical Technician and the Staff Inspector shall review the proofrolling described
in Subsection 6.2-7(C): Final Subgrade Proofrolling and determine whether the Subgrade
passes the proofroll.
(4) Paving operations shall only be permitted to begin after passing inspection results are
achieved from Subsection 6.2-7: Street Pavement Subgrade, Subsection 6.2-7(C): Final
Subgrade Proofrolling, and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2). Inspection reports referenced in Clause 6.2-
7(D)(1) and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2) shall be placed in the Staff project file and Staff shall make
their inspection records available to the Developer.
(5) Street paving shall occur within 30 hours after passing inspection results are achieved from
Clause 6.2-7(D)(1) and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2). A ¼ inch rain event or sub-freezing temperature
occurrence between a passing proofroll and Street paving shall void the proofroll and
geotechnical testing and shall require re-evaluation.
(6) For concrete pavements, small pours of up to one hundred square yards to complete
intersections, cul-de-sacs, etc. do not require subgrade re-proofrolling after initially passing a
proofroll as part of a large subgrade preparations and testing. Moisture conditioning and rerolling
may be required.
Controlled 6.2-8 Low Strength Material
(A) CLSM may be used in place of compacted clayey soils to uniformly backfill utility trenches,
manholes, etc.
(B) CLSM shall not be used in place of clean, free-draining #57 crushed limestone specified for and
intended as Drainage backfill around catch basins and manholes or in trench drains, such as
between catch basin pairs.
(C) CLSM shall be transported by mixing truck to ensure proper suspension when placed. Constant
agitation is required.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 145
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(D) Flotation of pipes should be avoided by backfilling in 8 to 12 inch lifts until fluid head subsides.
(E) Adequate separation from aluminum pipe, such as a bituminous coating, is required.
(F) CLSM shall extend from the top of compacted bedding or other backfill to bottom of pavement
structure.
(1) CLSM placement shall begin no greater than six inches above the top of the pipe.
(G) CLSM shall have a minimum excavatable strength of 20 pounds per square inch at three days and
30 pounds per square inch at 28 days. CLSM shall have a maximum excavatable strength of 100
pounds per square inch at 28 days for potential future excavatability.
Construction E 6.2-9 quipment on Paved Surfaces
Only rubber tired or rubber tracked equipment shall be used on paved surfaces.
6.2-10 Work Adjacent to Plastic Concrete
Grading operations adjacent to Concrete Curb are prohibited for a minimum of 24 hours after Concrete
placement has been completed.
6.2-11 Final Geotechnical Reporting
After the completion of all earthwork covered under this Article, for each Subdivision section that is
constructed and is to be recorded, the Geotechnical Engineer shall complete a final written report for that
Subdivision section. The report will include the following:
(1) All relevant construction inspection results; and
(2) A statement from the project Geotechnical Engineer that, to the best of his/her knowledge
and belief, all earthwork operations within the Public Street Right-of-way, Private Street
easements and areas structurally supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street
easements were performed in general conformance with the requirements of this Article and
the recommendations for the areas within the Public Street Right-of-way, Private Street
easements and areas structurally supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street
easements contained in the associated geotechnical exploration report.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 146
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.1: Purpose of the Traffic Impact Study
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Purpose o Section 7.1: f the Traffic Impact Study
7.1-1 The purpose of a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) is to protect the function of the Street system while
providing appropriate access to a proposed development.
7.1-2 The objectives of a TIS are to:
(A) Determine the appropriate location, spacing, and design of Access Points necessary to serve the
proposed development and minimize impact to the public transportation system.
(B) Determine the extent of Improvements to the adjacent and nearby Street system necessary to
maintain a satisfactory level of service and safety.
Section 7.2: Need for a Traffic Impact Study
A TIS shall be required when the full build out potential of the proposed development requesting access meets any
or all of the criteria identified in Subsections 7.2-1 through 7.2-4. The full build out potential shall be defined as
the proposed development and future development for which connections are accommodated in the development
plan as required in Subsection 4.1-18: Geometric Design of Streets, of these Subdivision regulations. Future
development shall be assumed to be that which is identified and recommended by the Comprehensive Plan.
7.2-1 The proposed development is expected to generate greater than 100 trips per hour during its peak hour of
operation based on trip generation estimates according to the most recent edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual methodologies.
7.2-2 The proposed access location does not meet applicable access control regulations as set forth in Article 8:
Access Control Regulations.
7.2-3 The access plan proposes a change in the Traffic Control on an existing Public Street including:
(A) Installation, removal, or relocation of a stop or yield sign;
(B) Installation, removal, or relocation of a traffic signal; or
(C) Changes in the timing and/or phasing of an existing traffic signal or signal system.
7.2-4 The proposed development does not meet the conditions of Subsections 7.2-1 through 7.2-3 above, but is
deemed necessary by Staff for conditions including but not limited to the presence of congested locations
identified in previous studies or plans, the presence of high crash locations identified by the Kentucky
Transportation Cabinet (KYTC), OKI, or the applicable Legislative Body, or proximity to major planned
Street Improvements in the area.
7.2-5 In the case where a TIS has already been completed as part of the approval process, an addendum to the
original report shall be required under the following circumstances:
(A) The original report was completed more than two years prior to the initial construction phase of the
development.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 147
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.3: Study Area
(B) A change in the application, or proposed land use has caused the generated vehicle trips per hour to
increase or modify the proposed Street or access configuration.
(C) There have been major Street Improvements or significant changes in development in the area
since the original approval or major changes in traffic flow as determined by Staff. Major Street
Improvements involve any Improvements that have an effect on the Street capacity or have caused
any changes in traffic flow patterns. This may include construction or installation of a new Traffic
Control device, change in cross-section of the Street or significant changes in the Street network.
Section 7.3: Study Area
The following subsections identify the minimum study area to be addressed by a TIS. Staff may adjust the
minimum study area as appropriate to the development size, specific site conditions, and/or local and regional
issues and policies. The Applicant may extend the minimum study area described below to demonstrate potential
benefits of the proposed access plan to the community.
7.3-1 When a development meets the criteria established in Clause 7.2-1 due to traffic volumes, the study area
for the TIS shall include all proposed Access Points to the development and shall include the first
signalized Access Points in all directions, on the adjacent Street network, within a two-mile radius of the
proposed site. The closest Unsignalized Access Points to the proposed Access Points in all directions
shall also be included.
7.3-2 When a development meets the criteria established in Clause 7.2-2 due to access control deviations, the
study area for the TIS shall include all proposed Access Points to the development, and shall include all
Access Points on both sides of the Street within the distance specified by the applicable regulation, from
the proposed Access Point, which does not meet the spacing standard.
7.3-3 When a development meets the criteria established in Subsection 7.2-3 due to modifications to Traffic
Controls, the study area for the TIS shall include:
(A) All Access Points to the proposed development;
(B) All Unsignalized Access Points adjacent to the proposed Access Points; and
(C) All Access Points, with Traffic Controls, on the adjacent Street network in all directions, within a
two-mile radius of the proposed site.
7.3-4 When Staff determines that the signal modification will affect the operation of a coordinated signal
system, the study area shall include all affected signals within the system. A coordinated signal system
may be considered to be affected when:
(A) The proposed signal would require a different cycle length than currently in use to attain an
acceptable Level of Service (LOS) as defined in Section 7.5: Mitigation.
(B) The proposed signal would require adjustment of existing intersection offsets to attain acceptable
corridor performance as defined in Section 7.5: Mitigation.
7.3-5 When a TIS is required by Staff as outlined in Clause 7.2-4, the study area shall be established to address
the specific issues for which the study was required.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 148
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
7.4-1 Analysis Scenarios
(A) The TIS shall examine the before and after conditions within the study area to a degree sufficient to
document the operational and safety impacts of the proposed development and access plan. The
before and after conditions shall be termed the “No Build” and “Build” conditions.
(B) The “No Build” condition shall include:
(1) Existing traffic volumes forecasted to the appropriate analysis year;
(2) Existing Street geometry,
(3) All applicable Traffic Control devices;
(4) Any traffic generated by proposed adjacent developments;
(5) Any funded Improvements within the study area; and
(6) Any Transportation System Management (TSM) Improvements, such as signal timing and/or
phasing optimization and reconfiguration of existing lane uses that may improve the
operation of the transportation system.
(C) The “Build” condition shall include:
(1) “No Build” traffic volumes;
(2) Site generated traffic; and
(3) Any Street Improvements proposed with the development.
(D) “No Build” and “Build” analysis shall be conducted for the anticipated year of opening and a
design year assuming a 10-year horizon. Opening year “Build” analysis should only include that
portion of development which is anticipated to be completed at opening. Design year analysis
shall include the full build-out potential of the development. In the event that the full build-out of
the development is anticipated to extend beyond the 10-year horizon, the design year shall be the
anticipated year of full build-out.
(E) All scenarios evaluated shall include analysis of the weekday AM and PM peak hours. The
Applicant should work with Staff to determine whether the peak hour of the development or the
peak hour of the adjacent Street traffic is to be analyzed to evaluate the worst-case scenario. When
a proposed development is anticipated to generate a high volume of traffic during non-traditional
peaks, such as a noon peak, late night or weekend peak period, these periods should also be
examined. The need to study additional periods of operation shall be at the discretion of Staff.
7.4-2 Data Collection
The data collection efforts for the study shall be consistent with the level of analysis required. At a
minimum this shall include two-hour turning movement counts conducted in 15-minute intervals at all
study intersections for all peak periods examined. When traffic patterns are affected by the presence of
non-traditional peaks such as school trips, the peak hour turning movement count shall be expanded to
include both peak periods. The peak hours should be determined by a 24-hour count of the adjacent
Street traffic on a typical weekday (i.e., Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday). Previously collected data
and traffic volumes may be used in the analysis at the discretion of Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 149
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
7.4-3 Future Traffic Volumes
Future traffic volumes used to evaluate the opening year (if different from existing year) and design year
conditions shall be determined by applying an appropriate growth rate to reflect anticipated changes in
demand on the Street network. This growth rate shall be determined from comparison of historical traffic
volumes in the study area. Other methods of forecasting traffic volumes, such as socio-economic
analysis and the use of travel demand models may also be used to determine future traffic growth rates at
the discretion of Staff.
7.4-4 Trip Generation and Distribution
(A) Trips generated by the proposed development shall be calculated using the most current edition of
the ITE Trip Generation Manual methodologies.
(B) Trips generated by the development should be distributed onto the Public Street network consistent
with existing traffic patterns in the area, identified by origin destination studies of adjacent
developments or traffic counts of adjacent Streets. This methodology may be replaced with more
refined trip distribution approaches derived from market research studies, travel demand models, or
other methodologies at the discretion of Staff.
7.4-5 Operational Analysis
Operational analysis shall be conducted for all intersections within the study area for all analysis
scenarios identified in Subsection 7.4-1: Analysis Scenarios. At a minimum, operational analysis shall
include, but is not limited to:
(A) Intersection Level of Service LOS analysis for all intersections in the study area. LOS analysis
should be consistent with Highway Capacity Manual (HCM)/Highway Capacity Software (HCS)
methodologies for unsignalized and signalized intersections. Roundabout analysis shall utilize
RODEL/ARCADY analytical procedures. Analysis results should be summarized with LOS and
delay by lane group and intersection totals. For roundabout analysis, LOS shall be determined
using both signalized and unsignalized HCM thresholds.
(B) Analysis shall be evaluated using the following parameters unless justified by additional study at
the discretion of Staff.
(1) Peak Hour Factor (PHF) = 0.90
(2) Lost Time = 2.0 sec
(3) No right turns on red (RTOR)
(4) HCS arrival type = 3
(5) Yellow and red clearance intervals shall be calculated based on ITE recommended
procedures.
(6) Pedestrian phases and minimum clearance times shall be accommodated for all potential
pedestrian crossings.
(7) Where applicable the minimum green time per phase shall be equal to or greater than the
minimum pedestrian clearance time.
(C) Queuing analysis shall be conducted for all controlled movements in the study area. Queuing
analysis should report 95th percentile queues for all scenarios and periods examined, and identify
any conflicts between adjacent queues and/or queues and permitted turning movements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 150
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.5: Mitigation
(D) Turn lane analysis shall be conducted for all Unsignalized Access Points to the proposed
development. This analysis shall determine if a right or left-turn lane is warranted at a location to
improve operations or safety and shall identify the proper length of turn lane to accommodate any
storage or deceleration requirements. Turn lane analysis shall be conducted in accordance with
KYTC design and permit standards.
(E) Signal warrant analysis shall be conducted for all existing and proposed traffic signals providing
access to the development. Signal warrant analysis shall also be required before any existing
traffic signal is removed. Signal warrant analysis shall be conducted in accordance with most
recent version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
(F) When a TIS is required under the conditions of Subsection 7.2-3, corridor level analysis shall also
be provided. Corridor analysis shall estimate average travel speed along each contiguous Street or
Street(s) in the study area, and shall include all controlled Access Points in the study area defined
in Subsection 7.2-3. Corridor analysis shall be conducted using the latest version of Synchro
software.
7.4-6 Safety Analysis
When the study area includes a corridor or intersection which has been identified as a high accident
location by KYTC, OKI, Staff, or the applicable Legislative Body, safety analysis shall be conducted and
included in the TIS. Safety analysis shall be conducted using the three most recent years of crash data
available. Engineering judgment shall be used when reviewing and analyzing existing crash patterns in
areas where Improvements have been implemented within the period of the crash data. At a minimum
safety analysis shall include but is not limited to:
(A) Determination of crash rates for the subject location;
(B) Statistical analysis of crash data by time, light conditions, day of week, pavement conditions, crash
type, and contributing factors;
(C) Development of crash diagrams based on crash reports. This shall also include analysis of the
Street environment to identify factors which may contribute to significant recurring crashes at the
location; and
(D) Identification and analysis of potential impacts associated with site traffic and/or the proposed
access plan on the existing crash patterns.
Section 7.5: Mitigation
7.5-1 When a proposed development and/or access plan is shown to result in an unacceptable LOS, or reduce
the LOS of adjacent Access Points, intersections or corridors, as defined in Subsection 7.5-3: Operational
Thresholds, the Applicant shall identify the extent of mitigation Improvements necessary to offset the
impact of the development.
7.5-2 Mitigation Improvements may include, but are not limited to, modification to signal systems,
construction of turn lanes or Medians, access Streets, shared Access Drives, etc. When mitigation
Improvements are proposed analysis shall be conducted for the “Build” condition for the year of opening
and the design year with the proposed Improvements. This analysis shall be consistent with and in
addition to the “No Build” and “Build” analysis required in Section 7.4: Study Requirements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 151
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.6: Administration
7.5-3 Operational Thresholds
(A) The following provisions shall be used to define thresholds for acceptable operational performance
for the “Build” condition within the study area.
(B) At existing intersections the intersection LOS shall not be lower than the “No Build” LOS.
Individual turning movements at the intersection shall not operate at LOS E or F. In such cases
where individual turning movements are shown to operate at LOS E or F under the “No Build”
condition, the turning movement delay shall not increase.
(C) Proposed intersections shall operate at intersection LOS C or better. No individual turning
movements may operate at LOS E or F.
(D) On existing corridors, as identified in Clause 7.4-5(F), the average travel speed of the corridor shall
not be less than 75 percent of the “No Build” travel speed.
(E) On proposed corridors, as defined in Clause 7.4-5(F), the average travel speed shall not be less than
half of the allowable speed limit.
Section 7.6: Administration
7.6-1 Responsibility for the Traffic Impact Study
The completion of the TIS is the responsibility of the Developer/Applicant of the subject property. The
report shall be completed by a Professional Engineer, licensed within the Commonwealth of Kentucky,
with previous experience and knowledge in traffic operations and analytical studies. Each report shall
contain the stamp, signature, and date of the responsible Engineer.
7.6-2 Pre-Study Meeting
(A) It is required that a pre-study meeting be conducted prior to starting a TIS. The Applicant will be
required to provide:
(1) A conceptual layout of the proposed Subdivision/development;
(2) An aerial of the proposed site including proposed Access Points; and
(3) A map of the Street network within a two-mile radius surrounding the proposed site.
(B) At this meeting the following parameters of the TIS will be determined:
(1) Study area;
(2) Proposed ITE Trip Generation Land Use
(3) Background and build-out study year;
(4) Adjacent developments;
(5) Traffic growth rates;
(6) Future highway projects in study area; and
(7) Operational analysis parameters.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 152
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.6: Administration
(C) It is at this meeting, that any potential issues regarding the report shall be discussed. Following the
meeting Staff will prepare a memorandum of understanding summarizing the conclusions and
parameters established in the pre-study meeting that shall be used to complete the study.
(D) It is the responsibility of the Developer/Applicant to schedule this meeting prior to submission.
Pre-study meetings shall be scheduled with Staff at least one week in advance.
(E) If a pre-study meeting is not conducted, the report may not be accepted.
Study Assumptions 7.6-3 Memorandum of Understanding
Following the Pre-Study Meeting and prior to the submission of the final report, the applicant should
submit a Memorandum of Understanding that details:
(A) Existing Traffic Data
(B) Trip Generation Results
(C) Trip Distribution
7.6-4 Documentation
The results of the TIS shall be documented in the TIS report. This report shall contain:
(A) A summary of proposed development;
(B) Data collection methodologies;
(C) A summary of existing traffic conditions;
(D) Raw traffic data (may be included in appendix);
(E) Trip generation calculations and summaries;
(F) Trip generation/distribution methodology (shall include graphics showing existing traffic volumes,
generated trips and total trips for all scenarios);
(G) Adjacent developments included in the background traffic;
(H) Traffic/safety analysis methodologies;
(I) A summary of traffic analysis results;
(J) Full output/calculations from traffic/safety analysis (may be included in appendix);
(K) A summary of recommended Improvements; and
(L) A concept plan showing proposed Improvements. The concept plan shall show proposed
Improvements over aerial (if available) to a measurable scale not greater than one inch is equal to
100 feet.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 153
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.1: Purpose
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.1: Purpose
The location and design of Access Points shall be in accordance with the access control regulations in this article in
order to:
8.1-1 Promote greater safety of passage between Streets, Sidewalks, and land;
8.1-2 Improve the convenience and ease of movement of travelers and pedestrians on Streets and Sidewalks;
and
8.1-3 Permit reasonable speeds and economy of travel, and increase and protect the capacity of Streets.
Section 8.2: Applicability
These regulations shall apply to all Street classifications as outlined in the adopted Comprehensive Plan, or in the
case of new or proposed Streets, as identified on the submitted Application.
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
The following regulations shall apply unless otherwise approved by Staff after completion of a TIS that shall
document that the proposed Improvements will not adversely impact the safety or capacity of the primary Street,
with the exception of Sight Distance requirements, which must be met. Requirements for a TIS are outlined in
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
8.3-1 Access Spacing
(A) All proposed Access Points shall meet the minimum spacing standards in Table 8.3-1.
TABLE 8.3-1:ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION
SPACING
NONRESIDENTIAL
(FULL ACCESS)
NONRESIDENTIAL
(PARTIAL ACCESS)
RESIDENTIAL
ACCESS
Arterial [2] 2,400 2,400/1,200 [1] 1,200/600 [1] 600
Collector [2] 1,200 600 300 300
Local (not applicable to
residential Driveways) [2] 1,200 150 N/A N/A
NOTE:
[1] For Streets with speed limits greater than or equal to 45 miles per hour (mph), use the larger values. For Streets with
speed limits of less than 45 mph, use the lower values.
[2] For existing streets the functional classification shall be based upon the classification indicated in the Kenton County
Comprehensive Plan. For proposed streets the functional classification shall be based upon Table 4.1-1.
(B) Spacing standards shall be determined as measured from centerline of the Access Point to
centerline of the Access Point as shown in Figure 8.3-A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 154
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
Figure 8.3-A: Illustration of access spacing management
(C) No Access Point shall be permitted within 300 feet from the edge of pavement of an arterial Street
nor within the limits of auxiliary left or right turn lanes at intersections as shown in Figure 8.3-B.
Figure 8.3-B: Illustration of access spacing from Arterial Streets
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 155
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
(D) If a Tract of land has no means of access that would meet the requirements of this section, a
Restricted Access Point shall be permitted. The Restricted Access Point shall be placed so as to
maximize spacing from adjacent Access Points.
Coordination o 8.3-2 f Access Points
Access points shall be designed, located, and constructed in a manner to provide and make possible the
coordination of access with, and between, adjacent properties to maximize the efficient utilization of
Access Points. Coordination of Access Points shall be regulated as follows:
(A) With the exception of residential Driveways, Access Points on opposite sides of a Street shall be
located directly opposite each other. Where ‘T’ type intersections are used, a minimum centerline
offset of 150 feet shall be maintained on Local Streets. On collector and arterial Streets, a
minimum centerline offset capable of accommodating required left and right turn lanes shall be
maintained. When no auxiliary turn lanes are required, a minimum centerline offset of 200 feet on
collector and arterial streets shall be maintained. See Figure 8.3-C, Figure 8.3-D, and Figure 8.3-E.
Figure 8.3-C: Illustration of preferred coordination of Access Points
Figure 8.3-D: Illustration of permitted coordination of Access Points
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 156
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
Figure 8.3-E: Illustration of prohibited coordination of Access Points
(B) In cases where access spacing greater than the minimum would prohibit future access to adjacent
Parcels, Access Points may not exceed the minimum spacing requirements, except where
topographical or exceptional physical conditions exist.
(C) In cases where access coordination is not possible, turning movement restrictions may be imposed
by Staff.
8.3-3 Access Width
(A) Driveways intended for residential uses shall meet the access width requirements identified in
Subsection 4.1-24: Access Drives. All other Access Points shall not be less than 12 feet nor more
than 48 feet in width.
(B) Access width shall be measured from the edge of pavement to edge of pavement, excluding the
Curb radius as shown in Figure 8.3-F.
Figure 8.3-F: Illustration of the access width measurement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 157
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.4: Traffic Control
8.3-4 Access Throat Length
(A) The Access Throat length shall be maintained to avoid the overlapping of Driveway entrance and
parking lot circulation conflicts. The Access Throat length shall be measured from the edge of the
intersecting Street to the edge of pavement on the parking lot access or adjacent drive as shown in
Figure 8.3-G.
(B) Minimum Access Throat lengths shall not be required for residential Driveways or for Access
Points on Local Streets, Private Streets, or Access Drives.
(C) A minimum throat length of 50 feet shall be required for Access Points which intersect a Public
Street, or as otherwise required to accommodate exiting queue lengths as determined by a TIS.
(D) The Access Throat length shall be separated from vehicular and pedestrian movements adjacent to
parking facilities and drives through the construction of a raised Median, landscaping, or other
non-traversable feature.
Figure 8.3-G: Illustration of Access Throat length measurement
Section 8.4: Traffic Control
Installation of any Traffic Control measures on an existing Public Street shall not be permitted unless otherwise
approved by Staff after completion of a TIS.
8.4-1 Except as herein provided, turning movements prohibited at Partial Access Points or Restricted Access
Points shall be controlled through the use of proper Channelization. Channelization shall be constructed
in the form of a raised non-traversable Median in the center of the primary Street, sufficiently designed to
obstruct the prohibited movement. See Figure 8.4-A.
8.4-2 When the construction of a Median on the primary Street is not possible, the prohibited movements shall
be controlled through the use of a raised non-traversable channelizing island constructed on the Access
Point approach. The channelizing island shall be of sufficient size and design so as to obstruct the
prohibited movement. See Figure 8.4-A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 158
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
Median islands not designed to function as a channelizing island (i.e. an entrance 8.4-3 landscape island) shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with Figure A.1-DD: Detail #28.
Figure 8.4-A: Illustrations of Channelization techniques
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
The need for and design of auxiliary turn lanes shall be determined by auxiliary turn lanes warrants and design
standards defined or identified by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet. See Figure 8.5-A and Figure 8.5-B.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 159
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
Figure 8.5-A: Illustration of a left turn requirement
Figure 8.5-B: Illustration of a right turn requirement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 160
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.6: Provision of Access Easement and Access Drives for Nonresidential Uses
Provision of Access Section 8.6: Easement and Access Drives for
Nonresidential Uses
8.6-1 Except as herein provided, each Parcel located directly adjacent to or abutting a Street classified as either
an arterial or collector in the Comprehensive Plan, shall provide an Easement and shared Driveway or
Private Street connecting to adjacent properties.
8.6-2 The access Easement shall be unobstructed from physical features constructed on the Parcel.
8.6-3 When adjacent Parcels with existing Easements and/or Access Drives exist, the access Easement shall be
provided in coordination with existing interconnected access provision on the adjacent Parcels.
8.6-4 When adjacent Parcels are not developed, the Easement shall be provided at a location capable of:
(A) Providing cross access to adjacent Parcels; and
(B) Meeting all applicable access spacing standards specified in these Subdivision regulations.
Section 8.7: Pedestrian Access Points
8.7-1 Development along Arterial or Collector Streets shall provide pedestrian Access Points that shall connect
to any adjacent public Sidewalk and transit stops.
8.7-2 If no public Sidewalk exists along the adjacent arterial or Collector Street at the time a new development
is proposed, a Sidewalk shall be provided, along with the required pedestrian Access Points.
8.7-3 Any expansion or improvement of an existing Parking Area shall be required to be in compliance with
this section if the following applies:
(A) The new Parking Area is directly adjacent to the Arterial or Collector Street;
(B) A public Sidewalk or transit stop already exists along the Arterial or Collector Street; and
(C) The expansion will add 10 or more off-Street parking spaces that are to be located adjacent to an
Arterial or Collector Street. If a public Sidewalk already exists, then pedestrian Access Points shall
be provided.
8.7-4 The requirements of this section may be waived if sufficient proof is presented that there is not adequate
room and/or adequate need for pedestrian Access Points.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 161
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 162


ASPHALT BASE SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF 4”
THICK UNDER THE CURB UNLESS APPROVED PER
SECTION 4.4 ALTERNATIVE PAVEMENT DESIGN
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE & GEOGRID
FULL DEPTH ASPHALT
CONCRETE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE & GEOGRID

6" BARRIER CURB & GUTTER
SLOPED CURB
FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS ONLY
6" BARRIER INTEGRAL CURB
SLOPED INTEGRAL CURB
FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS ONLY





R=100'
32.5'
R=25'
52.5'
52.5'
R=25'
R=25' R=25'
15'
15' 11' 2'
11'
R=25'
R=25'
2'
14' O.C.
15' O.C. Max.
11'
15'
11'
15'
8'+_
2'
8'+_
GENERAL RULES OF TOOLED CONTRACTION
JOINT LAYOUT
1.) Skew joints 2' in each 12.5' lane; 2'-4" skew in each 14' lane.
2.) Always have the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hit the skewed
joint first.
3.) Maximum joint spacing = 15'; adjust joint spacing as necessary to
keep spacing above a 8' minimum.
4.) On horizontal curves, layout joint spacing along centerline at 14' O.C.;
visually determine a radial line from the centerline back to the curb;
measure back (forward) from that point 2' to set the skew, remembering
the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hits the skewed joint first. Tool
the joint at the skewed line.
5.) At intersections, catch basins and cul-de-sacs, follow joint layout
shown.
TYPICAL SKEWED JOINT
AND C BENT BAR LAYOUT
SCALE: N.T.S
JOINT LAYOUT FOR PAIRED CATCH BASINS
NOTE:
ALL CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
ARE DOWELED JOINTS.
L








”
”






Appendix B: Surety Templates
Appendix B: Surety Templates
1. Use the following one-page template when an insurance company issues a Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
BOND NO. _____________
The undersigned _________________________ as Principal (hereinafter called Principal) and
_____________________ as Surety (hereinafter called Surety) are held and firmly bound unto the Kenton County
Planning Commission in the penal sum of ($ _____________) Dollars, for the payment of which well and truly be
made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heir, executors, administrators, successors and assigns.
THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE SUCH THAT
WHEREAS, the Principal has presented for the approval of the Oblige a plat of a Subdivision of Lots and lands to
be known as _________________________________. .
WHEREAS, before said plat can be given final approval, it is required under ordinance or regulations of said
Oblige that the project Improvements described in the attached Engineer’s Estimate shall have been completed or
that, in lieu of such completion, the Subdivider shall furnish to the Oblige a bond guaranteeing that such
Improvements will be completed in accordance with the applicable specifications and within the period of time
allowed under the Subdivision Regulations. If the completion is not made in accordance with Subdivision
Regulations, the Commission (“Oblige”) may use said Bond proceeds to complete all Improvements required.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said principal shall fully and faithfully perform all of the work specified to be done within
the time prescribed and in accordance with the plans and specifications therefore, to which reference is hereby
made, the same being a part hereof as though fully incorporated herein; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
to remain in full force and effect until the public Improvements are completed.
SIGNED AND DATED THIS ___________ DAY OF ________________ 20______.
Principal:
By: __________________________________________
Title
Printed
Name: _______________________________________
Surety:
By: __________________________________________
Title
Attachments:
(1) Insurance Company Power of Attorney
(2) Estimate of Costs
Figure B.1-A: Subdivision Bond Issued by Insurance Company
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 194
Appendix B: Surety Templates
2. Use the following two-page template when an Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit is used for a Subdivision
bond.
(BANK LETTERHEAD)
Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit No. ___________________ Date: __________________
Kenton County Planning Commission
2332 Royal Drive
Fort Mitchell, Kentucky 41017
To the Kenton County Planning Commission:
We hereby issue our Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit # ____________________________ in your favor for the
account of (Name and Address of Developer), up to an aggregate amount of U.S. $ _______________ available
by our draft(s) at sight drawn on (Name of Bank).
We are informed that this Letter of Credit is to ensure performance by (Name of Developer) with respect to
completing (Describe Work) in Section _________________ Subdivision ____________________.
, Kentucky.
Draft(s) must be marked “Drawn under (Name of Bank) Credit No. _____________________________ dated
___________________.
We hereby agree with you that the drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this credit will be duly
honored by us upon presentation at this office on or before 24 months from the date hereof.
Except as otherwise expressly stated herein, this Letter of Credit is subject to Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credit (1983 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 400.
(BANK)
By:________________________________
Signature
Page 1 of 2
Figure B.1-B: Subdivision Bond via Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit
(Continued on next page)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 195
Appendix B: Surety Templates
(Continued from previous page)
SUBDIVISION BOND
We, (Name of Developer), as principal and surety, are held firmly bound unto the Kenton County Planning
Commission in the sum $_________________ dollars (_____________________) for the payment of which well
and truly to be made we do hereby severally bond our company, our successors, executors and administrators
firmly by these presents. Said Bond to be secured by a Letter of Credit from the (Name of Bank) to remain in
effect until completion of the project, or of Developer fails to timely complete the project, this Letter of Credit will
be renewed to remain in effect up to 24 months.
The conditions of this obligation are the completion of Public Improvements, in (Subdivision Name), as shown on
the Engineer’s estimate of costs. If completion is not made in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations, the
Commission may draw on said Letter of Credit to complete all work needed to finish the project.
Now, if the principal shall well and duly perform the completion of the Public Improvements, and shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Commission for or on account of any injury or damage to persons or property arising from or
growing out of said work, then this obligation shall be void and the Letter of Credit shall be released to the
principal upon authorization of the Commission; otherwise this obligation shall remain in full force and effect until
the Public Improvements are completed.
WITNESS my/our signatures this ____________ day of ___________ , 20
_____.
(NAME OF DEVELOPER)
By: ________________________________
Title: ______________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY
COUNTY OF KENTON
Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me, a Notary Public, this_________________ day of
______________, 20_______.
___________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires:_________________
Attachments:
(1) Original Letter of Credit
(2) Estimate of Cost
Page 2 of 2
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 196
Appendix B: Surety Templates
3. Use the following one-page template when cash, a check, a money order, or a cashier’s check is used for a
Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
The undersigned as Principal (hereinafter called Principal) and (cash, check, money
order or cashier’s check – circle correct one) as Surety (hereinafter called Surety) are held and firmly bound unto
the Kenton County Planning Commission in the penal sum of ($ ) Dollars, for the payment of
which well and truly be made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heir, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns.
THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE SUCH THAT
WHEREAS, the Principal has presented for the approval of the Oblige a plat of a Subdivision of Lots and lands to
be known as .
WHEREAS, before said plat can be given final approval, it is required under ordinance or regulations of said
Oblige that the project Improvements described in the attached Engineer’s Estimate shall have been completed or
that, in lieu of such completion, the Subdivider shall furnish to the Oblige a surety guaranteeing that such
Improvements will be completed in accordance with the applicable specifications and within the period of time
allowed under the Subdivision Regulations. If the completion is not made in accordance with Subdivision
Regulations, the Commission (“Oblige”) may use said surety proceeds to complete all Improvements required.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said principal shall fully and faithfully perform all of the work specified to be done within
the time prescribed and in accordance with the plans and specifications therefore, to which reference is hereby
made, the same being a part hereof as though fully incorporated herein; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
to remain in full force and effect until the public Improvements are completed.
SIGNED AND DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
Principal:
By:
Title
Printed
Name: _____________________________
Attachments: $___________Check #_______________
(1) Cash / Check in the amount of
(2) Estimate of Costs
Figure B.1-C: Subdivision Bond via Cash, Check, Money Order, or Cashier’s Check
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 197
Appendix B: Surety Templates
4. Use the following three-page template when a Certificate of Deposit is used for a Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
We (Company Name), as principal and surety, are held firmly bound unto the Kenton County Planning
Commission in the sum of $ dollars ( ) for the payment of which well and truly
to be made do hereby severally bond our company, our successors, executors and administrators firmly by these
presents. Said bond to be secured by a certificate of deposit from the (Name of Bank) to remain in effect until
completion of the project, or if Developer fails to timely complete the project, this certificate of deposits will be
renewed to remain in effect up to 24 months.
Page 1 of 3
Figure B.1-D: Subdivision Bond via Certificate of Deposit (Continued below and on next page)
(Continued below)
(Use Corporate Letterhead)
Date
INSERT BANK NAME HERE
AND ADDRESS HERE
Correspondent:
This letter is in reference to the Certificate of Deposit (hereafter called CD), which was issued by your bank in the
amount of ($ ). The CD was issued as a guarantee from ( Name of
Company) as it relates to the completion of public Improvements at the Subdivision,
Section . You are hereby notified that (Name of Company) is waiving its signature to the withdrawal of
funds in the event that the public Improvements are not completed. (Name of Company) also agrees that no funds
may be withdrawn without authorization from the Kenton County Planning Commission.
Sincerely,
_____________________________________
Title
cc: Kenton County Planning Commission
Page 2 of 3
(Continued on next page)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 198
Appendix B: Surety Templates
(Continued from previous page)
(Use Bank Letterhead)
Date
Kenton County Planning Commission (Insert Company Name
2332 Royal Drive and Address Here)
Fort Mitchell, KY 41017
To Whom It May Concern:
Our Bank acknowledges the issuance of a $ Certificate of Deposit in the above names. The
Certificate Number is and it will mature on . In order for any withdrawal to
be processed it will require specific authorization of the Planning Commission.
The Company as co-holder of the Certificate of Deposit be separate letter attached hereto has waived its signature
to the withdrawal of funds in the event that the public Improvements are not completed. This Certificate of Deposit
is to serve as surety for the Subdivision Performance Bond which is attached, specifying the dollar amount and the
specific Subdivision project involved.
Thank You,
Title
Page 3 of 3
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 199
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
REPORT TO THE KENTON COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
FROM THE KENTON COUNTY STREET STANDARDS ENGINEERS COMMITTEE (SSEC)
Members: Mark Brueggemann, P.E.; Joe Kramer, P.E.; Jim Viox, P.E.; Ted Vogelpohl, P.E.;
Henry Fischer, Chairman
BACKGROUND
In 2008 the Kenton County Planning Commission (KCPC) initiated an effort to update the Kenton County
Subdivision Regulations. As a part of the update process, input was solicited from various interested groups in
Kenton County. Among those responding, the Kenton County Mayors’ Group, the Kenton County Judge
Executive, the Land Development Council of the Home Builders Association of Northern Kentucky (HBANKY),
and the Northern Kentucky Society of Professional Engineers (NKSPE) were particularly active in their response.
By mid-2013, there was consensus agreement among the interested groups and the KCPC staff on most parts of the
updated draft regulations. The area where there remained substantial disagreement among the parties mentioned
above was that part of the regulation draft that dealt with requirements for future subdivision street pavements.
During the late stages of this community discussion, at the suggestion of the Kenton County Judge Executive and
several city Mayors, and authorization of the Planning Commission Chairman, a committee of five local pavement
professionals with over 150 years of collective experience in the design, construction, reconstruction, and
maintenance of subdivision pavements was formed and took on the name of Kenton County Street Standards
Engineers Committee (SSEC). The committee members are listed above. This committee was asked, as a
voluntary community service, to do the following: analyze existing subdivision pavement performance, evaluate
that performance compared to reasonable expectations for pavement performance, and make recommendations that
would improve pavement customer value in future subdivision pavements. All earlier community discussion on
pavement performance was to be considered as input into their process.
The committee established a problem analysis and decision making approach with the objective of providing
Kenton County subdivision pavement customers (home purchaser/owner, home occupant, taxpayer, citizen)
maximized long-term pavement value. Over the course of a year, the committee met for two hour meetings,
normally twice weekly, to generate their analysis and recommendations. In addition, there were meetings and
conversations with many other individuals and groups seeking their advice, input, and consensus agreement. Those
groups included:
• The Kenton County Planning Commission Subdivision Regulations Committee
• Kenton County Planning Commission
• Kenton County Mayors’ Group Subdivision Regulation Review Committee
• Various Northern Kentucky city and county engineers
• Various Northern Kentucky city and county public works officials
• Brian Wood, P.E. – Executive Director of Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
• Local concrete and asphalt producers
• Local subdivision improvement contractors
• The Northern Kentucky Society of Professional Engineers continuing education session (Feb. 24, 2014)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 200
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT IN
THE KENTON COUNTY SUBDIVISION REGULATION STREET STANDARDS
The following represents the consensus problem identification and recommendations for improvement in Kenton
County subdivision street regulations by the SSEC. Besides many hours of analysis and discussion by our
Committee, input into the analysis and decision making process was solicited, received, and considered from a
broad spectrum of those involved in the design, construction and maintenance of subdivision streets, especially
those who have been involved in the KCPC subdivision regulation update process. In addition, many sources from
the professional pavement design and maintenance literature were considered and used.
It is noteworthy that the recommendations contained in this report are the unanimous recommendations of the
members of the SSEC.
The SSEC hereby respectfully requests that the KCPC accept the following analysis and incorporate these
recommendations into the revised Subdivision Regulation street standards now under their consideration.
PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION
Realistic problem solving requires accurate definition of the problems and their root causes. That is the aim of the
following as it relates to problems in existing Kenton County subdivision pavements and improvements for the
design and regulation of future pavements.
The following is a list of the most critical problems and opportunities for improvement that have been identified in
Kenton County subdivision pavements installed from roughly 1985 (28 years old) to 2000 (13 years old). The
significance of 1985 is that, in 1985, there was a substantial effort by the Northern Kentucky engineering,
homebuilding, and local government community to improve new subdivision pavement performance. This 1985
effort resulted in a substantial upgrade and standardization of subdivision pavement regulations across Northern
Kentucky, including Kenton County. The subdivision pavements built from 1985 to 2000 in Kenton County were
built under those 1985 regulations. There was little to no change in the pavement regulations during that period.
Jim Viox, Henry Fischer, and Thelen Associates, Inc. (George Thelen then and Ted Vogelpohl now) have been
participants in both the 1985 update effort and this current update effort. This continuity has benefitted this current
effort greatly. It is also noteworthy that very significant improvements in pavement performance and citizen/
homeowner/ taxpayer pavement value resulted from that 1985 effort. Hopefully, as much or more value can be
gained from this current effort.
PROBLEMS COMMON TO ASPHALT AND CONCRETE PAVEMENT
1. Pavement performance standards are not clear in the current regulations. Pavement design parameters,
performance expectations, and procedures for and the importance of proper pavement maintenance are not
set out. This has often resulted in unclear and unrealistic expectations for pavement performance and
maintenance within the Kenton County community.
2. Quality assurance efforts in pavement construction in some cases have been lacking, leading to premature
pavement failure. Related to this problem is the fact that some construction and material specifications in
the current subdivision regulations are inadequate to insure quality pavement performance. In other
instances, the existing regulations don’t provide an adequate description of material and construction
specification tolerances that can be achieved using good material control and construction practices. This
lack of proper tolerances leads to ambiguity, confusion, and arbitrary decision making during construction
on what the acceptable material and construction standards are. Various aspects of this quality assurance
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 201
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
effort are the responsibility of the developers, the design and geotechnical engineers, the construction
contractor, and the KCPC and its designated inspection agency.
3. In many cases, subdivision streets in Kenton County communities have not been adequately maintained by
their owners, thus shortening pavement life and substantially increasing ultimate customer long-term
pavement costs.
4. There is no consideration given in existing regulations pavement design of how to extend pavement life
beyond the 20 year design life.
5. Subgrade strength is, in some cases, being degraded because of water penetrating into and weakening the
subgrade. There is a need for improvement in the drainage characteristics of subdivision pavements (both
surface and subsurface); there are design shortfalls as well as construction quality control and maintenance
shortfalls. This problem is much more critical in asphalt pavements because of asphalt’s high reliance on
subgrade strength as compared to concrete’s reliance on uniform subgrade support.
6. Pavement failures caused by utility ditch settlement under the street. This is a more costly per occurrence
but less frequent problem for concrete pavements.
7. Existing subdivision regulation standards for streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions are often
inadequate for the heavy truck traffic loading these streets must support.
PROBLEMS SPECIFIC TO ASPHALT STREET PAVEMENTS
8. When asphalt pavements came into common use in Kenton County in the early 1990’s, there was a failure
to recognize and address the fact that asphalt pavements are more dependent on subgrade strength than
concrete pavements. Often there was an assumption that subgrade strength that was good enough for
concrete was good enough for asphalt. This isn’t true. This assumption led to some asphalt pavement
failures caused by inadequate subgrade preparation and/or inadequate subgrade materials.
9. Asphalt pavement subgrade weakening caused by inadequate pavement surface and subsurface storm water
management. Root causes include inadequate subgrade and surface cross slope, both in design and
inadequate quality control; water penetrating the asphalt/curb apron interface due to the asphalt being
finished below the curb apron; inadequate curb apron cross slope to the gutter line; the asphalt subgrade
being cut lower than the adjacent curb subgrade, thus trapping water under the asphalt; water penetrating
the subgrade from the area outside the curb; and inadequate sealing and maintenance of the asphalt/curb
apron interface. Another problem in this area relates to the improper use of more brittle asphalt materials
designed specifically for highway use. When more brittle asphalt materials are used in subdivision
pavements, premature surface cracks develop in the body of the pavement, allowing water to penetrate
through the pavement into the subgrade and accelerating deterioration of the pavement subgrade.
10. There are inadequate quality assurance requirements in the current regulations for asphalt material and no
asphalt in-place density requirements or testing.
11. In some limited cases, there have been excessive premature asphalt street concrete curb and gutter failures.
Some causes include: improper or inadequate isolation joints at structures (catch basins); inadequate curb
cross section bending strength and/or inadequate subgrade support; and inadequate concrete material
quality leading to D-cracking and other freeze-thaw concrete deterioration.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 202
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
PROBLEMS SPECIFIC TO CONCRETE STREET PAVEMENTS
12. Premature pavement failures caused by in-place concrete not being resistant enough to natural multi-year
freeze-thaw and expansion/contraction cycles. Causes include:
a) Concrete mixes (coarse aggregate type and cement content) that are not resistant enough to concrete Dcracking
and the use of appropriate de-icers. Note that some inappropriate de-icers will cause concrete
deterioration even with appropriate concrete mixes. The D-cracking problem leads to deterioration at
the joints as well as total concrete failure in the body of the concrete slabs.
b) Excessive concrete street lengthening or “growth” problems that are caused by the use of expansion
joints in the pavement, expansive gravel 57’s coarse aggregate, premature load transfer failures at
contraction joints, joint seal failure and poor maintenance. Another pavement condition that can
contribute to the problem is where pavement lengthening is relatively unrestricted, such as at the end of
downhill cul-de-sacs. Measures to manage potential pavement growth impacts on private property
outside of the pavement can also be improved.
13. Premature contraction joint load transfer failure which causes rough vehicle ride and eventual slab failure.
This problem is caused by the separation of the contraction joints due to the use of expansion joints and
more recently (since 1990) by the use of substantial amounts of #8 gravel in pavement concrete mixes. The
addition of #8 gravel and corresponding reduction in 57’s gravel decreases the percentage of total aggregate
above ½” in size, and thus decreases the aggregate interlock across the contraction joint. Inadequate joint
seal maintenance is another contributing factor to this problem. This type failure also contributes
significantly to concrete problems described in number 12 above.
RECOMMENDATION OBJECTIVE
The most serious and improvable existing subdivision pavement problems have been identified along with their
root causes. The objective now is to find solutions to those problems that yield the pavement customer (house
purchaser, home owner, occupant, taxpayer, citizen) the lowest possible 50 year net present value for the pavement
life cycle costs. Net present value accounts for the time value of money, which is the basis for evaluating any
pavement option. Initial construction costs, pavement joint maintenance, localized failure repair, and resurfacing
costs are the primary life cycle costs. 50 years was selected as the reasonable period to evaluate pavement use,
performance, and maintenance. It is anticipated that the life of most subdivision pavements as designed here can be
extended beyond 50 years when properly constructed and maintained with additional refurbishment and repair
some time after 50 years.
The following Committee recommendations are consistent with this preceding objective. Note that local suburban
subdivision streets, which represent the bulk of subdivision streets built in Kenton County, are used as examples in
many of these recommendations and exhibits. These recommendations are easily adapted to other classes of
subdivision streets.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. For all engineering, material, and construction specifications in the subdivision regulations, including those
recommended herein, establish realistically achievable definitions, including allowable variances and
tolerances.
Benefit: Meeting this objective will substantially help clarification of pavement expectations for all
involved in the subdivision process. It will also help minimize ambiguity and arbitrary decision making on
as-constructed pavement variances in the future.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 203
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
2. Include a Pavement Performance and Design section in the subdivision regulations that sets out a 20-year
design life and 50-year life cycle maintenance and resurfacing plan. Also include other subdivision
regulation pavement design parameters, the proper expectations for pavement performance, the differences
in performance characteristics between asphalt and concrete, the need for maintenance, and other related
subjects. Figure C.1-A:Exhibit A contains the SSEC parameter selection and example design calculations
for subdivision pavements. Exhibit B contains the SSEC 50-year life cycle expected minimum
maintenance requirements.
Benefit: Addresses problem #1 and helps address problems #3 and #4.
3. After revised regulations are adopted, establish an effort whereby a group of local engineers, contractors,
developers and governmental officials collaborate to improve the governmental pavement construction
inspection program. The focus should be to determine those factors or items that are most important to be
inspected to insure proper pavement performance. Then once those factors are determined, train inspection
personnel how to inspect those factors and document those inspections. The formation of a longer term
inspection oversight group should also be considered.
Benefit: Addresses problem #2.
4. Suggest to the Kenton County Mayors’ Group that a pavement management system such as the one used
currently by the City of Florence would be a good idea for implementation in Kenton County. Properly
implemented, this type of system will significantly improve long-term customer pavement value.
Benefit: Helps solve problem #3.
5. Adopt a structural subgrade strength minimum for the standard subdivision pavement design of CBR = 2 or
greater for concrete and CBR = 3 or greater for asphalt. Require site specific improvements in design and
construction of the subgrade and/or pavement by a Registered Engineer where these CBR requirements
can’t be met with the proposed subdivision’s natural soils and proper compaction.
Benefit: Help address problems 5 and 8.
6. Adopt a requirement for geotechnical reports regarding pavement design and subgrade support at multiple
stages of subdivision approval, as described in Exhibit C. These reports will also address other important
soil slope stability and structural issues.
Benefit: Assures adequate subgrade structural support for pavements. Helps address problems 5 and 8.
7. Establish minimum subdivision regulation pavement design for industrial and commercial subdivisions
with stated design parameters, including ESAL loading. Require planned traffic (ESAL) loading analysis
by a registered engineer for all commercial and industrial subdivisions. Where planned traffic loading
exceeds standard design loading or where minimum required CBR’s are not met, require the necessary
improvements in pavement design and construction. See Exhibit A for proposed industrial/commercial
pavement designs.
Benefit: Solves problem #7.
8. Increase subgrade cross slope from the current 2%. Use a subgrade cross slope of 3% for concrete and
4.5%+ for asphalt pavements (see Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit F).
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
9. Increase finish surface cross slope of all pavements from 2% to 3% (see Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit
F).
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
10. Use concrete sloped curb (see Exhibit E) and eliminate use of current concrete rolled curb.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 204
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Benefit: Helps solve problems 4 and 11 and improves vehicle ride when accessing driveways.
11. Use ODOT 6” chair back curb or equivalent instead of KTC 6” vertical curb. Allow horizontally sawed
driveway apron cuts in this curb type.
Benefit: The ODOT curb is more approachable when parking a car adjacent to the curb and less likely to
damage wheel rims.
12. Require that the front top edge of the sidewalk along the street be constructed 6” +1” above the top of
sloped curb (see Exhibit G).
Benefit: Help solve problem #4 by allowing for future significant asphalt overlays while still maintaining
adequate street drainage (see Exhibit H).
13. Require edge drains along all curb lines as depicted in Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit F.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
14. Require that telephone and electric crossovers under the street and three feet beyond the street to be
installed as follows: Separate the parallel ducts by at least 2” horizontally using spacers; cover with 6” of
fill sand; properly compact with a vibratory plate compactor; add additional conduit as necessary, properly
separated. Cover with fill sand properly compacted. Backfill remaining trench with KTC dense grade
aggregate (DGA) properly compacted up to subgrade (see Exhibit G). Other shallow utility ditches under
the pavement, other than those described in 15 below, are to be similarly bedded, covered, and backfilled.
Benefit: Helps solve problem #6.
15. Require storm catch basins and catch basin storm crossovers to be bedded, covered, backfilled, and drained
into one catch basin as depicted on Exhibit H. Make sure 57’s crushed stone is exposed to the base of the
pavement. Properly compact all materials.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5, 6 and 9.
16. Adopt subdivision street classifications, including number of lots served, street width, subgrade slope,
pavement thicknesses, and curb type, as shown in Exhibit I.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 1, 4, 5 and 9.
17. Adopt the standard of always having the pavement base course, whether stone-based or full-depth asphalt,
extend under the curb as shown in Exhibit D and Exhibit E.
Benefit: Allows for the required use of a 24-inch wide curb instead of the current standard 30-inch wide
curb and helps solve problems 5, 9 and 11.
18. Adopt asphalt material standards which more narrowly define those KTC asphalt material standards which
are appropriate for residential subdivision pavements. Set out testing requirements for asphalt aggregate
and liquid asphalt content. Also establish density testing requirements for in-place pavement. Use KTC
crushed stone base material for stone-based pavements. Require regular reporting and passing results of
KTC gradation requirement from base material sources.
Benefit: Helps solve problems #2 and #10.
19. For asphalt pavements, increase the cross slope of the apron of the 24” concrete curb and gutter section to
6% (see Exhibit D and Exhibit E). Require the asphalt surface at the apron to be finished 1/4” + 1/8” above
the apron and properly sealed.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
20. Install finish course of asphalt no later than one year from the date of installation of the asphalt base and
intermediate course (see Exhibit D and Exhibit E). When the finish course of asphalt is installed
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 205
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
immediately as a part of initial construction, asphalt base material may be substituted for intermediate base
material.
Benefit: Insures that asphalt streets are completed on a timely basis.
21. Specify concrete mixes used for concrete pavements to have six bags of cement per cubic yard. Require all
large aggregates (above #8’s) to be crushed limestone. Require that #4 limestone be included in the
pavement mix. A maximum aggregate size of 57’s is appropriate for concrete curb and gutter. Require
KTC approval of hardness requirements for crushed limestone aggregate sources. See Exhibit J for SECC
recommended concrete aggregate content and a discussion of the importance of large aggregate size in
concrete pavement.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 12 and 13.
22. Eliminate expansion joints in concrete pavements. Use skewed contraction joints as shown in Exhibit K.
Place contraction joints at a maximum spacing of 15’ O.C.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 12 and 13.
23. For concrete pavements, provide 3” of expansion joint material in the driveway apron area within the right
of way (see Exhibit L) to provide for the management of any concrete pavement growth that does occur.
Inspect placement when inspecting driveway apron/sidewalk construction. City/County street maintenance
personnel will monitor any closing of expansion joints, as a part of normal street maintenance, and take
appropriate action.
Benefit: Provides for management of street growth problems outside of the pavement, when they do occur
(problem #12.b).
24. Use pavement lugs in concrete pavement as shown in Exhibit M to help minimize potential pavement
growth in critical pavement geometric conditions. These critical conditions, which are identified in Exhibit
N and Exhibit O, have historically been the pavement geometric conditions where subdivision pavement
growth problems have been more likely to occur.
Benefit: This should help mitigate the problem described in problem #12.b.
25. The KCPC should consider the merits of replacing the current cul-de-sac design with the Hamilton County
teardrop cul-de-sac design (see Exhibit P).
Benefit: This teardrop design might make turn around for public service vehicles easier than the current
design.
The preceding represents our group consensus problem identification and recommendations for improvement in
future Kenton County subdivision pavements.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
As a part of the SECC’s work, they solicited and received the cooperation from three local developers (Arlinghaus,
Drees, and Fischer), several local governmental entities, local construction contractors, and material suppliers in the
construction of several pavement demonstration projects. These demonstration projects were built in 12 different
new subdivision sections throughout Northern Kentucky during the period of September 2012 through July 2014.
The purpose of these demonstration projects was to evaluate the constructability, ease of quality control, cost,
and—to the extent possible—probable long-term performance characteristics of various material specifications,
construction methods, and construction details. Included among the tested alternatives were many of the final
recommendations of this report which have been suggested for adoption in the Revised Subdivision Regulations for
Kenton County. There were also alternatives tested that were not used in the SECC’s final recommendations.
These demonstration projects greatly enhanced the confidence of the SSEC in their final recommendations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 206
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Among the final SSEC recommendations contained in this report that were tested in these demonstration projects
were critical parts of recommendations number 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24.
CONCLUSION
The recommendations for improvement are in the areas of design, construction standards, construction quality
control, and maintenance of pavements, which are interdependent and all necessary to insure good
homeowner/taxpayer pavement value. The SECC also recognizes that proper pavement performance expectation
setting for all involved in the regulation, design, construction, and maintenance of subdivision pavements is a
critical component of obtaining good pavement value. Hopefully, our work here will help improve communication
in this regard.
Our work on problem definition and recommendations is now complete. We now respectfully ask the Commission
to accept our work product and have your staff help us incorporate this work product into the current Kenton
County draft subdivision regulations which will be considered for adoption by the KCPC at public hearing.
Thank you for your consideration.
The undersigned members of the Kenton County Street Standards Engineers Committee,
Mark Brueggeman, P.E. Joseph Kramer, P.E.
Henry Fischer James Viox, P.E.
Ted Vogelpohl, P.E.
After this report was submitted to the Kenton County Planning Commission in draft form, the Commission
Chairman asked this Committee to work with the KCPC Staff to integrate these recommendations into the KCPC
draft subdivision regulations for consideration of adoption by the Planning Commission. This Committee did so, as
requested.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 207
EXHIBIT A
PARAMETER SELECTION AND EXAMPLE
CALCULATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION PAVEMENTS
Parameter selection and example calculation references include:
• American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
Guide For Design of Pavement Structures, 1986 and 1993.
• Pavement Analysis and Design, Yang H. Huang, University of Kentucky, Prentice
Hall, 1993.
• The Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 1 (MS-1), September 1981.
• Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, Pavement Design Guide (2007 Revision),
Division of Highway Design, Pavement Branch, February 2007.
• Pavement Design Manual, Ohio Department of Transportation, Office of
Pavement Engineering, July 2008.
• American Concrete Pavement Association.
• Pavement Design & Analysis, Life Cycle Cost Analysis, created by Thomas P.
Harman, M.S.C.E., in conjunction with Randall C. Riley, P.E., William Feltz, P.E.,
American Concrete Pavement Association, and The Ohio Ready Mixed Concrete
Association, 1988.
• Asphalt Institute, SW-1 Asphalt Pavement Thickness Design Software, User’s
Guide, 2005.
PARAMETER SELECTION
The subdivision pavement design parameters used in this document are presented in
Table 4.4-1, which is also included here for reference.
This space intentionally left blank.
2
TABLE 4.4-1 - SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT DESIGN PARAMETERS USING AASHTO
METHOD
DESIGN VALUES
PARAMETER CONCRETE ASPHALT
Design Life 20 years 20 years
Life Cycle Analysis 50 years 50 years
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 --
Reliability 80% 80%
Deviation 0.35 0.45
Initial Serviceability 4.2 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.5
Modulus of Rupture 600 psi --
Modulus of Elasticity 3,600,000 psi --
CBR, Minimum 2 (K=50 pci) 3 (MR=2700 psi)
Load Transfer 4.4 (no dowels) --
Load Transfer 3.2 (dowels) --
20 Year ESAL, Residential Local Street, = 199 lots served 81,000 81,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots
served
203,000 203,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots
served
406,000** 406,000**
20 Year ESAL, Commercial/Industrial Street 3,500,000* 3,500,000*
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Local Street, = 199 lots served 53,000 53,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 133,000 133,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 265,000** 265,000**
ESAL, Arterial Per KYTC Specification
Asphalt Surface Layer Coefficient 0.44
Asphalt Base Layer Coefficient 0.40
Crushed Stone Base Layer Coefficient 0.14
Crushed Stone Base with Tensar TX5 Geogrid Layer
Coefficient
0.25 for CBR = 3
0.21 for 2= CBR < 3
Thickness conversion factor, 17 year old asphalt 0.7
Thickness conversation factor, 34 year old asphalt 0.6
*Engineer shall submit documentation of project-specific design ESAL for each commercial/industrial
Subdivision pavement. If project-specific 20-year ESAL are less than 3,500,000, the required street thicknesses
in Table 4.4-2 shall be used. If project-specific 20-year ESAL loading is greater than 3,500,000, a project-specific
pavement design is required.
**Project specific design required for developments with more than 1,000 lots
This space intentionally left blank.
3
Design Life: The service or performance period before a new
pavement requires rehabilitation, or the time during which
a new pavement deteriorates from its initial serviceability
to its terminal serviceability. Selected as 20 years.
Life Cycle Analysis: The extended pavement service or analysis period
including maintenance, resurfacing and rehabilitation
beyond the Design Life. Selected as 50 years.
Drainage Coefficient: Selected as 1.0 based on poor quality of drainage and
pavement structure being exposed to moisture levels
approaching saturation up to 5 percent of the time.
Reliability: Factor that incorporates some degree of certainty that the
designs will last for the pavement design life and life
cycle. Selected 80 percent.
Deviation: Standard deviation that accounts for reliability of AASHTO
Road Test data for local conditions. Selected 0.35 for
concrete pavement and 0.45 for asphalt pavement.
Initial Serviceability: Serviceability is described as the ability of a pavement to
serve its intended traffic. The AASHTO serviceability
scale is 0 to 5, with 5 being a flawless pavement and 0
being a pavement that is impossible to travel. Initial
serviceability is a function of pavement type and
construction quality. Selected 4.2 for concrete and 4.5 for
asphalt.
Terminal Serviceability: The lowest serviceability that will be tolerated before
rehabilitation. Selected 2.5 for concrete and asphalt
4
pavements.
Modulus of Rupture: Average 28-day third point flexural strength of concrete.
Selected as 600 psi.
Modulus of Elasticity: Selected as 3,600,000 psi for concrete.
CBR: California bearing Ratio of subgrade soils. Selected 2
(minimum) for concrete pavements and 3 (minimum) for
asphalt pavements. Selected a modulus of subgrade
reaction (K) of 50 pci to correlate with CBR = 2 for
concrete pavements. Selected a resilient modulus (MR)
of 2,700 psi to correlate with a CBR = 3 for asphalt
pavements, which accounts for seasonal environmental
and climatic factors, roadbed soil quality and roadbed soil
moisture and freeze-thaw conditions.
Load Transfer: Load transfer factor for transverse joints in concrete
pavement. Selected 4.4 for undoweled joints and
aggregate interlock only, and 3.2 for doweled joints.
Equivalent 18,000-pound
Single Axle Loads
(ESAL):
The estimated average truck traffic for site development
work, average truck traffic for single-family house
construction, and average post-construction residential
traffic are presented in the following Tables 1-3.
This space intentionally left blank.
5
TABLE 1
Average Truck Traffic for Site Development Work for 25-Lot Subdivision Street
Equipment/Material
Delivered
Number of
Non-Steering Tandem
Axles
ESAL Per
Loaded
Truck
Trips Per
Loaded
Truck
ESAL Per
25 Lots
Pans, Off-Road Trucks,
Excavator, Compactor, Dozers 3 17 6 102
Loader, Small Dozer,
Gravel/Sand, Structures,
Manholes, Pipe, Asphalt
2 2.379 89 212
Concrete, Loader, Backhoe,
Paver, Rollers 2 1.695 33 56
TOTAL ESAL PER 25 LOTS = 370
TABLE 2
Average Truck Traffic for One Single-Family House Construction
Equipment/Material
Delivered
Number of
Non-
Steering
Tandem
Axles
Number of
Non-
Steering
Single
Axles
ESAL Per
Loaded
Truck
Trips Per
Loaded
Truck ESAL
Trusses - 2 1.473 - 1.5
Concrete and Gravel 2 - 2.379 16 38.1
Gravel, Brick, Stone/Cultured
Stone, Sand, Shingles 2 - 1.600 8 12.8
Steel (Beams/Columns),
Lumber, Drywall 1 - 1.419 9 12.8
Misc. Construction Deliveries - 1 0.0927 25 2.3
Heavy Construction
Equipment, 953 Loader, etc. 1 1 0.998 8 8.0
Light Construction Equipment,
Backhoe, D3, etc. 1 1 0.129 16 2.1
Dumpsters 1 - 0.714 2 1.4
TOTAL ESAL PER HOUSE CONSTRUCTED = 79
(EST. 80)
TABLE 3
Average Post-Construction Residential Traffic Per 100 Lots
Vehicle ESAL Per Vehicle
Vehicle Trips Per 20 Year
Design Life
ESAL Per 20
Years
Garbage Truck 4.189 4,160 17,426
School Bus 1.699 8,000 13,592
Car 0.0014 73,000 102
TOTAL POST-CONSTRUCTION
ESAL PER 100 LOTS PER 20 YEARS = 31,120
6
The 20-year design ESAL values are:
Residential local street serving =199 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
80424ESAL
31,120ESAL 199Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 199Lots
25Lots
ESAL 199 Lots
=
+ ? ?
?
?
? ??
?
+ ? ?
?
?
? ??
?
= -
Residential subcollector street serving 200 to 500 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
202,630 ESAL
31,120ESAL 500Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 500Lots
25Lots
ESAL 500Lots
=
+ ? ?
?
?
? ??
?
+ ? ?
?
?
? ??
?
= -
Residential collector street serving 501 to 1000 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
405,630 ESAL
31,120ESAL 1000Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 1000Lots
25Lots
ESAL 1000Lots
=
+ ? ?
?
?
? ??
?
+ ? ?
?
?
? ??
?
= -
Commercial/Industrial Street
Reviewed several existing Northern Kentucky commercial/industrial subdivisions to
evaluate truck traffic. Selected 3,500,000 ESAL for 20-year design life as base value
for commercial/industrial pavements. Each project to have documentation of projectspecific
ESAL. If project-specific ESAL greater than 3,500,000, then a project-specific
design is required.
Year 17 to Year 34 and
Year 34 to Year 50 ESAL:
For residential streets, 85% (17/20) of average 20-year
post-construction ESAL, without site development work
and house construction traffic. For commercial/industrial,
85% of 20-year ESAL.
Layer Coefficients: Selected asphalt and crushed stone base layer structural
coefficients for relating layer thicknesses to Structural
Number.
7
Thickness Conversion
Factors:
Selected factors for estimating equivalent thicknesses of
aged asphalt.
PAVEMENT THICKNESS CALCULATION
The pavement thicknesses in the following table were calculated for each of the street
classifications using the AASHTO pavement design methods:
TABLE 4
Calculated Pavement Thicknesses for Street Classifications
Street Classification ESAL
Structural
Number Pavement Type
Calculated
Thickness (in.)
Local
(=199 Lots) 81,000 3.07
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/6.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/3.5/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/2.5/6***
Concrete 5.75
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 3.54
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/7.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/4.75/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/3.75/6***
Concrete 6.75
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 3.93
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/8.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/5.75/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/4.0/6***
Concrete 7.5
Commercial/Industrial 3,500,000 5.34
Full-Depth Asphalt N/A
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/9.25/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.5/7.25/7***
Concrete Over
Stone Base 9/4****
* Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course
** Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course / Crushed Stone Base
*** Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course / Crushed Stone Base / TX5 Geogrid
**** Doweled Joint Concrete / Crushed Stone Base
8
50-YEAR LIFE CYCLE CONSIDERATION
Full-depth asphalt subcollector street example:
New: Thickness
(inch)
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
1.25” Surface Course 1.25 0.44 0.55
7.5” Base Course 7.5 0.40 3.00
3.55 > 3.54
Year 17:
From Table 4.4-1, use 133,000 ESAL from Year 17 to Year 34. Required Structural
Number =3.32
Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Surface Course Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.7 0.44 0.39
7.5” Old Base Course 7.5 0.7 0.40 2.10
3.37 > 3.32
Year 34:
From Table 4.4-1, use 133,000 ESALS from Year 34 to Year 51. Required Structural Number
=3.32
Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Mill & Surface Course
Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.6 0.44 0.33
7.5” Old Base Course 7.5 0.6 0.40 1.80
3.01 < 3.32
Need more initial pavement structural capacity to achieve the required 50-year life
cycle. Increase the asphalt base course thickness for the initial 20-year design life from
7.5” to 8.75”. Then:
Year 34: Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Mill & Surface Course
Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.6 0.44 0.33
8.75” Old Base Course 8.75 0.6 0.40 2.10
3.31 ? 3.32
9
Concrete Commercial/Industrial Street Example:
Using applicable parameters from Table 4.4-1, the calculated doweled concrete
pavement thickness for 3,500,000 ESAL (20-year Design Life) is 9 inches. For a
50-year Life Cycle, the total ESAL are:
(3,500,000 ESAL) 8,750,000 ESAL
20 Years
ESAL 50 Years 50 = ?
?
?
??
= ?
Increasing the doweled concrete pavement thickness to 10 inches yields a
calculated ESAL = 8,982,500, which is greater than ESAL50 (8,750,000).
After the asphalt and concrete pavement thickness adjustments for 50-year Life Cycle
considerations are made, the calculated thicknesses in Table 4 become the required
thicknesses in Table 4.4-2.
1Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
2 Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Appendix A Detail #12 and Detail #13)
3 Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints (see Appendix A Detail #11)
4 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can
be replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses are
maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector, and
7.5 inches commercial/industrial
5 Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where
a number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a
Local Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
6 Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
TABLE 4.4-2 REQUIREDSUBDIVISION STREET THICKNESSES
Street
Classification
With Number of
Lots Served5
Concrete
Concrete
Over 4”
Crushed
Stone Base
Full-Depth Asphalt Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB)
Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB) + Geogrid6
Surface Base1 Surface Base CSB1 Surface Base CSB1
Residential
Local
=199 Lots
7”2 NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”4 1.5” 3” 7”4
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”2 NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”4 1.5” 4” 7”4
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”2 NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”4 1.5” 5.75” 7”4
Commercial/
Industrial Not
Permitted 10”3 Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7” 4 1.5” 12” 7”4
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
10
ALTERNATE PAVEMENT DESIGNS
The above calculations are based upon a CBR of 2 for concrete pavements and a CBR
of 3 for asphalt pavements, per Table 4.4-1. The following Table 5 presents the
Structural Numbers for Alternate Asphalt Pavement Designs for CBR values ranging
from 2 to 7, for use in Alternate Designs when the documented CBR value is not 3.
Design for CBR values less than 2 is not recommended; rather, the subgrade soils
should be improved to CBR = 2 or greater. The Structural Numbers in Table 5 include
the adjustment for the 50-year Life Cycle consideration.
TABLE 5
Structural Numbers for Alternative Asphalt Pavement Designs
Street Classification STRUCTURAL NUMBER
CBR 2 CBR 3 CBR 4 CBR 5 CBR 6 CBR 7
Local
(=199 Lots) 4.09 3.75 2.85 2.50 2.24 2.04
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 4.92 4.05 3.52 3.14 2.84 2.60
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 5.60 4.69 4.09 3.65 3.34 3.07
Commercial/
Industrial 8.40 7.24 6.47 5.92 5.47 5.12
The calculated concrete pavement thicknesses for CBR values between 2 and 7 are
presented in Table 6.
TABLE 6
Calculated 20-Year Concrete Thicknesses
Street Classification
CALCULATED CONCRETE THICKNESS (INCH)
20 Year
ESAL CBR 2 CBR 3 CBR 4 CBR 5 CBR 6 CBR 7
Local
(=199 Lots) 81,000 5.62 5.29 5.16 5.09 4.99 4.95
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 6.68 6.37 6.24 6.17 6.08 6.03
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 7.55 7.26 7.15 7.08 7.00 6.96
Commercial/
Industrial 3,500,000 8.98* 8.71* 8.61* 8.55* 8.49* 8.45*
* Doweled Joints
11
The thicknesses in Table 6 illustrate that there is very little variation in calculated
pavement thicknesses with changes in CBR. For all street classifications, there is only
0.53” to 0.67” variation in concrete thickness when the CBR changes from 2 to 7.
Therefore, it is recommended that all alternative concrete pavement designs use the
same required thicknesses as the base or standard designs. The required thicknesses
for each street classification, adjusted for 50-year Life Cycle considerations, are given in
Table 7.
TABLE 7
Required Concrete Pavement Thicknesses
Street Classification
20 Year
ESAL CBR Required Concrete Thickness (inch)
Local
(=199 Lots) 81,000 2-7 7.01
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 2-7 8.01
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 2-7 9.01
Commercial/
Industrial 3,500,000 2-7 10.02
1Plain concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels.
2Plain concrete, on at least 4 of crushed stone base, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse
Contraction Joints.
EXHIBIT B
50 YEAR LIFE CYCLE MAINTENANCE STRATEGY
ASPHALT PAVEMENT
Minor Maintenance
• Joint and crack seal every three (3) years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot pavement repair
Major Maintenance – at approximately +17 years
• Spot curb repair, as necessary
• Spot base repair
• Mill asphalt 2 inches deep at the concrete curb apron to 0 inches at 6 feet out
from the curb apron
• Install new 2 inch asphalt surface with a 4 percent curb apron to centerline
cross slope
• Seal the asphalt/curb apron interface
Major Maintenance – at approximately +34 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot base repair
• Pavement fabric over joint between asphalt and curb
• New 2 inch asphalt surface overlay
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
Minor Maintenance
• Joint and crack seal every three (3) years
• Inspect driveway apron expansion material for signs of pavement lengthening;
take remedial action as necessary
• Localized failure repairs
Major Maintenance – at approximately +17 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot slab repair
Major Maintenance – at approximately +34 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot slab repair
• Inspect for erosion (tunneling) under pavement, mud jack as necessary
• Mill concrete 2 inches deep at or near the concrete gutter line to 0 inches deep
out from the gutter line
• Install asphalt skim coat and Stress Absorbing Asphalt Membrane Interlayer
(SAMI) over the width of the pavement
• Install 1½ inch deep asphalt surface overlay with a 4 percent gutter line to
centerline cross slope
EXHIBIT C
SUBGRADE QUALITY VERIFICATION
A qualified geotechnical engineer will provide the verification of the site specific subgrade support. The City of
Cincinnati’s list of qualified geotechnical engineers will be used as the base “approved” list for geotechnical
engineers with the ability of KCPC to add to or delete from that list. The following steps will be taken:
a. At the preliminary subdivision plan stage, the geotechnical engineer will use his local soils
knowledge, USGS soils mapping, and a visual field reconnaissance to report on the likelihood of soils
on that specific site meeting the minimum CBR values for subgrade. The report will also include
observations relative to the site’s suitability for building support.
b. At construction drawing submittal, the geotechnical engineer will submit a report on the soil types,
the expected CBR of those soil types that exist on that section of lots being submitted (or possibly
on the subdivision as a whole). This submittal will also include information on other issues of
structural subsurface stability for proposed subdivision public land improvements planned for the
site. These judgments will be based on the results of soil borings, open trench exploration, soil
testing, etc. that are sufficient for the geotechnical engineer to render his engineering opinion.
c. During mass earthwork, subgrade materials will be evaluated as to their meeting required densities
and as to the subgrade materials being used being capable of producing the CBR required to meet
the base subdivision street design when compacted to the required densities. Reports as to these
results will be submitted by the geotechnical engineer to the KCPC prior to the installation of
pavement. If subgrade soils are substandard, remedial subgrade/pavement enhancement will be
designed and submitted to KCPC.
d. Prior to pavement being installed, the subgrade will be tested for density, moisture content, proof
rolled, inspected for uniformity and proper subgrade profile according to approved procedures of
the KCPC by properly qualified and supervised inspectors.
EXHIBIT "D"
EXHIBIT "E"
EXHIBIT "F"
EXHIBIT "G"
EXHIBIT "H"
1
EXHIBIT I
RECOMMENDED SUBDIVISION STREET CLASSIFICATIONS AND THICKNESSES*
*The Design criteria are contained in Exhibit A of this report
1Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
2 Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Exhibit K)
3 Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints
4 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can
be replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses
are maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector,
and 7.5 inches commercial/industrial
5 Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where
a number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a
Local Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
6 Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
7 Parking one side
8 No on-street parking
9 All residential collector streets serving above 1,000 lots and industrial or commercial streets are to include heavy vehicle (ESAL)
traffic analysis.
Street
Classification
With Number of
Lots Served5
Concrete
Concrete
Over 4”
Crushed
Stone Base
Full-Depth Asphalt Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB)
Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB) + Geogrid6 Street
Surface Base1 Surface Base CSB1 Surface Base CSB1 Width
Residential
Local
=199 Lots
7”2 NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”4 1.5” 3” 7”4 25’7
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”2 NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”4 1.5” 4” 7”4 28’7
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”2 NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”4 1.5” 5.75” 7”4 30’7 28’8
Commercial/
Industrial9 Not
Permitted 10”3 Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7” 4 1.5” 12” 7”4 28’8
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
EXHIBIT J
RECOMMENDED AGGREGATE TYPE AND WEIGHT
FOR SUBDIVISION CONCRETE MIXES
Concrete Use #57 Crushed
Limestone
#57
Gravel
#4 Crushed
Limestone
#8
Gravel
Concrete
Sand
Street pavement 1,100# 400# 300# 1,310#
Curb & gutter asphalt pavement 1,500# 300# 1,320#
Driveway aprons and public sidewalks
1,500# 300# 1,320#
OR
1,413# 350# 1,280#
There are numerous issues to consider in the selection of aggregate type and distribution in concrete
mixes. In un-reinforced concrete pavement with non-doweled contraction joints (all Kenton County Sub
Reg pavements except commercial/industrial), having a relatively high percentage of large, angular
aggregate supports good long-term contraction joint performance. The comparative measure of
aggregate size distribution used for concrete is the percentage retained on various size sieves.
The following table compares aggregate distribution for typical pavement mixes used in Northern
Kentucky in the 1980’s and earlier, the mid 1990’s through today, and the SSEC recommended
pavement aggregate mix.
AGGREGATE COMPARISON, CUMULATIVE PERCENT RETAINED
ON VARIOUS SIZE SIEVES
Sieve Size 1980’s Mix Mid-1990’s to Current SSEC Recommended
Pavement Mix
1” 0% 0% 8%
¾” 5% 6% 15%
½” 28% 21% 32%
?” 46% 31% 40%
Passing ?” 54% 69% 60%
R=100'
32.5'
R=25'
52.5'
52.5'
R=25'
R=25' R=25'
15'
15' 11' 2'
11'
R=25'
R=25'
2'
14' O.C.
15' O.C. Max.
11'
15'
11'
15'
8'+_
2'
8'+_
GENERAL RULES OF TOOLED CONTRACTION
JOINT LAYOUT
1.) Skew joints 2' in each 12.5' lane; 2'-4" skew in each 14' lane.
2.) Always have the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hit the skewed
joint first.
3.) Maximum joint spacing = 15'; adjust joint spacing as necessary to
keep spacing above a 8' minimum.
4.) On horizontal curves, layout joint spacing along centerline at 14' O.C.;
visually determine a radial line from the centerline back to the curb;
measure back (forward) from that point 2' to set the skew, remembering
the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hits the skewed joint first. Tool
the joint at the skewed line.
5.) At intersections, catch basins and cul-de-sacs, follow joint layout
shown.
TYPICAL SKEWED JOINT
AND C BENT BAR LAYOUT
SCALE: N.T.S
JOINT LAYOUT FOR PAIRED CATCH BASINS
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINT PLAN
NOTE:
ALL CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
ARE DOWELED JOINTS.
L
EXHIBIT K
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY APRON
SLOPED CURB
EXHIBIT L
PAVEMENT LUG DETAIL EXHIBIT M
EXAMPLE PAVEMENT LUG LOCATION EXHIBIT N
EXAMPLE PAVEMENT LUG LOCATION EXHIBIT O
EXHIBIT "P"