
Hillview, Kentucky Code of Ordinances


CITY OF HILLVIEW, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-18 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-17, passed 1-7-19; and
State legislation current through 2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 90-12



AN ORDINANCE APPROVING, ADOPTING AND ENACTING THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF HILLVIEW, BULLITT COUNTY, KENTUCKY



   WHEREAS, the City of Hillview is authorized by KRS 83A.060 (5) to adopt
a codification of local legislation by reference; and



   WHEREAS, the City of Hillview has created a codification of legislation
covering the following subjects:



   Title I   :   General Provisions



   Title III   :   Administration



   Title V   :   Public Works



   Title VII   :   Traffic Code



   Title IX   :   General Regulations



   Title XIII   :   General Offenses



   Title XV   :   Land Usage



   TSO   :   Tables of Special Ordinances



NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HILLVIEW,
BULLITT COUNTY, KENTUCKY, as follows:



   SECTON ONE:  That the ordinances of the City of Hillview, Bullitt
County, Kentucky, of a general and permanent nature, as prepared by the
American Legal Publishing Corporation and copyrighted 1989 and as attached
hereto and made a part of this ordinance as if fully copied herein, are
hereby approved, adopted and enacted as the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky.



   SECTION TWO:  A copy of the Code of Ordinances, as adopted, shall
accompany this ordinance and shall be made a part of the permanent records of
the City pursuant to KRS 83A.060 (5).



   SECTION THREE:  The Codified Ordinances contain all of the provisions
of a general and permanent nature pertaining to the subjects therein
enumerated and embraced.  All prior ordinances and parts of the ordinances
in force on October 1, 1990, which are incorporated in or pertain to the
subject enumerated and embraced in this Code of Ordinances, are hereby
repealed prospectively as of October 1, 1990.



   SECTION FOUR:  The repeal of ordinances as provided in section (3)
hereof, however, shall not affect:



   (a)   Any ordinance of a temporary nature, or any ordinance
pertaining to subject not enumerated and embraced in the Code of Ordinances;



   (b)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before
October 1, 1990;



   (c)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money to or by the City, authorizing the issuance of any bonds or
notes of the City, or any other evidence of the City indebtedness, or any
contract or obligation assumed by the City;



   (d)   Any right or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution to any person or corporation;



   (e)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, assessments, or
charges;



   (f)   Any prosecution, suit, or other proceeding pending, or any
judgement rendered on or prior to October 1, 1990; or



   (g)   Any ordinance which may be adopted by this City after October
1, 1990.



   SECTION FIVE:  This Ordinance shall forthwith be published in
accordance with KRS 83A.060 (9) and shall become effective as of October 1,
1990.



   Given first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council of the
City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky on the 20th day of August, 1990. 
Given second reading voted upon and passed at a regular meeting of the City
Council of the City of Hillview, Bulllitt County, Kentucky on the 17th day of
September, 1990.



   Votes for:  6;      Votes Against: 
0;      Abstentions:  0.



                        Richard Terry         
                      /s/



                        Mayor



ATTEST:



Louise King              /s/



City Clerk



ORDINANCE 00-08



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF HILLVIEW, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2000 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Hillview, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the adoption of the 1997 S-5 Supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of this municipality; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Hillview, Bullitt County,
Kentucky:



   SECTION I



   That the 2000 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as set out in its entirety.



   SECTION II



   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after
its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.



First reading:  7-17-00 



Second reading:    8-21-00



Published:    8-30-00 



                             Leeman Powell  /s/   
         



               Mayor



ATTEST:



  Betty J. Bradbury /s/     



City Clerk



ORDINANCE 2011-10



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF HILLVIEW, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 S-11 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Hillview, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the city; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky; now, therefore,



   BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Hillview:



   SECTION I



   That the 2011 S-11 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Hillview, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as set out in its entirety.



   SECTION II



   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after
its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.



Given first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of
Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky, on the 19th day of September, 2011. 
Given second reading, voted upon and passed at the regular meeting of the
City Council of the City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky, the 17th day
of October, 2011.



Votes for   6  ;      Votes against   0  ;      Not Voting  
  .



                              Jim Eadens /s/ 
   



                              Jim Eadens, Mayor



ATTEST:



Karen Gathof      /s/     



Karen Gathof, City Clerk



ORDINANCE 2014-03



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF HILLVIEW, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2013 S-13 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Hillview, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the city; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky; now, therefore,



   BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Hillview:



   SECTION 1. That the 2013 S-13 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Hillview, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION 2. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.



   Given first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council of the
City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky, on the 17th day of February,
2014.  Given second reading, voted upon and passed at the regular meeting of
the City Council of the City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky, the 17th
day of March, 2014.



   Votes for   5  ;      Votes against   0  ;      Not
Voting     .



                     Jim Eadens /s/             
             



                     JIM EADENS, MAYOR



ATTEST:



Karen Gathof      /s/                     



KAREN GATHOF, CITY CLERK



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;  GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Computation of time



   10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent



   10.06   Writings and signatures



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Revivor



   10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance



   10.10   Construction of section references



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Ordinances saved



   10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.15   Conflicting provisions



   10.16   Reference to offices



   10.17   Errors and omissions



   10.18   Historical and statutory references



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Hillview Code, for which designation "codified ordinances" or "code" may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.



(KRS 446.140)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code."
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01." Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTION.  Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.  (KRS
446.010 (1))



   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.



   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human
being.  (KRS 446.010 (2))



   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and
maintained by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration
information on vehicles and boat and information on holders of motor vehicle
operator’s licenses and personal identification cards. (KRS 446.010(55))



   BUSINESS TRUST.  Includes, except when utilized in KRS Chapter 386, a
“statutory trust” as organized under KRS Chapter 386(A).  KRS 446.010(6))



   CERTIFIED MAIL.  Any method of governmental, commercial, or electronic
delivery that allows a document or package to have proof of:



      (1)   Sending the document or package;



      (2)   The date the document or package was delivered or
delivery was attempted; and



      (3)   The signature of the receipt of the document or package.



(KRS 446.010(8))



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  When used in this code
shall denote the City of Hillview, Kentucky, irrespective of its population
or legal classification.



   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company, or association.  (KRS 446.010(9))



   COOPERATIVE.  Except in KRS Chapter 272, includes a limited
cooperative association.  (KRS 446.010(56))



   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company, or association.  (KRS 446.010(10))



   COUNCIL. The city legislative body.  (KRS 83A.010(5))



   COUNTY. Bullitt County, Kentucky.



   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted. 
(KRS 446.010(12))



   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or
trustees.  (KRS 446.010(13))



   DOMESTIC.  When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust,
or limited liability, means all those incorporated or formed by authority of
this state.  (KRS 446.010(14))



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.  (KRS
446.010(15))



   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor.  (KRS 83A.010(6))



   EXECUTIVE ORDER.  An order issued by the mayor which is binding upon
the officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over which
the city has jurisdiction.  (KRS 83A.010(7))



   FEDERAL.  Refers to the United States (KRS 446.010(17))



   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, business trust, statutory trust, or limited liability, includes
all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state.  (KRS
446.010(18))



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   KRS.  Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and
all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest. 
(KRS 446.010(23))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY.  The City Council.  (KRS 91A.010(8))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER.  A City Councilman.  (KRS 83A.010(8))



   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes, or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine,
equine, or camelid, species.  (KRS 446.010(25))



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.  (KRS 446.010(26))



   MISDEMEANOR.  An offense for which the criminal fine can not exceed
the amount set forth in KRS 534.040 (2) (a), or a term of imprisonment not to
exceed the periods set forth in KRS 532.090 (1) or both.  (KRS 83A.065)



   MONTH.  Calendar month.  (KRS 446.010(27))



   MUNICIPAL ORDER.  An official act of the City Council which is binding
upon the officers and employees of the City and any governmental agency over
which the municipality has jurisdiction.



(KRS 83A.010(9))



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Hillview, Kentucky.



   OATH.  Includes AFFIRMATION in all cases in which an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath.  (KRS 446.010(28))



   OFFICER.  Any person elected to a position by the voters or any person
appointed to a position which:



   (A)   Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly, or a
city;



   (B)   Possesses a delegation of a portion of the sovereign power of
government;



   (C)   Has powers and duties to be discharged which are conferred
directly or by implication by the city;



   (D)   Has duties performed independently and without control of a
superior power other than the law;



   (E)   Has some permanency;



   (F)   Requires an official oath;



   (G)   Is assigned by a commission or other written authority; and



   (H)   Provides for an official bond if required by proper authority.



(KRS 83A.010(10))



   ORDINANCE.  An official act of the City Council which is a regulation
of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law or is an
appropriation of money. (KRS 83A.010(11))



   PARTNERSHIP.  Includes both general and limited partnerships.  (KRS
446.010(30))



   PEACE OFFICER.  Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers,
metropolitan and urban-county government correctional officers, marshalls,
policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make arrests.  (KRS
446.010(31))



   PERSON.  May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships,
joint stock companies and limited liability companies.  (KRS 446.010(33))



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Any governmental, commercial, or electronic method
of delivery that allows a document or package to have:



      (1)   It’s chain of custody recorded in a register to enable
its location to be tracked;



      (2)   Insurance available to cover its loss; and



      (3)   The signature of the recipient of the document or
package available to the sender.  (KRS 446.010(36))



   REGULAR ELECTION.  The election in even numbered years at which
members of Congress are elected and the election in odd numbered years at
which state officers are elected.



(KRS 446.010(37))



   RESOLUTION.  An expression of the opinion, will or policy of the
legislative body on some matter of ministerial business which has come before
the body.  (While an ordinance, and to a large extent a municipal order,
involves a distinctly legislative act, a resolution is a less formal
mechanism for dealing with matters of a special or temporary character.)



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.  (KRS 446.010(39))



   SWORN.  Includes AFFIRMED in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.  (KRS 446.010(43))



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE.  The Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding
a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of
such premises, alone or with others.



   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of a
term of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person elected
or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there
has been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it
applies whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from
the state, county, city, or district, or otherwise.  (KRS 446.010(46))



   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.  (KRS 446.010(47))



   VIOLATION. An offense for which the criminal fine can not exceed the
amount set forth in KRS 534.040 (2)(c).  (KRS 83A.065)



   YEAR.  Calendar year.  (KRS 446.010(49))



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Singular includes plural.  A word importing the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well
as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may
extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or
things.  (KRS 446.020 (1))



   (B)   Masculine includes feminine.  A word importing the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.



(KRS 446.020 (2))



   (C)   Liberal construction.  All sections of this code shall be
liberally construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the
intent of Council.



(KRS 446.080 (1))



   (D)   Retroactivity.  No ordinance shall be construed to be
retroactive, unless expressly so declared.



(KRS 446.080 (3))



   (E)   Technical terms.  All words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such meaning.



(KRS 446.080 (4))



§ 10.04  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order
of court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act,
event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on
which the public office in which a document is required to be filed is
actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of
the next day which is not one of the days just mentioned.  When the period
of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.



   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an
act to be done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before
the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in
computing the time.  If the day thereby computed on which or by which the
act is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a
day on which the public office in which the act is required to be completed
is actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is
none of the days just mentioned.



   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act
is directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is
Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the
next day that is not a legal holiday.



(KRS 446.030)



   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



§ 10.05  MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHOR - AGENT.



   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or
other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such officers or other persons.



(KRS 446.050)



   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.



§ 10.06  WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.



   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party
thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is
subscribed at the end or close of the writing.



   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the
English language.



(KRS 446.060)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional partthat it is
apparent that Council would not have enacted the remaining partswithout the
unconstitutional part, or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
Council.



(KRS 446.090)



§ 10.08  REVIVOR.



   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is
revived when the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance
enacted at the same meeting of Council.



   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived
by the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same
or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the
effective date of the original repealer.



   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting
of Council which enacted the amendment.



   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the
amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as
long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original amendment.



   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment as the case may be.



(KRS 446.100)



§ 10.09  RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.



   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to
any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall
conform, so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of such
proceedings. If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any
provision of the new ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the
party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



(KRS 446.110)



§ 10.10  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code
of ordinances.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance,
all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose
effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain
in effect and are saved.



§ 10.14  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this
code by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
herein.  Anychapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances
may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.



   (B)   The method of amendment set forth in § 32.37 should be used
by the city to amend, add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.16  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.17  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.18  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads word-for-word the same as the statute. 
Example (KRS 83A.090) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).  If a KRS cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following
the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information.  Example:



            § 31.10  MAYOR.



               The executive authority of the city shall be
vested in



            and exercised by the Mayor.



            (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)



            Statutory reference:



            For powers and duties of the Mayor, see KRS 83A.130



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise
provided, the offender shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each offense.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN





         31.   CITY OFFICIALS





         32.   CITY COUNCIL





         33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE





         34.   PUBLIC RECORDS





         34A.   PUBLIC MEETINGS





         35.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         36.   CITY POLICIES





         37.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         38.   TAXATION





         39.   PERSONNEL POLICY





         40.   CODE OF ETHICS




CHAPTER 30:  MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN



Section



   30.01   Form of government



   30.02   Governing officers



§ 30.01  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The form of government provided for this city shall be known as the
"Mayor-Council Plan." (KRS 83A.130 (1))



§ 30.02  GOVERNING OFFICERS.



   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall
be called Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the
City Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by
statute or city ordinance.



(KRS 83A.130 (2))



   (B)   The City Council shall be composed of six members.



(KRS 83A.030 (1))



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Oath; bond



   31.02   Compensation



   31.03   Removal from office



Elected Officials



   31.20   Election procedure



   31.21   Mayor



   31.22   Councilmembers



Nonelected City Officials



   31.35   Establishment of nonelected city offices



   31.36   City Clerk/Treasurer



   31.37   City Attorney



   31.38   Citation Officer



   31.39   Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  OATH; BOND.



   (A)   Oath.  Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon
the discharge of duties of his or her office, take the following oath:  "I
do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of this Commonwealth, and the Constitution of the United States,
and be faithful and true to the Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I
continue a citizen thereof, and that I will faithfully execute, to the best
of my ability, the office of                    , according to law;
and I do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that, since the adoption of the
present Constitution, I being a citizen of this United States, have not
fought a duel with deadly weapons within this State, nor out of it, nor have
I sent or accepted a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons, nor have
I acted as a second in carrying a challenge, nor aided or assisted any person
thus offending, so help me God", as established by section 228 of the
Kentucky Constitution.



   (B)   Certification of oath.  Certification of the person
administering the oath of office to an elected official shall certify in
writing that the oath was administered and the date of its administration.
The certification shall be filed in accordance with KRS 62.020.



   (C)   Bond.  Official bonds shall, if required, meet the standards
of KRS 62.060.



§ 31.02  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected
city officer not later than  the first Monday in May in the year in which
the officer is elected.  An elected officer's compensation shall not be
changed after his election or during his or her term of office.



      (1)   In order to equate the compensation of Mayors and
Councilmembers with the purchasing power of the dollar, the Department for
Local Government computes by the second Friday in February of every year the
annual increase or decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding year
by using 1949 as the base year in accordance with section 246 of the
Constitution of Kentucky, which provides that the Mayor in cities of the
first class shall be paid at a rate no greater than twelve thousand dollars
($12,000) per annum and Mayors in cities other than the first class and
Councilmembers shall be paid at a rate no greater than seven thousand two
hundred dollars ($7,200) per annum.



      (2)   The City Council shall set the compensation of these
officers in accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that
stipulated by the Department of Local Government.



      (3)   Effective January 1, 2015, the compensation for the
Mayor and members of the City Council shall be as follows:



         (a)   The compensation for the Mayor shall be the sum of
One Hundred Twenty-five Dollars ($125.00) per day.



            1.   The individual duly serving as Mayor shall
file with the City Clerk/Treasurer a weekly report of the days devoted to
conducting the duties of the office of Mayor.



            2.   The compensation established herein and
received by the duly serving Mayor shall never exceed the maximum amount
established by the Kentucky Constitution § 246, as adjusted based on the
provisions of KRS 83A.075.



         (b)   The compensation for a member of City Council
shall be the sum of Four Hundred Fifty Dollars ($450.00) per month.



(Ord. 93-01, passed 2-15-93; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 4-21-14; Am. Ord.
2014-05, passed 4-21-14)



   (B)   The City Council shall fix the compensation of each appointed
city officer in the ordinance that creates the office and may change it by
ordinance.



   (C)   The City Council shall establish the compensation of city
employees in accordance with the personnel and pay classification plan
ordinance of the city.



   (D)   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into
the city treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by
any officer or employee.



Statutory reference:



   Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075



§ 31.03  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   (A)   Elected officers.  Any elected officer, in case of
misconduct, inability, or willful neglect in the performance of the duties of
his or her office, may be removed from office by a unanimous vote of the
members of the City Council exclusive of any member to be removed, who shall
not vote in the deliberation of his removal.  No elected officer shall be
removed without having been given the right to a full public hearing.  The
officer, if removed, has the right to appeal to the circuit court of the
county and the appeal shall be on the record.  No officer so removed is
eligible to fill the office vacated before the expiration of the term to
which originally elected.



   (B)   Nonelected officers.  Nonelected city officers may be removed
by the Mayor at will, unless otherwise provided by state law or ordinance.



Statutory reference:



   Removal of elected officers, see KRS 83A.040 (9)



   Removal of nonelected officers, see KRS 83A.080 (2)



ELECTED OFFICIALS



§ 31.20  ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The offices of Mayor and City Council members shall be elected
in the appropriate general election (or special election, if necessary as
provided in KRS Chapter 83A) by nonpartisan means to wit:



      (1)   The city will forgo conducting a nonpartisan primary
election for the nomination of candidates to city office, regardless of the
number of candidates running for each office, and require all candidates to
file their nomination papers with the Bullitt County Clerk not earlier than
the first Wednesday after the first Monday in November of the year preceding
the year in which the office will appear on the ballot and not later than the
second Tuesday in August before the day fixed by KRS Chapter 118 for holding
a regular election for the office. Signatures for nomination papers shall not
be affixed on the document to be filed prior to the first Wednesday after the
first Monday in November of the year preceding the year in which the office
will appear on the ballot.



      (2)   All nomination papers shall be filed no later than 4:00
p.m. local time when filed on the last day on which the papers are permitted
to be filed.



      (3)   The election of candidates to city office shall be
governed by the provisions of this section, KRS 83A.175(1) to (6), and KRS
Chapters 116 to 121.



      (4)   The number of candidates equal to the number of city
offices to be filled who receive the highest number of votes cast in the
regular election (or special election, if necessary) for each city office
shall be elected.



      (5)   Candidates shall be subject to all other applicable
election laws pursuant to KRS Chapters 83A and Chapters 116 to 121.



      (6)   If a vacancy occurs in a candidacy for city office after
the expiration of time for filing nomination papers, or if there are fewer
candidates than there are offices to be filled, the vacancy in candidacy
shall be filled by write-in voting.



   (B)   The law for filling vacancies in office remains unaffected and
is governed by the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



(Ord. 2012-15, passed 12-17-12)



Statutory reference:



   Election of city officers, see KRS 83A.050



   Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080 (3), (4)



   Election to fill unexpired term of city office, see KRS 83A.165



§ 31.21  MAYOR.



   (A)   Election; term of office.  The Mayor of this city shall be
elected by the voters of the city at a regular election. His or her term of
office begins on the first day of January following his or her election and
shall be for four years and until his or her successor qualifies. If a person
is elected or appointed as Mayor in response to a vacancy and serves less
than four (4) calendar years, then that period of service shall not be
considered for purposes of re-election a term of office.



(KRS 83A.040(1))



   (B)   Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least twenty-one (21)
years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the
city throughout his or her term of office.



(KRS 83A.040(1))



   (C)   Compensation.  For provisions concerning Compensation, see §
31.02.



   (D)   Vacancy.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council
shall fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days.  If for any reason, any
vacancy in the office of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs,
the Governor shall promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified
person who shall serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.



(KRS 83A.040 (5), (6))



      (1)   When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a
member of the City Council shall not vote for himself or herself.



(KRS 83A.040 (2) (c))



      (2)   When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation
of the Mayor, the resigning Mayor shall not vote on his or her successor.



(KRS 83A.040 (3))



      (3)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the
office of Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the
resignation date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation shall be
effective at the next regular or special meeting of the City Council
occurring after the date specified in the written letter of resignation.



(KRS 83A.040 (7))



      (4)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is
required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council
shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary
of State of the vacancy.



(KRS 83A.040 (8))



      (5)   The City Council shall elect from among its members an
individual to preside over meetings of the City Council during any vacancy in
the office of the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of KRS 83A.130.



   (E)   Power and Duties.



      (1)   The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in
and shall be exercised by the Mayor.  The Mayor shall enforce the
Mayor-Council Plan, city ordinances and orders, and all applicable
statutes.  He shall supervise all departments of city government and the
conduct of all city officers and employees under his jurisdiction and require
each department to make reports to him as required by ordinance or as he
deems desirable.



      (2)   The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of
local government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.



      (3)   The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public
on the condition and needs of city government as he finds appropriate or as
required by ordinance, but not less than annually. He shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council he finds in the public interest.



(KRS 83A.130 (3))



      (4)   Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall
promulgate procedures to insure orderly administration of the functions of
city government and compliance with statutes or ordinances.  Upon
promulgation or upon revision or rescission of the procedures, copies shall
be filed with the person responsible for maintaining city records.



(KRS 83A.130 (4))



      (5)   Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties, or
responsibilities to subordinate officers and employees and any expression of
his official authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by
executive order.  Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years
and kept in a permanent file.



(KRS 83A.130 (7))



      (6)   All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of
the city shall be made and executed by the Mayor or his agent designated by
executive order.



(KRS 83A.130 (8))



      (7)   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power
to appoint and remove all city employees, including police officers, except
as tenure and terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance, or
contract and except for employees of the Council.



(KRS 83A.130 (9))



      (8)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of
the functions of city government at any time he is unable to attend to the
duties of his office by delegating responsibility for any function to be
performed, in accordance with division (D) (5) above.  However, the Mayor
may not delegate the responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council,
and the authority to approve ordinances or promulgate administrative
procedures may only be delegated to an elected officer.  With approval of
the Council, the Mayor may rescind any action taken in his absence under this
section within thirty (30) days of such action.  If for any reason the
disability of the Mayor to attend to his duties persists for sixty (60)
consecutive days, the office of Mayor may be declared vacant by a majority
vote of the Council and the provisions of § 31.21 (C) shall apply.



(KRS 83A.130 (10))



§ 31.22  COUNCILMEMBERS.



   For provisions concerning City Council, see Chapter 32.



NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS



§ 31.35  ESTABLISHMENT OF NONELECTED CITY OFFICES.



   (A)   All nonelected city offices shall be created by ordinance
which shall specify:



      (1)   Title of office;



      (2)   Powers and duties of office;



      (3)   Oath of office;



      (4)   Bond, if required; and



      (5)   Compensation.



   (B)   With the exception of the Police Chief and all city police
officers, all nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with
approval of City Council.  The Police Chief and all city police officers
shall be appointed by the Mayor at will and such appointments need not be
approved by City Council.



   (C)   All nonelected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will
unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.



   (D)   The following are nonelected city offices:



      (1)   City Clerk/Treasurer



      (2)   Deputy City Clerk/Treasurer



      (3)   City Attorney



      (4)   Building Inspector



      (5)   Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner



      (6)   Dog Warden



      (7)   Public Works Manager



Statutory reference:



   Nonelected city offices, see KRS 83A.080 (1), (2)



§ 31.36  CITY CLERK/TREASURER.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   The office of City Clerk/Treasurer may, by ordinance, be
combined with any other non-elected city office by inclusion of the title and
duties of such office.



   (C)   The duties and responsibilities of the City Clerk/Treasurer
shall include, but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of
the city;



      (2)   Performance of the duties required of the "official
custodian" or "custodian" pursuant to KRS 61.870 through 61.882;



      (3)   Possession of the seal of the city if used;



      (4)   Establishing City Council agenda;



      (5)   Maintaining ordinance books and executive orders;



      (6)   Collecting all accounts receivable by the city and
receiving all bills or charges against the city;



      (7)   Handling routine complaints, correspondence, regular
inquiries not involving action by the City Council;



      (8)   Assisting in preparing the annual budget.



      (9)   Receiving and receipting all taxes due the city.



      (10)   Completing all clerical work required by the Mayor
and/or City Councilmembers.



      (11)   Filing required Federal and/or State Government Forms.



      (12)   Accounting for all city revenues



      (13)   Preparing city payroll and maintaining records.



      (14)   Preparing monthly financial reports.



      (15)   Maintaining all financial reports in conformity to the
adoptive budget; and



      (16)   No later than January 31 of each year, mail to the
Department for Local Government, a list containing current city information
including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   The correct name of the Mayor, legislative body
members, and the following appointed officials who are serving as of January
1 of each year:



            i.   City Clerk;



            ii.   City Treasurer;



            iii.   City Manager;



            iv.   City Attorney;



            v.   Finance Director;



            vi.   Police Chief;



            vii.   Fire Chief; and



            viii.   Public Works Director



         (b)   The correct name of the city; mailing address for
City Hall, and telephone number of the City Hall; and



         (c)   The name and telephone number of either an elected
or appointed official to serve as a contact person that may be reached during
normal business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.



      (17)   Performance of any other duties and responsibilities
required of the City Clerk/Treasurer by statue or ordinance. 



(KRS 83A.085)  (Ord. 86-1, passed 1-7-86)



   (D)   Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City
Council from time to time as set forth in § 31.02.



   (E)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City
Clerk/Treasurer unless such person has taken the oath required by section 228
of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond, if
required, with corporate surety authorized to transact business in Kentucky
and conditioned upon the performance of the duties specified herein.



   (F)   The applicant for this position shall have graduated from high
school; have one year's experience in bookkeeping or related fields and two
years' experience in clerical work; and be over twenty-one (21) years of age.



   (G)   This position shall exist until abolished by the City Council
by appropriate action.



(Ord. 86-1, passed 1-7-86)



Cross reference:



   See § 39.69 Wage Scales



§ 31.37  CITY ATTORNEY



   (A)   The city hereby establishes the non-elected office of City
Attorney pursuant to the authority of KRS 83A.080, KRS 83A.130(12).



   (B)   The City Attorney shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   Attend regular and special City Council meetings;



      (2)   Be available at reasonable times to render legal
opinions to the Mayor, City Council and city employees concerning their
municipal duties;



      (3)   Prepare all legal documents and review all legal
documents on behalf of the city;



      (4)   Represent the city in all courts and administrative
hearings, assist any attorney retained by the insurance carrier for the
city,  and to act at all times as general legal counsel for the city;



      (5)   Prepare all ordinances and revisions of all ordinances;



      (6)   Defend the city in all courts and administrative
hearings against claims, causes of action, or attacks of any kind on the
validity of city ordinances; and



      (7)   Cooperate with any attorney for the city and with
employees of the city in general.



   (C)   The person selected by the Mayor for the nonelected office of
City Attorney shall have graduated from an accredited law school and be
licensed to practice law in the State of Kentucky.



   (D)   (1)   The office of City Attorney shall exist until
abolished by the City Council by ordinance.



      (2)   The City Attorney shall be hired by the Mayor in the
sole discretion of the Mayor and shall hold such office until his or her
resignation, or until relieved of the office by the Mayor in the Mayor's sole
discretion.



   (E)   The rate of compensation for the City Attorney shall be as
determined by the Mayor but not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500) per month.



   (F)   (1)   The City Attorney shall take the oath prescribed in
Section 228, of the Kentucky Constitution and shall further solemnly swear or
affirm that he or she will support the ordinances of the city and that he or
she will faithfully execute, to the best of his or her ability, the office of
City Attorney according to the ordinances of the city and applicable state
law.



      (2)   No bond shall be required of the City Attorney, but the
City Attorney shall be required to carry malpractice insurance in an amount
of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000).



(Ord. 01-01, passed 1-15-01)



Cross Reference:
   City Council meetings, see § 32.21
   Oath of office, see § 31.01




§ 31.38  CITATION OFFICER.




   (A)   Duties. The Citation Officer shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Enforcing all of the requirements of any City of
Hillview ordinance and all appropriate Kentucky Revised Statutes dealing with
the protection of the public, except for offenses which constitute a
violation of the Kentucky Penal Code or a moving motor vehicle offense.



      (2)   Maintaining all records relating to the operation of the
Office.



      (3)   Filing any and all federal and/or state forms.



      (4)   Meeting with and answering questions from the public.



      (5)   Issuing a citation for violation of any applicable City
of Hillview ordinance or Kentucky Revised Statute, and appearing at any
scheduled court or administrative agency hearing concerning any citation.



      (6)   Report no less often than quarterly to the City Council
on the activities of the Office.



   (B)   Qualifications.  The applicant for the position of Citation
Officer shall have graduated from high school or have a high school
equivalency certificate, and be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, have
no felony convictions, and be capable of reading, writing and communicating
with the general public.



   (C)   Tenure.  The person filling this position shall be employed
and/or terminated by action of the Mayor.



   (D)   Compensation.  The rate of compensation for the Citation
Officer shall be a maximum of fourteen dollars ($14) per hour with a maximum
number of hours per week of thirty (30).



(Ord. 2003-19, passed 9-15-03)



§ 31.39  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Duties.  The Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator of the
City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky, shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Enforcement of all Kentucky Revised Statutes which
relate to alcoholic beverages, excluding traffic offenses.



      (2)   Enforcement of all city ordinances relating to alcoholic
beverages, excluding traffic offenses.



      (3)   The enforcement of all administrative regulations
relating to alcoholic beverages, excluding traffic offenses.



      (4)   Directing and maintaining the preparation of the
necessary records and files relating to alcoholic beverages, excluding
traffic offenses.



      (5)   Conducting the necessary correspondence, inspections,
license review, license issuance, requisition supplies and recommend the
purchase of necessary equipment for this position.



      (6)   Meeting with and answering questions for the public.



   (B)   Qualifications.



      (1)   The Administrator shall be over the age of twenty-one
(21) years.



      (2)   No person shall be an administrator, an investigator, or
an employee of the city or a consolidated local government under the
supervision of the Administrator, who would be disqualified to be a member of
the board under KRS 241.100.



   (C)   Appointment.  The Administrator shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.



   (D)   Compensation.  The rate of compensation for the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator shall be one hundred dollars ($100) per month
or as established in the annual budget adopted by the city.



(Ord. 2009-08, passed 7-20-09)



CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL



Section



General Provisions



   32.01   Members; election, qualifications, compensation



   32.02   Vacancies



   32.03   Powers and duties



Rules of Procedure



   32.20   Mayor as Presiding Officer



   32.21   Meetings



   32.22   Quorum



Ordinances



   32.35   One subject; title



   32.36   Introduction; enacting clause



   32.37   Form of amendment



   32.38   Reading requirement; exception for emergency



   32.39   Approval, disapproval by Mayor



   32.40   Adoption of standard codes by reference



   32.41   Official city records



   32.42   Indexing and maintenance requirements



   32.43   Publication requirements



   32.44   Additional requirements for adoption may be established by
city



   32.45   Periodic review required



   32.46   Municipal orders



   32.47   Proved by Clerk/Treasurer; received in evidence



   32.48   Legislative immunity



Cross-reference:



   Monthly public caucus meeting, see § 36.03



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Election; term of once. Each Councilmember shall be elected
at-large by the voters of the city at a regular election. Terms of office
begin on the first day of January following the election and shall be for two
years.



   (B)   Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age,
shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall reside in the city
throughout his term of office.



(KRS 83A.040 (4))



   (C)   Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see §
31.02.



§ 32.02  VACANCIES.



   (A)   Vacancies.



      (1)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a
member of the City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which
specifies a resignation date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation
shall be effective at the next regular meeting of the City Council.



(KRS 83A.040 (7))



      (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the City Council which is
required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council
shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary
of State of the vacancy.



(KRS 83A.040 (8))



   (B)   Failure to fill vacancies. If for any reason, any vacancy on
Council is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall
promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall
serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.



(KRS 83A.040 (6))



Statutory reference:



   Filling of vacancies for nonpartisan city office, see KRS 83A.175



§ 32.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and
shall be exercised by the elected Council of the city. The Council may not
perform any executive functions except those functions assigned to it by
statute.



(KRS 83A.130 (11))



   (B)   The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the
duties and responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules, and
regulations for the public health, safety, and welfare.



(KRS 83A.130 (12))



   (C)   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient
revenue to operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the
city in a budget which provides for the orderly management of city resources.



(KRS 83A.130 (12))



   (D)   The Council may investigate all activities of city
government.  The Council may require any city officer or employee to prepare
and submit to it sworn statements regarding the performance of his official
duties.  Any statement required by the Council to be submitted or any
investigation undertaken by the Council, if any office, department, or agency
under the jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or
undertaken unless and until written notice of the Council's action is given
to the Mayor.  The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the
Council and to appear personally or through his designee on behalf of any
department, office, or agency in the course of  any investigation.



(KRS 83A.130 (13))



RULES OF PROCEDURE



§ 32.20  MAJOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council.  The
Council has the authority to establish, by ordinance, the manner in which one
of its number may be selected to preside at meetings of the Council in the
absence of the Mayor.



   (B)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall
not have a vote, except that he may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.



(KRS 83A.130 (5))



Cross reference:



   Council's responsibility to select one of its own members to preside
when there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor, see § 31.21.



§ 32.21  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The regular meeting date, time and location of the City
Council of the city shall be on the third Monday night of each month at 6:30
p.m. at 299 Crestwood Lane, Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky.



(Ord. 82-1, passed 1-4-82; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 6-28-10)



   (B)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
upon written request of a majority of the Council.  In the call, the Mayor
or Council shall designate the purpose, time, and place of the special
meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for
compliance with KRS Chapter 61.



   (C)   At a special meeting no business may be considered other than
that set forth in the designation of purpose.



   (D)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person
responsible for maintaining city records as provided under § 31.36 and by
the officer presiding at the meeting.



(KRS 83A.130 (11))



   (E)   Two (2) business meetings of the City Council shall be held
each month on the first and third Monday at 6:30 p.m. at the Hillview
Government Center.



   (F)   The regular business meetings of the city scheduled for the
third Monday in January and for the first Monday in September are permanently
canceled.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 1-7-19)



Cross reference:



   Public Meetings, See Ch. 34A



§ 32.22 QUORUM.



   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council
constitutes a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum is sufficient to
take action.



(KRS 83A.060 (6))



ORDINANCES



§ 32.35  ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.



   Each ordinance shall embrace only one subject and shall have a title
that clearly states the subject.



(KRS 83A.060 (1))



§ 32.36  INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.



   Each ordinance shallbe introduced in writing and shall have an enacting
clause styled 'Be it ordained by the City of Hillview."



(KRS 83A.060 (2))



§ 32.37  FORM OF AMENDMENT.



   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and
ordinances to amend shall set out in full the amended ordinance or section
indicating any text being added by a single solid line drawn underneath it. 
Text that is intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning with an
opening bracket and at the end with a closing bracket.  The text between the
brackets shall be stricken through with a single solid line.



(KRS 83A.060 (3))



§ 32.38  READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no
ordinance shall be enacted until it has been read on two separate days.  The
reading of an ordinance may be satisfied by stating the title and reading a
summary rather than the full text.



   (B)   In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of the membership, the Council may suspend the requirements of second reading
and publication in order for an ordinance to become effective by namsng and
describing the emergency in the ordinance.  Publication requirements of §
32.43 shall be complied with within ten (10) days of the enactment of the
emergency ordinance.



(KRS 83A.060 (4) (7))



§ 32.39  APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL BY MAYOR.



   (A)   All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to
the Mayor who, within ten (10) days after submission, shall either approve
the ordinance by affixing his signature or disapprove it by returning it to
the Council together with a statement of his objections.



   (B)   No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's approval
unless he fails to return it to the legislative body within ten (10) days
after receiving it or unless the Council votes to override the Mayor's veto,
upon reconsideration of the ordinance not later than the second regular
meeting following its return, by the affirmative vote of one more than a
majority of the membership.



(KRS 83A.130 (6))



§ 32.40 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.



   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or
nationally recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of
local legislation by an ordinance thatidentifies the subject matter by title,
source, and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without
setting them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting ordinance and is
made a part of the permanent records of the city.



(KRS 83A.060 (5))



§ 32.41  OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.



   (A)   Every action of the Council is hereby made a part of the
permanent records of the city and on passage of an ordinance the vote of each
member of the Council shall be entered on the official record of the meeting.



   (B)   The Council has provided, under the provisions of §§
31.36(C) and 32.42, for the maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent
records of the city.  The City Clerk/Treasurer and the presiding officer
shall sign the official record of each meeting.



(KRS 83A.060 (8))



§ 32.42  INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   At the end of each month, all ordinances adopted in the city shall be
indexed and maintained by the City Clerk/Treasurer in the following manner:



   (A)   The city budget, appropriations of money, and tax levies shall
be maintained and indexed so that each fiscal year is kept separate from
other years.



   (B)   All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or
an ordinance book in the order adopted and maintained in this code of
ordinances. 



(KRS 83A.060 (8))



§ 32.43  PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 32.38 (B), no ordinance shall be
effective until published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424.



   (B)   The publication requirements for ordinances, including all
bond and zoning ordinances, may be satisfied by publication in full or in
summary as designated by Council.



   (C)   The requirements for summary publication may be satisfied by
publication of the title, a brief narrative setting forth the main points of
the ordinance in a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a clear
and understandable manner of the meaning of the ordinance, and the full text
of each section that imposes taxes or fees prepared and certified by an
attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   (D)   Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may
include a sketch, drawing, or map, including common landmarks, such as
streets or roads in lieu of metes and bounds descriptions. (KRS 83A.060 (9))



§ 32.44  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY CITY.



   The city may specify by ordinance additional requirements for adoption
of ordinances in greater detail than contained herein, but the city may not
lessen or reduce the substantial requirements of this chapter or any statute
relating to adoption of ordinances.



(KRS 83A.060 (10))



§ 32.45  PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.



   At least once every five (5) years all ordinances in this code of
ordinances shall be examined for consistency with state law and with one
another and shall be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent,
and invalid provisions.



(KRS 83A.060 (11))



§ 32.46  MUNICIPAL ORDERS.



   (A)   Council may adopt municipal orders.  All municipal orders
shall be in writing and shall be adopted only at an official meeting. 
Orders may be amended only by a subsequent municipal order or ordinance. 
All orders adopted shall be maintained in an official order book.



   (B)   In lieu of an ordinance, municipal orders may be used for
matters relating to the internal operation and functions of the city and to
appoint or remove or approve appointment or removal of members of boards,
commissions, and other agencies over which the Council has control.



(KRS 83A.060 (12), (13))



§ 32.47  PROVED BY CLERK/TREASURER; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.



   All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of
the City Clerk/Treasurer; and when the ordinances are placed in this code of
ordinances by authority of the city, the printed copy shall be received in
evidence by any state court without further proof of the ordinances.



(KRS 83A.060 (14))



§ 32.48  LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.



   For anything said in debate, Councilmembers shall be entitled to the
same immunities and protections allowed to members of the General Assembly. 



(KRS 83A.060 (15))



Statutory reference:



   Privileges of members of General Assembly, see KRS 6.050 and KY. Const.
§ 43



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



Financial Administration



   33.01   Definitions



   33.02   Accounting records and financial reports



   33.03   Annual budget ordinance



   33.04   Annual audit of city funds



   33.05   Official depositories; disbursement of city funds



Improvements



   33.10   Definitions



   33.11   Financing of improvements



   33.12   Apportionment of cost



   33.13   Comprehensive report required



   33.14   Public hearing required



   33.15   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners



   33.16   Affected owner may contest



   33.17   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien



   33.18   Effect of additional property or change in financing



FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION



§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:



   BUDGET.   A proposed plan for raising and spending money for specified
programs, function, activities, or objectives during a fiscal year.



   DEBT SERVICE .  The sum of money required to pay installments of
principal and interest on bonds, notes, and other evidences of debt accruing
within a fiscal year and to maintain sinking funds.



   ENCUMBRANCES .  Obligations in the form of purchase orders or
contracts that are chargeable to an appropriation.  An obligation ceases to
be an encumbrance when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.



   FISCAL YEAR .  The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.



   GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS.   Those standards
for audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities, and functions
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. 



(KRS 91A.010(6))



   GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING.   Those
standards and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board. 



(KRS 91A.010 (7))



§ 33.02  ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.



   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render
financial reports in such a way as to:



      (1)   Determine compliance with statutory provisions;



      (2)   Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial
operations of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity
with generally accepted governmental accounting principles; and



      (3)   Readily provide such financial data as may be required
by the federal revenue sharing program.



   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and
operated on a fund basis.



(KRS 91A.020)



§ 33.03  ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.



   (A)   The annual budget proposal shall detail the raising of revenue
from all sources, including grants and transfers, and the spending of money
for specified programs, functions, activities, or objectives of the city,
including all principals and interest due on debt, for the budget year.  The
total of anticipated revenues shall equal or exceed the total of proposed
expenditures.



   (B)   The form of the annual budget proposal shall be consistent in
form, to the extent practical, with the accounting system of the city.



   (C)   The annual budget proposal shall provide a complete program
and financial plan for all funds for the budget year.  It shall contain:



      (1)   A budget message, as specified in KRS 91A.030(7).



      (2)   A budget summary, as specified in division (D) of this
section, supported by:



         (a)   An estimate of fund balance carry-forwards, as
described in division (E) of this section.



         (b)   An estimate of all anticipated revenues of the
city with a comparison to previous years as specified in division (F) of this
section.



         (c)   Proposed expenditures with a comparison to
previous years, as specified in division (G) of this section.



         (d) An estimate of anticipated transfers, as specified in
division (H) of this section.



   (D)   Budget Summary. At the beginning of the annual budget proposal
there shall appear a summary of the budget, which need not be itemized
further than by principal sources of anticipated revenue, and proposed
expenditures by program, function, activity or objectives of the city, in
such a manner as to present a simple and clear summary of the detailed
estimates of the budget components.



   (E)   Fund Balance Carry-Forward. Each fund balance available for
appropriation shall be limited to the amount by which assets are estimated to
exceed liabilities at the beginning of the budget year. Fund balance
carry-forward shall mean the fund balance as of June 30th of the previous
budget year which is carried forward to the succeeding budget year.



   (F)   Anticipated Revenues and Comparison with Other Years. In
parallel columns opposite several items of anticipated revenue there shall be
placed:



      (1)   The amount of each such item actually received during
the next preceding fiscal year and the upcoming fiscal year; and



      (2)   The total of the amount of each item actually received
to the time of preparation of the annual budget proposal, plus anticipated
revenues for the remainder of the current fiscal year estimated as current
and accurately as possible; and



      (3)   The amount of each item anticipated to be received
during the proposed budget year, estimated as accurately as possible.



   (G)   Proposed Expenditures and Comparison with Other Years. In
parallel columns, opposite the several items of proposed expenditures, there
shall be placed:



      (1)   The amount of each such item actually expended during
the current fiscal year; and



      (2)   The total of the amount actually expended to the time of
preparation of the annual budget proposal plus the expenditures estimated for
the remainder of the current fiscal year as accurately as possible; and



      (3)   The amount of each item to be appropriated for the
budget year.



   (H)   Anticipated Transfer From Other Funds. Any anticipated excess
revenues, if legally available for general purposes and to the extent such
excess is to be used to support other funds, shall be stated as transfer
items in the annual budget proposal.



(Ord. 81-8, passed - - )



§ 33.04  ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.



   (A)   Each city shall, after the close of each fiscal year, cause
each fund of the city to be audited by the Auditor of Public Accounts or a
certified public accountant. The audits shall be completed by February 1
immediately following the fiscal year being audited. Within ten (10) days of
the completion of the audit and its presentation to the city legislative body
in accordance with division (D)(5) of this section, each city shall forward
an electronic copy of the audit report to the Department for Local Government
for information purposes.



   (B)   If a city is required by another provision of law to audit its
funds more frequently or more stringently than is required by this section,
the city shall also comply with the provisions of that law.



   (C)   The Department for Local Government shall, upon request, make
available electronic copies of the audit reports and financial statements
received by it under division (A) of this section to the Legislative Research
Commission to be used for the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975 or to the
Auditor of Public Accounts.



   (D)   Each city required by this section to conduct an annual or
biennial audit shall enter into a written contract with the selected auditor.
The contract shall set forth all terms and conditions of the agreement which
shall include but not be limited to requirements that:



      (1)   The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial
statements, which shall include the government-wide and fund financial
statements;



      (2)   The auditor shall include in the annual or biennial city
audit report an examination of local government economic assistance funds
granted to the city under KRS 42.450 to 42.495. The auditor shall include a
certification with the annual or biennial audit report that the funds were
expended for the purpose intended;



      (3)   All audit information be prepared in accordance with
generally accepted governmental auditing standards which include tests of the
accounting records and auditing procedures considered necessary in the
circumstances. Where the audit is to cover the use of state or Federal funds,
appropriate state or Federal guidelines shall be utilized;



      (4)   The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed
report embodying:



         (a)   The basic financial statements and accompanying
supplemental and required supplemental information;



         (b)   The auditor's opinion on the basic financial
statements or reasons why an opinion cannot be expressed; and



         (c)   Findings required to be reported as a result of
the audit;



      (5)   The completed audit and all accompanying documentation
shall be presented to the city legislative body at a regular or special
meeting; and



      (6)   Any contract with a certified public accountant for an
audit shall require the accountant to forward a copy of the audit report and
management letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon request of the city
or the Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall
have the right to review the certified public accountant's work papers upon
request.



   (E)   A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this
section shall be considered satisfactory and final in meeting any official
request to a city for financial data, except for statutory or judicial
requirements, or requirements of the Legislative Research Commission
necessary to carry out the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.



   (F)   Each city shall, within 30 days after the presentation of an
audit to the city legislative body, publish an advertisement in accordance
with KRS Chapter 424 containing:



      (1)   The auditor's opinion letter;



      (2)   The “Budgetary Comparison Schedules-Major Funds,”
which shall include the general fund and all major funds;



      (3)   A statement that a copy of the complete audit report,
including financial statements and supplemental information, is on file at
city hall and is available for public inspection during normal business hours;



      (4)   A statement that any citizen may obtain from city hall a
copy of the complete audit report, including financial statements and
supplemental information, for his personal use;



      (5)   A statement which notifies citizens requesting a
personal copy of the city audit report that they will be charged for
duplication costs at a rate that shall not exceed $0.25 per page; and



      (6) A statement that copies of the financial statement prepared
in accordance with KRS 424.220, when a financial statement is required by KRS
424.220, are available to the public at no cost at the business address of
the officer responsible for preparation of the statement.



   (G)   Any resident of the city or owner of real property within the
city may bring an action in the Circuit Court to enforce the provisions of
this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500). In addition, any officer who fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall, for each failure, be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500), in the discretion of the court, which may be recovered only
once in a civil action brought by any resident of the city or owner of real
property within the city. The costs of all proceedings, including a
reasonable fee for the attorney of the resident or property owner bringing
the action, shall be assessed against the unsuccessful party.



   (H)   In the event of extenuating circumstances that prevent a city
from completing and submitting a required audit or financial statement in
compliance with the applicable deadlines in division (A) of this section, the
city may submit a written request for an extension of time to the Department
for Local Government on a form prescribed by the Department for Local
Government. The Department for Local Government shall approve the request if
it is submitted on or before the applicable deadline, and in the judgment of
the Department for Local Government the request is warranted by extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the city. Extensions granted under this
division shall not exceed nine (9) months from the original due date of the
audit or financial statement. If the Department for Local Government approves
an extension for a city and the city fails to complete and submit the
required audit or financial statement in compliance with that extended
deadline, then the provisions of division (I) of this section shall apply.



   (I)   If a city fails to complete an audit or financial statement
and submit it to the Department for Local Government as required in division
(A) and division (H) of this section, the Department for Local Government
shall notify the Finance and Administration Cabinet that the city has failed
to comply with the audit requirements of this section, and that any funds in
the possession of any agency, entity, or branch of state government shall be
withheld from the city until further notice. The Department for Local
Government shall immediately notify the Finance and Administration Cabinet
when the city complies with the requirements of division (A) and division (H)
of this section for all prior fiscal years it has failed to comply with the
audit requirements of this section, and the Finance and Administration
Cabinet shall direct the reinstatement of payments to the city, including any
funds that were withheld due to the non-compliance.



   (J)   Within a reasonable time after the completion of a special
audit or examination conducted pursuant to KRS 43.050, the Auditor shall bill
the city for the actual expense of the audit or examination conducted. The
actual expense shall include the hours of work performed on the audit or
examination as well as reasonable associated costs, including but not limited
to travel costs. The bill submitted to the city shall include a statement of
the hourly rate, total hours, and total costs for the entire audit or
examination.



(KRS 91A.040)



Statutory reference:



   Department for Local Government to provide assistance, see KRS 91A.050.



§ 33.05  OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall designate as the city's official depositories
one or more banks, federally insured savings and loan companies, or trust
companies within the Commonwealth.  The amount of funds on deposit in an
official depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or surety
bonds.



   (B)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which
the city is responsible, which has not been otherwise invested or deposited
in a manner authorized by law, shall be deposited in official depositories. 
All city funds shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the
Mayor which states the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the
purpose of the payment, and the fund out of which the funds are payable. 
Each authorization shall be numbered and recorded.



(KRS 91A.060)



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 33.10  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:



   ASSESSED VALUE BASIS .  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property
bears to the total assessed value of all such properties.



   BENEFITS RECEIVEDBASIS.  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to equitable determination by Council of the special benefit
received by property from the improvement, including assessed value basis,
front foot basis, and square foot basis, or any combination thereof, and may
include consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for
different classes of property based on nature and extent of special benefits
received, and other factors affecting benefits received.



   COST.   All costs related to an improvement, including planning,
design, property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and
legal fees, financing costs, and publication expenses.



   FAIR BASIS .  Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot
basis, or benefits received basis.



   FRONT FOOT BASIS .  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual
parcels of property bears to such front footage of all such properties.



   IMPROVEMENT.   Construction of any facility for public use or services
or any addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific properties
in the area served by such facility.



   PROPERTY.   Any real property benefited by an improvement.



   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT or ASSESSMENT .  A special charge fixed on property
to finance an improvement in whole or in part.



   SQUARE FOOT BASIS .  The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property
beam to the square footage of all such property.



(KRS 91A.210)



§ 33.11 FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The city may not finance any improvement in whole or in part
through special assessments except as provided in this subchapter and in any
applicable statutes.



(KRS 91A.200)



   (B)   Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a
fair basis.



   (C)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing, and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing.



(KRS 91A.220)



§ 33.12  APPORTIONISMENT OF COST.



   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government, or any educational, religious, or charitable organization.
Council may assess such property in the same manner as for privately owned
property or it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.



(KRS 91A.230)



§ 33.13  COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.



   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the
city shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:



   (A)   The nature of the improvement;



   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the
boundaries or other description of the area to be assessed;



   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;



   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;



   (E)   If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and



   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects
of the improvement, assessments, or financing.



(KRS 91A.240)



§ 33.14  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   After preparation of the report required by § 33.13, the city shall
hold at least one public hearing on the proposed improvement at which all
interested persons shall be heard.  Notice of the hearing shall be published
pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each affected property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall include:



   (A)   The nature of the improvement;



   (B)   Description of area of the improvement;



   (C)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in
whole or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;



   (D)   Time and place the report may be examined; and



   (E)   Time and place of the hearing.



(KRS 91A.250)



§ 33.15  ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.



   Within ninety (90) days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall
determine whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and
if it determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and
containing all necessary terms, including the items referred to in § 33.13
and a description of all properties.  Promptly upon passage the city shall
publish such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by
certified mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to
proceed with the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the
estimated cost to the property owner, and the ratio the cost to each property
owner bears to the total cost of the entire project.



(KRS 91A.260)



§ 33.16  AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.



   (A)   Within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice provided
for in § 33.15, any affected property owner may file an action in the
circuit court of the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by
special assessment, the inclusion of his property in the improvement, or the
amount of his assessment.  If the action contests the undertaking of the
improvement by the special assessment method of the inclusion of the property
of that property owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it
relates to any property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the
final judgment has been entered.



   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution are final and binding with respect to such
property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments.  After the
lapse of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties are
forever barred.



(KRS 91A.270)



§ 33.17  WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.



   (A)   After the passage of tine for the action provided for in §
33.16, or after favorable final judgment in any such action, whichever comes
later, the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof stayed by
the action, including notice requiring payment of special assessment or
installment thereon and bonds or other method proposed to finance the
improvement.  The first installment may be apportioned so that other
payments will coincide with payment of ad valorem taxes.



   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments
thereof on any property, and accrued interest and other charges, constitutes
a lien on the property to secure payment to the bondholders or any other
source of financing of the improvement.  The lien takes precedence over all
other liens, whether created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the
ordinance, except a lien for state and county taxes general municipal taxes,
and prior improvement taxes, and is not defeated or postponed by any private
or judicial sale, by any mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the
description of the property or in the names of the owners.  No error in the
proceedings of the Council shall exempt any benefited property from the lien
for the improvement assessment, or from payment thereof, or from the
penalties or interest thereon, as herein provided.



(KRS 91A.280)



§ 33.18  EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.



   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the
improvement or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§ 33.13
through 33.17 applies if additional property is included in the improvement
or if change is made in the method or period of financing; but additional
property may be included in the improvement with the consent of the owner
thereof without compliance with other sections if it does not increase the
cost apportioned to any other property, or any other change may be made
without such compliance if all property owners of the improvement consent.



(KRS 91A.290)



CHAPTER 34:  PUBLIC RECORDS



Section



General



   34.01   Definitions



Procedures for Requesting Public Records



   34.05   Initial request with immediate inspection



   34.06   Referral to proper custodian



   34.07   Public records not immediately available



   34.08   Refusal of unreasonable requests



   34.09   Time limitation; denial of inspection



   34.10   Concealing or destroying records prohibited



   34.11   Access to records relating to particular individual



   34.12   Public records protected from disclosure



GENERAL



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   CITY.  The city government of this city.



   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE.  The direct or indirect use of any public record
or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease of a
service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary, or fee.  COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not include
publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or periodical;
use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news or other
informational programs; or use of a public record in the preparation for
prosecution or defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to
such action, or the attorneys representing the parties.



   CUSTODIAN.  The official custodian or any authorized person having
personal custody and control of public records.  The CUSTODIAN having
personal custody of most of the public records of this city is the City
Clerk/Treasurer.



   MECHANICAL PROCESSING.  Any operation or other procedure which is
transacted on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a
copier, computer, recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.



   MEDIA.  The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include, but is not limited to paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.



   OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.  The chief administrative officer or any other
officer or employee of a public agency who is responsible for the
maintenance, care, and keeping of public records, regardless of whether the
records are in his actual personal custody and control.  The OFFICIAL
CUSTODIAN of this city shall be the Mayor.



   PERSON.  A human being who makes a request for inspection of public
records.



   PUBLIC AGENCY.  Every city government board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city government agency, including the policy-making board
of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local officer, or any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a
hospital medical staff or a committee formed for the purpose of evaluating
the qualifications of public agency employees, established, created, or
controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an interagency
body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public agency" is defined
in this section.



(KRS 61.870)



   PUBLIC RECORDS.  All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes,
discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other documentation regardless of
physical form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the
possession of, or retained by a public agency.  PUBLIC RECORDS shall not
include any records owned or maintained by or for a body referred to in
subsection (1) (h) of KRS 61.870 that are not related to functions,
activities, programs, or operations funded by state or local authority nor
any records that may be excluded by § 34.12.



   REASONABLE FEE or FEE.  The fair payment required by a public agency
for making copies of non exempt public records requested for noncommercial
purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including
the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the
public agency, but not including the cost of staff.  If a public agency is
asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the
format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency may
at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.



   REQUEST.  An oral or written application by any person to inspect
public records of the city.



   SOFTWARE.  The program code which makes a computer system function,
but does not include that portion of the program code which contains public
records exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific
addresses of files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any
other mechanism for controlling the security or restricting access to public
records in the public agency's computer system.  SOFTWARE consists of the
operating system, application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines
such as translators and utility programs, but does not include that 
material which is prohibited from disclosure or copying by a license
agreement between a public agency and an outside entity which supplied the
material to the agency.



(KRS 61.870)



PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS



§ 34.05  INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.



   (A)   As defined in § 34.01, and subject to the limitations set
forth in § 34.12, any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records
of the city shall make a request or complete a written application for such
records at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer during regular office
hours, except during legal holidays.  The application shall be hand
delivered, mailed, or sent via facsimile to the City Clerk/Treasurer's office.



(KRS 61.872 (2))



   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person's request is in
compliance with the open records law and the requested records are
immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection.  Suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of
the City Clerk/Treasurer for the inspection.  No person shall remove
original copies of public records from the offices of any public agency
without the written permission of the official custodian of the record. 



(KRS 61.872 (1).



   (C)   An applicant may inspect public records during the regular
business hours of the city, or by receiving copies of the public records from
the city through the mail if the applicant's residence or principal place of
business is outside of the county in which the city is located and he has
precisely described public records which are available within the city. If
the person requesting the public records requests that the records be mailed,
the official custodian shall mail the copies upon receipt of all fees and the
cost of mailing.



(KRS 61.872 (3))



   (D)   The applicant shall have the right to make abstracts of the
public records and to obtain copies of all public records not exempted by
this chapter.  When copies are requested, the custodian may require a
written request and advance payment of the prescribed fee as defined in §
34.01. 



(KRS 61.874 (1))



   (E)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format.  Nonexempt public
records used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy
format where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. 
Agencies are not required to convert hard copy format records to electronic
formats.



   (F)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as
not less than 82 inches x 11 inches in at least one (1) color on white paper,
or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard Code
for Information Interchange (ASCII) format.  If the public agency
maintains  electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and this
format conforms to the requestor's requirements, the public records may be
provided in this alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified
by the public agency.  Any request for a public record in a form other than
the forms described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized
request.



(KRS 61.874 (2) (b))



   (G)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.  The public
agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are requested for a
commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the requestor
stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may require
the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency.  The contract shall
permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.  The fee may be based on the cost to the public agency of
media, mechanical processing and staff required to produce a copy of the
public record or records or the cost to the public agency of the creation
purchase, or the acquisition of the public records.



(KRS 61.874 (4))



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part
of a public record for a:



      (1)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial
purpose, if a certified statement from the  requestor was required by the
public agency pursuant to subsection (G) of this section: or



      (2)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly
allows the use of the public record for a different commercial purpose; or



      (3)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly
allows the use of the public record for a commercial purpose.  A newspaper,
periodical, radio or television station shall not be held to have used or
knowingly allowed the use of the public record for a commercial purpose
merely because of its publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its
express permission for that commercial use.



(KRS 61.874 (5))



   (I)   Online access to public records in electronic form, as
provided under this section, may be provided and made available at the
discretion of the public agency.  If a party wishes to access public records
by electronic means and the public agency agrees to provide online access, a
public agency may require that the party enter into a contract, license, or
other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for these agreements. 
Fees shall not exceed:



      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and
reasonable cost of computer time access charges;



      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a
reasonable fee based on  the factors set forth in subsection (G).



(KRS 61.874 (6))



§ 34.06  REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.



   If the City Clerk/Treasurer does not have custody or control of the
public record or records requested, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall so notify
the applicant and shall furnish the name and location of the custodian of the
public record.



(KRS 61.872 (4))



§ 34.07  PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.



   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately so notify the applicant
and shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection of the public
records, not to exceed three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of
the cause is given for further delay and the place, time, and earliest date
on which the public record will be available for inspection or duplication.



(KRS 61.872 (5))



§ 34.08  REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.



   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies of public records.  However, refusal under this section must be
sustained by clear and convincing evidence. (KRS 61.872 (6))



§ 34.09  TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.



   (A)   The official custodian, upon any request for records made
under this chapter, shall determine within three (3) days, excepting
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after the receipt of any request
whether to comply with the request and shall notify in writing the person
making the request within the three-day period of its decision.  Any agency
response denying, in whole or in part, inspection of any record shall include
a statement of the specific exception authorizing the withholding of the
record and a brief explanation of how the exception applies to the record
withheld.  The response shall be issued by the official custodian or under
the official custodian's authority and shall constitute final agency action.



(KRS 61.880)



   (B)   If the requesting party wants the Attorney General to review
the denial of a request for inspection of a public record, he shall proceed
under the provisions of KRS 61.880 and 61.882.  Upon the Attorney General's
request, the agency will provide additional documentation.



   (C)   If upon request by the person seeking inspection, the Attorney
General reviews the denial and issues a written opinion upholding, in whole
or in part, the request for inspection, the requesting  party may institute
appeal proceedings within thirty (30) days for injunctive or declaratory
relief in the circuit court.  In addition, if the Attorney General disallows
the request, or if the city continues to withhold the record notwithstanding
the Attorney General's opinion, and the person seeking disclosure institutes
proceedings in circuit court, the city shall notify the Attorney General of
such action. 



(KRS 61.880, 61.882)



§ 34.10  CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.



   No official or employee of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy
any record with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these
rules and regulations.



§ 34.11  ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.



   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or in
which he is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 



(KRS 61.884)



§ 34.12  PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application
of this chapter and these rules and regulations, and shall be subject to
inspection only upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except that
no court shall authorize the inspection by any party of any materials
pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is provided by the Rules of
Civil Procedure governing pretrial discovery:



      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal
nature where the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.



      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and
compiled and maintained for scientific research.  This exemption shall not,
however, apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is directed
by other statute.



      (3)   (a)   Upon and after July 15, 1992, records
confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized  as confidential or proprietary, which
if opened would permit an unfair commercial advantage to competitors of the
entity that disclosed the records.



         (b)   Upon and after July 15, 1992, records
confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which
are compiled and maintained (i) in conjunction with an application or the
administration of a loan or grant; (ii) in conjunction with an application
for or the administration of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax
credits as described in KRS Chapter 154; (iii) in conjunction with the
regulation of commercial enterprise, including mineral exploration records,
unpatented, secret commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulae, or
processes, which are used for the making, preparing, compounding, treating,
or processing of articles or materials which are trade commodities obtained
from a person; or (iv) for the grant or review of a license to do business. 
These exemptions shall not, however, apply to records the disclosure or
publication of which is directed by other statutes.



      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a
business or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the
business' or industry's interest in locating in, relocating within, or
expanding within the Commonwealth.  This exemption shall not include those
records pertaining to applications to agencies for permits or licenses
necessary to do business or to expand business operations within the state,
except as provided in division (A) (3) above.



      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in
conjunction with the regulation or supervision of financial institutions,
including but not limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and
credit unions, which disclose the agency's internal examining or audit
criteria and related analytical methods.



      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to the acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has
been acquired.  The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this
provision.



      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data
used to administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or
academic examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again.



      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved
in administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting
and investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the disclosure of
the information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants
not otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication.  Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action.  The exemptions provided by this
subdivision shall not be used by the custodian of the records to delay or
impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.



      (9)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would
have a reasonable likelihood of threatening  the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to
a terrorist act and limited to:



            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence
assessments;



            2.   Vulnerability assessments;



            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;



            4.   Counterterrorism measures and plans;



            5.   Security and response needs assessments;



            6.   Infrastructure records that expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division through the disclosure of the
location, configuration, or security of critical systems, including public
utility critical systems. These critical systems shall include but not be
limited to information technology, communication, electrical, fire
suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater, sewage, and gas systems;



            7.   The following records when their disclosure
will expose a vulnerability referred to in this division: detailed drawings,
schematics, maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor plans, and
operating, utility, or security systems of any building or facility owned,
occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency; and



            8.   Records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division and that describe the exact
physical location of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological
materials.



         (b)   As used in this division, "terrorist act" means a
criminal act intended to:



            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all
or part of the civilian population;



            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division
(A)(9)(a)6.; or



            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or
facility owned, occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.



         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a
request to inspect a public record for a reason identified in this division,
that public agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request,
referred to in KRS 61.880(1), to the executive director of the Kentucky
Office of Homeland Security and the Attorney General;



         (d)   Nothing in this division shall affect the
obligations of a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of
public records under state environmental, health, and safety programs;



         (e)   The exemption established in this division shall
not apply when a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a
public record identified in this division under the Open Records Law.



      (10)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with
private individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give
notice of final action of a public agency.



      (11)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda
in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended.



      (12)   All public records or information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by federal law or regulation.



      (13)   Public records or information the disclosure of which
is prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of
the General Assembly.



      (14)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chapter 45A
or 56. This exemption shall not apply after:



         (a)   A contract is awarded; or



         (b)   The procurement process is canceled without award
of a contract and there is a determination that the contract will not be
resolicited; and



      (15)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to
any governmental function.



   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.  In addition, if any public record contains material
which is not excepted under this section, the city shall separate the
excepted and make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject
to the possible applicability of § 34.08.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or
limit the exchange of public records or the sharing of information between
public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need
or is necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.



   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny,
abridge, or impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for
employment, or an eligible person on an employment register to inspect and
copy any record, including preliminary and other supporting documentation,
that relates to that person.  Such records shall include, but not be limited
to work plans, job performance, demotions, evaluations, promotions,
compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers, layoffs, disciplinary
actions, examination scores, and preliminary and other supporting
documentation.  A municipal employee, applicant, or eligible person on an
employment register shall not have the right to inspect or copy any
examination or any documents relating to ongoing criminal or administrative
investigations by an agency.



(KRS 61.878)



CHAPTER 34A:  PUBLIC MEETINGS



Section



General



   34A.01   Definitions



Public Meeting Requirements



   34A.05   Meetings open to the public



   34A.06   Requirements for closed sessions



   34A.07   Public meeting schedules



   34A.08   Special meetings



   34A.09   Video teleconferences



   34A.10   Enforcement



Cross-reference:



   Monthly public caucus meeting, see § 36.03



GENERAL



§ 34A.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ACTION TAKEN.  A collective decision, a commitment or promise to make
a positive or negative decision, or an actual vote by a majority of the
members of the governmental body.



(KRS 61.805 (3))



   MEETING.  All gatherings of every kind, including video
teleconferences, regardless of where the meeting is held, and whether regular
or special and informational or casual gatherings held in anticipation of or
in conjunction with a regular or special meeting.



(KRS 61.805 (1))



   MEMBER.  A member of the governing body of a public agency.  Member
does not include employees or licensees of the agency.



(KRS 61.805 (4))



   PUBLIC AGENCY.  Every city government board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city government agency, including the policy-making board
of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local  officer,  or  any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a
hospital medical staff or a committee formed for the purpose of evaluating
the qualifications of public agency employees, established, created, or
controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an interagency
body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public agency" is defined
in this section.



(KRS 61.805 (2))



   VIDEO TELECONFERENCE.  One (1) meeting, occurring in two (2) or  more
locations, where individuals can see and hear each other by means of video
and audio equipment.



(KRS 61.805 (5))



PUBLIC MEETING REQUIREMENTS



§ 34A.05  MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.



   (A)   All meetings of a quorum of the members of any public agency
at which any public business is discussed or at which any action is taken by
the agency, shall be public meetings, open to the public at all times, except
for the following:



      (1)   Deliberations on the future acquisition or sale of real
property by a public agency, but only when publicity would be likely to
affect the value of a specific piece of property to be acquired for public
use or sold by a public agency;



      (2)   Discussions of proposed or pending litigation against or
on behalf of the public agency;



      (3)   Collective bargaining negotiations between public
employers and their employees or their representatives;



      (4)   Discussions or hearings which might lead to the
appointment, discipline, or dismissal of an individual employee, member, or
student without restricting that employee's, member's or student's right to a
public hearing if requested.  This exception shall not be interpreted to
permit discussion of general personnel matters in secret;



      (5)   Discussions between a public agency and a representative
of a business entity and discussions concerning a specific proposal, if open
discussions would jeopardize the siting, retention, expansion, or upgrading
of the business;



      (6)   Local cabinet meetings and executive cabinet meetings;



      (7)   Deliberations of quasi-judicial bodies regarding
individual adjudications or appointments, at which neither the person
involved, his representatives, nor any other individual not a member of the
agency's governing body or staff is present, but not including any meetings
of planning commissions, zoning commissions, or boards of adjustment;



      (8)   That portion of a meeting devoted to a discussion of a
specific public record exempted from disclosure. However, that portion of any
public agency meeting shall not be closed to a member of the Kentucky General
Assembly;



      (9)   Meetings which federal or state law specifically require
to be conducted in privacy;



      (10)   Meetings which the Constitution provides shall be held
in secret; and



      (11)   Meetings of any selection committee, evaluation
committee, or other similar group established under KRS Chapter 45A or 56 to
select a successful bidder for award of a state contract.



   (B)   Any series of less than quorum meetings, where the members
attending one or more of the meetings collectively constitute at least a
quorum of the members of the public agency and where the meetings are held
for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section, shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
discussion between individual members where the purpose of the discussions is
to educate the members on specific issues.



(KRS 61.810)



§ 34A.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR CLOSED SESSIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements shall be met as a condition for
conducting closed sessions by those public agencies authorized by § 34A.05
(A) (1)  and (4) except as (4) relates to students:



      (1)   Notice shall be given in regular open meetings of the
general nature of the business to be discussed in closed session, the reason
for the closed session, and the specific provision of § 34A.05 authorizing
the closed session;



      (2)   Closed sessions may be held only after a motion is made
and carried by a majority vote in open, public session;



      (3)   No final action may be taken in closed session; and



      (4)   No matters may be discussed at a closed session other
than those publicly announced prior to convening the closed session.



   (B)   Public agencies and activities identified in § 34A.05 (A)
paragraphs (2), (3), (4), but only so far as (4) relates to students, (5),
(6), (7), (8), and (9) are excluded from the requirements of subsection (A)
of this section.



(KRS 61.815)



§ 34A.07  PUBLIC MEETING SCHEDULES.



   (A)   All meetings of a public agency shall be held at specified
times and places which are convenient to the public. In considering locations
for public meetings, the agency shall evaluate space requirements, seating
capacity, and acoustics.



   (B)   All public agencies shall provide for a schedule of regular
meetings by ordinance, order, resolution, by laws or by whatever other means
may be required for the conduct of business of the public agency.  The
schedule of regular meetings shall be made available to the public.



(KRS 61.820)



§ 34A.08  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Except as provided by subsection (B) of this section, the
following requirements shall govern special meetings of public agencies:



      (1)   The presiding officer or a majority of the members of
the public agency may call a special meeting;



      (2)   The public agency shall provide written notice of the
special meeting containing the date, time, place of the special meeting and
the agenda.  Discussions and action at the meeting shall be limited to items
listed on the agenda in the notice.



      (3)   As soon as possible, written notice shall be delivered
personally, transmitted by facsimile, or mailed to every member of the public
agency as well as each media organization which has filed a written request,
including a mailing address, to receive notice of special meetings.  The
notice shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before the special
meeting.  The public agency may periodically, but no more often than once in
a calendar year, inform media organizations that they will have to submit a
new written request or no longer receive written notice of special meetings
until a new written request is filed.



      (4)   A public agency may satisfy the requirements of division
(A)(3) of this section by transmitting the written notice by electronic mail
to public agency members and media organizations that have filed a written
request with the public agency indicating their preference to receive
electronic mail notification in lieu of notice by personal delivery,
facsimile machine, or mail.  The written request shall include the
electronic mail address or addresses of the agency member or media
organization.



      (5)   As soon as possible, written notice shall also be posted
in a conspicuous place in the building where the special meeting will take
place and in a conspicuous place in the building which houses the
headquarters of the agency.  The notice shall be posted at least twenty-four
(24) hours before the special meeting.



   (B)   In the case of an emergency which prevents compliance with the
notice requirements in this section, this subsection shall govern a public
agency's conduct of a special meeting.  The special meeting shall be called
pursuant to subsection (A) (1) of this section.  The public agency shall
make a reasonable effort, under emergency circumstances, to notify the
members of the agency, media organizations which have filed a written request
pursuant to this section, and the public of the emergency meeting.  At the
beginning of the emergency meeting, the person chairing the meeting shall
briefly describe for the record the emergency circumstances preventing
compliance with the notice requirements of this section.  These comments
shall appear in the minutes.  Discussion and action at the emergency meeting
shall be limited to the emergency for which the meeting is called.



(KRS 61.823)



§ 34A.09  VIDEO TELECONFERENCES.



   (A)   A public agency may conduct any meeting through video
teleconference.



   (B)   Notice of a video teleconference shall comply with the
requirements of KRS 61.820  or 61.823 as appropriate, in addition the notice
of a video teleconference shall:



      (1)   Clearly state that the meeting will be a video
teleconference; and



      (2)   Precisely identify a primary location of the video
teleconference where all members can be seen and heard and the public may
attend in accordance with KRS 61.840.



   (C)   The same procedure with regard to participation, distribution
of materials, and other matters shall apply in all video teleconference
locations.



   (D)   Any interruption in the video or audio broadcast of a video
teleconference at any location shall result in the suspension of the video
teleconference until the broadcast is restored.



(KRS 61.826)



§ 34A.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to KRS 61.846
and 61.848 for enforcing KRS 61.805 to 61.850.



Cross-reference:



   Rules of Procedure, see §§ 32.20 - 32.22.



CHAPTER 35: POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Established



   35.02   Classification and pay scale



   35.03   Civil Service Provisions apply



   35.04   Participation in Kentucky Law Enforcement Foundation Program
Fund



Police Chief



   35.10   Duties



   35.11   Qualifications



   35.12   Tenure



   35.13   Compensation



   35.14   Oath



Police Officers



   35.20   Duties



   35.21   Qualifications



   35.22   Tenure



   35.23   Compensation



   35.24   Oath



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 95.700 a Police Department is hereby
established.



   (B)   At the discretion of the City Council individual police
officers may be identified by rank as Patrolman, Sergeant, Lieutenant,
Captain and Chief of Police.



   (C)   An auxiliary police force is hereby established pursuant to
KRS 95.445 for the city. Such force shall consist of 15 auxiliary police
officers who shall be appointed and removed by executive order of the Mayor.
Subject removal may be without cause. The force shall be subject to all rules
and regulations promulgated by City Council.



(Ord. 80-2, passed 1-2-80; Am. Ord. 80-7, passed 3-17-80)



§ 35.02  CLASSIFICATION AND PAY SCALE.



   (A)   The City Council does hereby adopt the Public Personnel
Implementation and Administration Manual produced by the Kentucky Education
and Training Network dated November 1981 as the official grade classification
and pay scale classification for all city police officers employed by the
city. Said Public Personnel Implementation and Administration Manual is
hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein.



   (B)   The Mayor in establishing the grade, classification, and pay
scale for police officers in the city shall comply with the minimum and
maximum amount set forth in the Public Personnel Implementation and
Administration Manual.



   (C)   The City Council, in giving its advice and consent to the
Mayor in the setting of salary and grade classification, shall be bound by
the grade classification and pay scale established in the Public Personnel
Implementation and Administration Manual.



(Ord. 85-12, passed 11-7-85)



§ 35.03  CIVIL SERVICE PROVISIONS APPLY.



   The Civil Service Commission shall prescribe and propound such
examinations as are proper, commensurate with vacant positions within the
Police Department of the city, according to classification prescribed by
ordinance, shall set such times and places for holding examinations as may be
proper and shall give notice of examinations by publication pursuant to KRS
Chapter 424.



(Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



Cross reference:



   Civil Service Commission, see §§ 37.01 - 37.11



§ 35.04  PARTICIPATION IN KENTUCKY LAW ENFORCEMENT FOUNDATION PROGRAM FUND.



   (A)   The City shall apply for participation in the Kentucky Law
Enforcement Foundation Program Fund Training Incentive Program.



   (B)   If accepted for participation in the Fund, the City shall
comply with KRS 15.410 - 15.510, the general conditions contained in the
application for participation, and such further rules, regulations and
policies as may be reasonably prescribed by the Kentucky Department of
Justice.



(Ord. 93-06, passed 6-2-93)



Statutory Reference:



   Law Enforcement Foundation Program Fund, see KRS 15.410 - 15.510



POLICE CHIEF



§ 35.10  DUTIES.



   The Police Chief shall:



   (A)   Plan, direct, and exercise general supervision over the work
of the Department, subject to the ultimate authority of the Mayor.



   (B)   Recommend to the Mayor the adoption of such written rules and
regulations as he may  deem necessary for the proper administration of the
Police Department; and enforce such rules and regulations, work methods and
procedures after promulgation by the Mayor and approval of City Council in
accordance with KRS 83A.130 (4)).



   (C)   Make and review all personnel assignments within the
Department, subject to the ultimate authority of the Mayor.



   (D)   Review activities and reports of police officers.



   (E)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council for the
appointment, promotion and dismissal of officers.



   (F)   Enforce disciplinary measures when necessary.



   (G)   Ascertain that officers receive adequate training in modern
police methods and procedures.



   (H)   Direct the preparation and maintenance of police records and
files.



   (I)   Direct the investigation of major criminal offenses.



   Q)   Cooperate with state and federal officers in the apprehension
of wanted persons.



   (K)   See that reports are prepared for the Mayor (who shall report
to the City Council and the National Safety Council, Federal Bureau of
Investigation).



   (L)   Prepare budget estimates and control the expenditure of
Department funds, subject to the ultimate authority of the Mayor.



   (M)   Conduct Department correspondence, requisition supplies and
recommend the purchase of necessary equipment.



   (N)   Meet with and answer questions for the public.



   (O)   Attend police conferences and meet with various citizen groups.



(Ord. 86-2, passed 1-7-86; Am. Ord. 99-1, passed 9-21-99)



§ 35.11  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The applicant for Police Chief shall have graduated from high school or
have a high school equivalency certificate; completed the basic ten week
training program offered by the Division of Law Enforcement Training or have
four years of practical experience as a police officer and be 25 years of age
or over.



(Ord. 86-2, passed 1-7-86)



§ 35.12  TENURE.



   The position of Police Chief shall exist until abolished by the City
Council by appropriate action. (Ord. 86-2, passed 1-7-86)



§ 35.13  COMPENSATION.



   The rate of compensation for the Police Chief shall be as determined by
City Council by ordinance.



(Ord. 86-2, passed 1-7-86)



§ 35.14  OATH.



   The Police Chief shall take the oath prescribed in § 228 of the
Kentucky Constitution.



(Ord. 86-2, passed 1-7-86)



POLICE OFFICERS



§ 35.20  DUTIES.



   A Police officer shall:



   (A)   Patrol a designated area of the city in a patrol car to
prevent and discover the commission of crime and to enforce traffic
regulations; answer calls and complaints; administer first aid; serve
warrants; and answer questions for the public.



   (B)   Conduct preliminary investigations at the scene of crimes and
serious accidents; gather evidence; locate and interview witnesses; make
arrests and interrogate prisoners; compile accident statistics.



   (C)   Direct traffic at intersections and at accidents and fires;
maintain order in crowds, at parades, and other public meetings.



   (D)   Operate electronic equipment for speed detection.



   (E)   Process prisoners, provide for their needs and supervise their
activities; appear in court to present evidence and testify against the
person accused of crimes.



   (F)   Prepare and maintain necessary records and reports.



   (G)   Participate in training activities.



   (H)   Give advice on laws and ordinances and general information to
the public.



   (I)   Perform related work as required.



(Ord. 86-6, passed 1-7-86)



Statutory Reference:



   Training Requirements, KRS  95.955



§ 35.21  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The applicant for police officer shall have graduated from high school
or have a high school equivalency certificate; and be 21 years of age or
older.



(Ord. 86-6, passed 1-7-86)



§ 35.22  TENURE.



   The position of police officer shall exist until abolished by the City
Council by appropriate action.



(Ord. 86-6, passed 1-7-86)



§ 35.23  COMPENSATION.



   Compensation for a police officer shall be as determined by City
Council by ordinance.



(Ord. 86-6, passed 1-7-86)



Cross reference:



   See § 39.79 Wage Scale



§ 35.24  OATH.



   Police officers shall take the oath prescribed in  228 of the Kentucky
Constitution.



(Ord. 86-6, passed 1-7-86)



CHAPTER 36:  CITY POLICIES



Section



   36.01   Discrimination on the basis of disability status; grievance
procedure



   36.02   Continuity of municipal government



   36.03   Monthly public caucus meeting



§ 36.01  DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY STATUS; GRIEVANCE
PROCEDURE.



   (A)   There is on file at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer a
grievance procedure for anyone who believes they may have been discriminated
against by the city based on disability status with respect to federally
funded programs.  These grievance procedures are incorporated herein by
reference as if enumerated herein in full.  These procedures may be obtained
by contacting the City Clerk/Treasurer who shall forward a copy to any party
requesting them.



   (B)   The administration of these procedures and related federal and
state regulations shall be the responsibility of the executive authority of
the city.



   (C)   These procedures may be amended by ordinance to comply with
court directives or additional federal or state regulations.



(Ord. 84-12, passed 8-21-84)



§ 36.02  CONTINUITY OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CATASTROPHE. A disaster or series of concurrent disasters which
adversely affect the entire commonwealth or a major geographical portion
thereof.



      DECLARED EMERGENCY.  Any incident or situation declared to be an
emergency by executive order of the Governor, or a county judge/executive, or
a mayor, or the chief executive of other local governments in the
commonwealth pursuant to the provisions of KRS Chapters 39A to 39F.



      DISASTER.  Any incident or situation declared as such by
executive order of the Governor, or the President of the United States,
pursuant to federal law.



      EMERGENCY.   Any incident or situation which poses a major
threat to public safety so as to cause, or threaten to cause, loss of life,
serious injury, significant damage to property, or major harm to public
health or the environment and which a local emergency response agency
determines is beyond its capabilities.



      EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR.  A person designated under this
section, if an officer is unavailable, to exercise the powers and discharge
the duties of that office until a successor is appointed or elected and
qualified as provided by law, or until the lawful incumbent is able to resume
the exercise of the powers and discharge the duties of the office.



      OFFICE.  Includes all state and local offices, the powers and
duties of which are defined by law, except the office of Governor, and except
those in the General Assembly and the judiciary. An "officer" is a person who
holds an office.



      POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.  Includes counties, urban-counties,
charter counties, cities, special districts, authorities, and other public
corporations and entities whether organized and existing under charter or
general law.



      UNAVAILABLE.  Means that during a state of emergency either:



         (a)   A vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy
authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the
office; or



         (b)   That the lawful incumbent of the office and any
duly authorized deputy are absent or unable to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of the office.



   (B)   Location of City Council meetings.  During the continuance of
a catastrophe, disaster, emergency and/or declared emergency all meetings of
the City Council may be within or without the territorial limits of the city
at a place and time as designated in a resolution promulgated by the Mayor.
The location shall be within the state.



   (C)   Exercise of Authority.  While the public business is being
conducted at temporary location, the governing body and other officers of the
city shall have and exercise, at that location, all of the executive,
legislative, and administrative powers and functions conferred upon that body
and officers under state law. The powers and functions, may be exercised in
the light of the exigencies of the emergency situation without regard to or
compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
and pertaining thereto. All acts of the body and officers shall be as valid
and binding as if performed within the territorial limits of the city.  This
division shall control notwithstanding any statutory charter or ordinance
provision to the contrary.



   (D)   Appointments.  During the time of a catastrophe, disaster
emergency and/or declared emergency the Mayor and/or Deputy Mayor, or if the
Mayor and/or Deputy Mayor are unavailable a majority of the City Council, may
appoint no less than three (3) nor more than seven (7) emergency interim
successors for each office, department and/or agency necessary to continue
the provisions of vital services to the general public within the municipal
boundaries of the city. These emergency interim successors shall have the
full authority to exercise all powers of their office, department and/or
agency.



   (E)   No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim
successor unless he or she is eligible under the Constitution and statutes to
hold the office to which he or she is designated to succeed, but no statutory
provision prohibiting local or state officials from holding another office
shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor.



   (F)   Emergency interim successors shall take the oath required to
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may
succeed. No person, as a prerequisite to the exercise of the powers or
discharge of the duties of an office to which he or she succeeds, shall be
required to comply with any other provision of law relative to taking office.



   (G)   Officials authorized to act as emergency interim successors
are empowered to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office
only during continuance of an emergency. The City Council, by joint
resolution, may at any time terminate the authority of the emergency interim
successors to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of office.



   (H)   Until the persons designated as emergency interim successors
shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office in accordance
with this section, the persons shall serve in their designated capacities at
the pleasure of the designating authority.



   (I)   Any person violating any provision of this section or any
administrative regulation promulgated or order issued pursuant to this
section for which another penalty is not specified shall be guilty of a Class
A misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2006-02, passed 2-20-06)



§ 36.03  MONTHLY PUBLIC CAUCUS MEETING.



   (A)   A monthly caucus meeting shall be held on the first Monday of
each month at 6:30 p.m. at the Hillview Government Center.



   (B)   The purpose of said caucus meeting is discussion of any and
all issues related to the city, exchange of ideas regarding said issues, and
presentations by guest speakers or Council persons.



   (C)   There shall be no final action taken on any issue at the
caucus meeting.



   (D)   A regular monthly business meeting will continue to be held on
the third Monday of each month wherein all final actions shall be taken.



(Ord. 2015-11, passed 12-21-15)



CHAPTER 37:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Civil Service Commission



   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Commission established; members



   37.03   Examinations



   37.04   Qualification of applicants



   37.05   Present employees



   37.06   Appointments; promotions



   37.07   Dismissal, suspension or reduction



   37.08   Action in Circuit Court



   37.09   Number of employees; abolition of office or position



   37.10   Prohibition of political activity



   37.11   Salary of commission members



Human Rights Commission



   37.20   Membership



   37.21   Powers



   37.22   Enforcement of orders



Joint Planning Commission



   37.30   Planning unit established; levy of fees



   37.31   Planning Commission established; membership



   37.32   Board of Adjustment established; membership



   37.33   Existing regulations ratified



Vacant Property Review Commission



   37.40   State statutes adopted



   37.41   Establishment; membership; duties



Code Enforcement Board



   37.50   Definitions



   37.51   Creation and membership



   37.52   Enforcement powers



   37.53   Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office;
oath; compensation



   37.54   Organization of Board; meetings; quorum



   37.55   Conflict of interest



   37.56   Powers of the Code Enforcement Board



   37.57   Enforcement proceedings



   37.58   Hearing; notice; and final order



   37.59   Presentation of cases



   37.60   Appeals; final judgement



   37.61   Ordinance fine schedule



   37.62   Lien; fines, charges, and fees



   37.63   Lienholder notification system



   37.64   Liens



   37.65   Immediate action



CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



   Editor’s note:  After the July 1, 2010, any individual hired as a
police officer shall not receive the benefits of the provisions of this
subchapter nor be required to take the civil service examination as a
condition of employment.  All city police officers who currently are
included in the Civil Service system created by Ord. 85-8 shall continue to
receive those benefits. Please refer to Ordinance No. 2010-10, passed 6-28-10.



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   ADMINISTRATIVE OR DIRECTORAL POSITION.   The head of a department of
municipal government.



   APPOINTING AUTHORITY   The officer, commission, board or body having
the power of appointment or removal in any office, department, commission,
board or institution.



   CIVIL SERVICE.   The offices and positions of trust or employment in
the service of the city not  specifically excluded by KRS 90.310 to 90.410
or by ordinance of the city as provided in KRS 90.310.



   COMMISSION.   The board of civil service commissioners as established
herein.



   DISMISSAL.   The discharge of an employee.



   EMPLOYEE.   Any person employed in the conduct of municipal affairs,
either full-time or part-time, but the term shall not include the Mayor, an
administrative or directorial position, persons employed on temporary or
special projects, or to persons whose regular employments with the city are
seasonal and are less than nine months in any one year and the City
Clerk/Treasurer.



(Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.02  COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall
appoint three (3) but no more than five (5) persons who shall constitute the
Civil Service Commission of this city.  Each appointee shall be at least
thirty (30) years of age and not related by either blood or marriage to the
Mayor or any member of the City Council.  The appointees shall originally be
appointed one for a term of three (3) years, one for a term of two (2) years,
and all remaining appointments shall be for a term of one (1) year and the
successors to these appointees shall be appointed in like manner, each for a
period of three (3) years and until their successor is appointed and
qualified.  A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as original appointments.  At the time of any appointment if the
Mayor elects to appoint only three (3) Commissioners, not more than two (2)
Commissioners shall be adherents of the same political party.  If the Mayor
elects to appoint more than three (3) Commissioners, not more than three (3)
Commissioners shall be adherents of the same political party.  The appointee
originally appointed for the term of three (3) years shall be Secretary of
the Commission.  Each appointee shall qualify by taking an oath of office as
required by law.  The salaries of the Commissioners may be fixed by City
Council (see § 37.11).



   (B)   If the appointing authority of any city fails to appoint a
Civil Service Commission within thirty (30) days after he has the power to so
appoint or after a vacancy exists, the Mayor Pro Tern shall make the
appointment and the appointee shall hold office until the expiration of the
term and until his successor is appointed and qualified.



   (C)   The Civil Service Commission shall make and enforce rules, not
inconsistent with the provisions of KRS 90.310 to 90.410 and the ordinances
of the city, for examinations and registrations therefor.



(KRS 90.310 (2) - (4))  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.03  EXAMINATIONS.



   (A)   The Civil Service Commission shall prescribe and propound such
examinations as are proper, commensurate with vacant positions within the
Police Department of the city, according to classification prescribed by
ordinance, shall set such times and places for holding examinations as may be
proper and shall give public notice of examinations by publication pursuant
to KRS Chapter 424.



   (B)   The Civil Service Commission shall, as soon after examinations
as is practicable, certify to the Mayor or other appointing authority a list
of the applicants so examined, with one having the highest average ranked
first and all others ranked numerically according to the result of the
examination.



   (C)   Any honorably discharged solider, sailor, marine, member of
the air force, or member of any other branch of the military service who was
inducted into that service through voluntary or involuntary enlistment, and
who is an applicant for any municipal civil service positions, and a
registered voter of that municipality, shall be entitled to a five percent
(5%) increase on his examination score.  Any Red Cross nurse who served
during the period of hostilities between the United States and the Central
Powers in World War I and between the United States and Japan and Germany in
World War II, and who is a registered voter of that municipality, shall be
entitled to the same percentages.  Such percentages shall be added to
examination scores only if the score is determined by the civil service
commission to be a passing score and after verification of the required
service.



   (D)   The Civil Service Commission shall maintain an eligible list
of not less than three (3) of each position to be filled.



   (E)   The appointing authority may designate certain civil service
positions and prescribe that for such positions the examinations shall first
be given exclusively to current employees; provided, however, that if less
than three (3) employees with a minimum of two (2) years seniority achieve a
passing grade, the examination shall be held in accordance with division (A)
of this section.



(KRS 90.320)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.04  QUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS.



   (A)   The Civil Service Commission shall examine all applicants as
to their physical and mental qualification for the particular classification
wherein they seek employment.  To be eligible for examination a person must
not be less than eighteen (18) nor have passed his or her forty-sixth (46th)
birthday, a law-abiding citizen of sobriety and integrity, and must be able
to read and write and understand the English language; provided, however,
that any present employee who is over forty-five (45) years of age and who is
otherwise qualified shall be eligible to take any promotional examinations.



   (B)   No person shall be appointed to a position under civil service
until that person is a resident of the county in which the city is located.



(KRS 90.330)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.05  PRESENT EMPLOYEES.



   Employees who at the time the provisions of this subchapter are adopted
have been in the employ of the city for one (1) year last past shall not be
required to stand an original examination, and shall be eligible for all the
benefits provided herein.



(KRS 90.340)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.06  APPOINTMENTS; PROMOTIONS.



   (A)   The appointing authority shall make all civil service
appointments, and the appointments shall be made only from the lists of
applicants certified to him by the Civil Service Commission after
examination.  Appointments shall be made only by the selection of one (1) of
the three (3) holding the highest averages in the particular class and grade
wherein the vacancy exists, except as provided in division (F) of this
section.



   (B)   Whenever it is imperative to fill a vacancy in classified
civil service before the Commission can certify a list of as many as three
(3) persons eligible for appointment after competitive examination, the
appointing authority shall nominate a competent person from the same class or
next lower rank to the Commission for noncompetitive examination, and if
certified by the Commission as qualified after the noncompetitive
examination, he may be appointed provisionally to fill the vacancy until an
appointment can be made after competitive examination.  This provisional
appointment shall continue only until a regular appointment can be made from
the eligible list prepared by the Commission, which eligible list shall be
prepared within ninety (90) days after vacancy.



   (C)   In case of great emergency and when no one upon the eligible
list or by promotion from a lower rank is available, an appointment may be
made by the appointing authority without examination, but in no case shall
such appointment continue longer than sixty (60) days and in no case shall
successive appointments be made of the same person, or other persons, to such
vacancy.



   (D)   Temporary appointments made necessary by reason of illness or
disability of regular employees shall continue only during such period of
disability.



   (E)   The death of an employee shall not authorize an appointment
without examination.



   (F)   Whenever, from any cause, there shall be a vacancy in any of
the classified services, the employee in said classification ranking next
highest in seniority, if he chooses, shall succeed to and fill said vacancy,
unless upon charges made by the city that said employee is not qualified to
fill said vacancy, and after notice and upon trial to determine his
qualifications in the same manner as is now required for the dismissal,
suspension or reduction in grade or pay of an employee, it be established by
the city that said employee has not the necessary qualifications to enable
him to discharge the duties of the office or position in which the said
vacancy occurs.  Provided that in case of a vacancy in the classified
service, where peculiar and exceptional qualifications of a particular
professional or educational character are required, upon satisfactory
evidence that for reasons stated in writing by the appointing authority,
competitive examination in such case has failed to provide an eligible list;
the Commission may suspend the provisions requiring competitive examination
under civil service.



   (G)   Where the service to be rendered by an appointee in the
classified service is for a temporary period not to exceed sixty (60) days,
and the need of such service is imperative, the appointing authority may
select for that temporary service any person on the list of those eligible
for permanent appointment.  Successive temporary appointments to the same
position shall not be made under this provision.  The acceptance or refusal
by an eligible applicant of a temporary appointment shall not affect his
standing on the register for permanent employment, nor shall temporary
service be  counted as part of the probationary service in case of
subsequent appointment to a permanent position.



   (H)   No person shall be certified by the Commission from an
eligible list more than four (4) times to the same appointing authority for
the same or similar position.



   (I)   The appointing authority may provide that all permanent
employment may be probationary appointments for a period of not more than
twelve (12) months, after which probationary period regular appointments
shall be given to all probationary employees who are deemed to be
satisfactory by the respective appointing authority.



(KRS 90.350)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85; Am. Ord. 97-03, passed 3-17-97)



§ 37.07  DISMISSAL, SUSPENSION OR REDUCTION.



   (A)   No employee in the classified service of this city shall be
dismissed, suspended or reduced in grade or pay for any reason except
inefficiency, misconduct, insubordination or violation of law involving moral
turpitude, or violation of any rule adopted by the city legislative body or
Civil Service Commission.



   (B)   Any person may prefer charges in writing against any employee
by filing them with the Mayor or other appointing authority who shall
communicate the charges without delay to the Civil Service Commission of the
city.  The charges must be signed by the person making them and must set out
clearly each charge.  The appointing authority shall, whenever probable
cause appears, prefer charges against any employee whom he believes guilty of
conduct justifying his removal.  Upon the filing of charges the Clerk of the
Civil Service Commission shall notify its members and serve a copy of the
charges upon the accused employee with a statement of the date, place and
hour at which the hearing of charges will begin, this hearing not to be held
within three (3) days of the date of the service of charges upon the accused
employee.  The day on which the charges are served on the accused employee
shall count as one of the days of notice.  The person accused may in writing
waive the service of charges and demand trial within three (3) days after
they have been filed with the Clerk of the Civil Service Commission.



   (C)   Upon the hearing the charges shall be considered traversed and
put in issue, and the trial shall be limited to the issues presented by the
written charges.



   (D)   The Civil Service Commission shall have the power to summon
and compel attendance of witnesses at all hearings by subpoena issued by the
clerk of that body and served upon the witnesses by members of the Police
Department of the city or any officer authorized to serve subpoenas.  If any
witness fails to appear in response to a summons or refuses to testify
concerning any matter on which he may lawfully be interrogated, any district
court judge, on application of the Commission may compel obedience by
proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of a subpoena issued
from the district court.  The accused employee shall have the right to have
subpoenaed any witnesses he may desire, upon furnishing their names to the
clerk.  As many as ten (10) subpoenas may be served on the request of the
accused employee without charge but each additional subpoena requested by him
shall be issued by the clerk and served by the Police Department only upon
payment of fifty cents ($.50) to the City Clerk/Treasurer by the employee. 
The action and decision of the Civil Service Commission on the charges shall
be reduced to writing and kept in a book for that purpose and the written
charge shall be attached to the book containing the body's decision.



   (E)   In cases where the head of the department or the appointing
authority has probable cause to believe an employee has been guilty of
conduct justifying his removal or punishment he shall immediately suspend
that employee from duty or from both pay and duty pending trial and the
employee shall not be placed on duty or allowed pay thereafter until the
charges are heard by the Civil Service Commission.



   (F)   The Civil Service Commission shall punish any employee found
guilty by reprimand or a suspension for any length of time not to exceed six
months, or by reducing the grade, if the employee's classification warrants,
or by combining any two or more of these punishments, or by dismissal.  No
employee shall be reprimanded, removed, suspended or dismissed except as
provided in this section.



(KRS 90.360)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.08  ACTION IN CIRCUIT COURT.



   (A)   Any employee of the city found guilty by the Civil Service
Commission of any charge as provided by § 37.07 may bring an action in the
Bullitt Circuit Court of the county in which the city is located to contest
the action of that body.



   (B)   Upon request in writing by the accused, and the payment of
costs therefor, the clerk of the Civil Service Commission shall file a
certified copy of the charges and the judgement of that body in the Circuit
Court.  Upon the transcript being filed the case shall be docketed in the
Circuit Court and tried as an original action.



   (C)   If the clerk fails to certify the transcript to the Circuit
Court within five (5) days after the request is made, then the aggrieved
person may file an affidavit in that court setting out as fully as possible
the charges made at the time of trial and judgement, together with a
statement that demand for the transcript had been made of the clerk more than
five (5) days prior to the filing of the affidavit. Upon filing of this
affidavit in the Circuit Court, the case shall be docketed in that court and
the court may compel the filing of the transcript by the clerk by entering
proper mandatory order, and upon failure of the clerk so to do, he shall be
liable to fine and imprisonment for contempt.  Such action shall have
precedence over other business and be determined speedily.



(KRS 90.370)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.09  NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES; ABOLITION OF OFFICE OR POSITION.



   (A)   The City Council shall fix by ordinance the number and
classification of city employees, and the salaries for each classification. 
When the number of employees and their classification has been fixed by
ordinance, no employee shall be dismissed, suspended or reduced in grade or
pay for any reason except that set out in § 37.07 herein.



   (B)   Whenever in the exercise of a reasonable discretion, it shall
be the judgement of the City Council that economic necessity requires it, or
that there is no longer a need for a particular office or position to exist,
the Board of Commissioners may abolish said office or position and any
officer or employee occupying said office or position may be laid off or
suspended until and if such office or position is recreated or
re-established.  The abolition of any office or position must not be a
subterfuge to effect another purpose, but must be actual and bona fide and
must not amount to the mere alteration, modification or abolition of title
only.



   (C)   Should any officer or employee conceive that he has been
aggrieved by the abolition or the proposed abolition of said office or
position, he may, at any time within ninety (90) days, file a petition in
equity in the Bullitt Circuit Court, stating his reasons why the position or
office has not been fairly abolished, or why it should not be abolished, and
upon issue joined thereon by the city, the burden shall be on the latter to
establish the necessity for and the good faith of the city in abolishing said
office or position.  The right to abolish and the right to have the office
or position recreated shall be determined as other equitable actions are
determined.



   (D)   If the office or position is recreated or re-established
within five (5) years, then any person who was deprived of his office or
position shall be restored to the office or position he formerly held or
occupied in the order of his seniority if he shall elect to do so, and the
city shall advise said officer or employee at his last known address and
advertise pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, that the office or position has been
recreated or re-established.



(KRS 90.380)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



§ 37.10  PROHIBITION OF POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



   (A)   No person shall be appointed to any position because of
political partisan service rendered by him or his family, or because of
political sentiment or affiliation, nor shall any person be dismissed or
reduced in grade because of any political opinion.



   (B)   No employee of this city shall coerce or persuade another, or
in any way actively participate in any election, or cause others to do so.



(KRS 90.390)  (Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)  Penalty, see  10.99



§ 37.11  SALARY OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.



   Commission members shall receive a salary as determined by City Council
by ordinance from the general fund of the city annually.



(Ord. 85-8, passed 9-16-85)



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 37.20  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Human Rights Commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall
be appointed on a non-partisan basis and shall be broadly representative of
the financial institutions, real estate businesses, religious groups, human
rights groups, and the general public.  The Mayor shall appoint the members,
to be approved by the City Council.  In the event of incapacity, death or
resignation of any member a successor shall be appointed for the member's
unexpired term.  Members shall be eligible for reappointment.  Before
making new appointments or any reappointments, the Mayor may request the
recommendations of the City Council. No elected or appointed city official
shall be a member of the Commission. The members shall serve without
compensation.



(Ord. 79-55, passed - - )



§ 37.21  POWERS.



   The Human Rights Commission is authorized to:



   (A)   Receive, initiate, investigate, hear, and determine charges of
violation of ordinances, orders, or resolutions forbidding discrimination
adopted by the city.



   (B)   Compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
evidence before it by subpoena issued by the Circuit Court.



   (C)   Issue remedial orders, after notice and hearing, requiring
cessation of violations.



   (D)   Issue affirmative orders as in its judgment will carry out the
purposes of this subchapter and Chapter 95.



   (E)   Employ an executive director, attorneys, hearing examiners,
clerks and other employees and agents.



   (F)   Enter into cooperative working agreements with federal or
state agencies to achieve the purposes of this subchapter and Chapter 95.



   (G)   In its discretion or upon request of the City Council or the
Kentucky Commission on Human Rights refer a matter under its jurisdiction to
the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights for initial action or review.



(Ord. 79-5, passed - - )



Statutory reference:



   Powers of local commissions, see KRS 344.230 and 344.330



§ 37.22  ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS.



   The proceeding for enforcement of an order of the Human Rights
Commission is initiated by filing a complaint in the Circuit Court. Copies of
the complaint shall be served upon all parties of record. Within thirty (30)
days after the filing of the complaint by the Human Rights Commission, or
within such further time as the court may allow, the Human Rights Commission
shall transmit to the court the original or certified copy of the entire
record upon which the order is based, including a transcript of testimony,
which need not be printed. By stipulation of all parties to the proceedings,
the record may be shortened.  The findings of fact of the Human Rights
Commission shall be conclusive unless clearly erroneous in view of the
probative and substantial evidences on the whole relief or restraining order
as it deems just, and to enter an order enforcing, modifying and enforcing as
modified or setting aside in  whole or in part the order of the Human Rights
Commission, or remanding the case to the Kentucky Human Rights Commission for
further proceedings.  All such proceedings shall be heard and determined by
the Circuit Court and the Court of Appeals as expeditiously as possible and
with lawful precedence over other matters.



(Ord. 79-5, passed - - )



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of local Commission orders, see KRS 344.340



JOINT PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 37.30  PLANNING UNIT ESTABLISHED; LEVY OF FEES.



   (A)   A joint planning unit has been established and is hereby
established and ratified for the entire county of Bullitt and all of the
cities situated therein.



   (B)   It is agreed that the Joint Planning Commission shall be
supported by the levy of fees for services rendered with Bullitt County
contributing the balance necessary to fund the combined planning operations.



   (C)   It is agreed that the Bullitt County Fiscal Court will approve
a budget annually for the Joint Planning Commission, amended as needed, and
bear the expense incurred under said budget except those borne by the cities
as set out above. Nothing contained in this agreement shall prohibit the
acceptance of funds from other sources for the expenses of the planning unit
or the administration of KRS Chapter 100.



(Ord. 80-9, passed 8-18-80)



§ 37.31  PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The name of the Planning Commission shall be the "Bullitt
County Planning Commission".



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall be composed of fourteen (14)
members which shall include:



      (1)   Six (6) members who are residents of Bullitt County
living outside the city limits of Lebanon Junction, Shepherdsville, Mt.
Washington, or Hillview and these six (6) members shall be appointed by the
Bullitt County Judge subject to the approval of the Bullitt Fiscal Court.



      (2)   Two (2) members who are residents of the City of Lebanon
junction, appointed by the Mayor of Lebanon Junction subject to the approval
of the City Council of Lebanon junction.



      (3)   Two (2) members who are residents of the City of
Shepherdsville appointed by the Mayor of Shepherdsville subject to the
approval of the City Council of Shepherdsville.



      (4)   Two (2) members who are residents of the City of Mt.
Washington appointed by the Mayor of Mt. Washington, subject to approval of
the City Council of Mt. Washington.



      (5)   Two (2) members who are residents of the City of
Hillview appointed by the Mayor of Hillview subject to the approval of the
City Council of Hillview.



   (C)   The term of office of all commission members shall be four (4)
years and shall expire on December 31st, of the last year of the term.
Commission members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified.



   (D)   All commission members shall be reimbursed for any necessary
expenses. Such expenses shall be approved and paid by the Bullitt Fiscal
Court. Citizen members shall receive compensation for each commission or
public meeting attended of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) with such
compensation to be fixed and paid by the Bullitt Fiscal Court. No commission
member shall be paid for attending more than forty (40) meetings during any
fiscal year of the commission without prior approval of the Bullitt Fiscal
Court.



   (E)   All other details which are necessary for the establishment,
operation and administration of the Commission, for the preparation of plans,
and for the aids to help implement the plans shall be as provided by law.



   (F)   The Commission may employ such administrative officials and
staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with
professional planners and for personal services as it may require with each
to be approved and paid by the Bullitt Fiscal Court.



(Ord. 80-9, passed 8-18-80)



§ 37.32  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   A Board of Adjustment, to be known as the "Bullitt County
Board of Zoning Adjustment" has been established and is hereby established
and ratified.



   (B)   The Board shall be composed of seven (7) members which shall
include:



      (1)   Three (3) members not residents of any incorporated city
in Bullitt County, each appointed by the Bullitt County Judge subject to the
approval of the Bullitt Fiscal Court.



      (2)   One (1) member who is a resident of the City of Lebanon
Junction, appointed by the Mayor of Lebanon Junction subject to the approval
of the City Council of Lebanon Junction.



      (3)   One (1) member who is a resident of the City of Mt.
Washington appointed by the Mayor of Mt. Washington subject to the approval
of the City Council of Mt. Washington.



      (4)   One (1) member who is a resident of Shepherdsville,
appointed by the Mayor of Shepherdsville subject to the approval of the City
Council of Shepherdsville.



      (5)   One (1) member who is a resident of the City of Hillview
appointed by the Mayor of Hillview subject to the approval of the City
Council of Hillview.



   (C)   The term of office of all Board members shall be four (4)
years and shall expire on December 31st of the last year of the term. Board
members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified.



   (D)   All Board members shall be reimbursed for any necessary
expenses and shall be approved and paid by the Bullitt Fiscal Court. Board
members shall receive compensation for each Board or public meeting attended
of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) with such compensation to be fixed
and paid by the Bullitt Fiscal Court. No Board member shall be paid for
attending more than forty (40) meetings during any fiscal year of the Board,
without prior approval of the Bullitt Fiscal Court.



   (E)   All other details which are necessary for the establishment,
operation and administration of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be as
provided by law.



(Ord. 80-9, passed 8-18-80)



§ 37.33  EXISTING REGULATIONS RATIFIED.



   The existing zoning ordinance and regulations of Lebanon Junction dated
January 3, 1972 recorded in City of Lebanon Junction Ordinance Book as
Ordinance Number 119 and the existing zoning map of the City of Lebanon
Junction dated January 3, 1972 and filed in the Bullitt County Clerk's Office
and the existing zoning ordinance and regulations of the City of
Shepherdsville adopted September 13, 1972 and referenced in City of
Shepherdsville Ordinance Book as Number 152, and the existing zoning map of
the City of Shepherdsville dated _______,______and filed in the Bullitt
County Clerk's office and the existing zoning ordinance and regulations of
the City of Mt. Washington ordinance book as Ordinance CIX and the existing
zoning map of the City of Mt. Washington dated January 10, 1972 and filed in
the Bullitt County Court Clerk's Office and the existing zoning ordinance
regulations of the City of Hillview adopted on February      , 1980
recorded in City of Hillview Ordinance Book as Ordinance Number 66 and the
existing zoning map of the City of Hillview dated______,______ and filed in
Bullitt County Clerk's Office and the existing zoning ordinance and
regulations for Bullitt County dated March 3, 1972 and recorded in Fiscal
Court Order Book 8 page 202 in the office of the Bullitt County Clerk and the
existing zoning map of the Bullitt County dated March 3, 1972 and filed in
the Bullitt County Clerk's Office and all subsequent amendments are each
hereby readopted, affirmed, established, and ratified.



(Ord. 80-9, passed 8-18-80)



VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMSION



§ 37.40  STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.



   The City Council does hereby adopt all of the provisions of KRS 99.700
through KRS 99.730 as it relates to blighted and deteriorated properties
within the boundaries of the city limits.



(Ord. 84-16, passed 10-15-84)



§ 37.41  ESTABLISHMENT MEMBERSHIP; DUTIES.



   (A)    A commission to be known as the Hillview Vacant Property
Review Commission is hereby established.



   (B)   (1)   This Commission shall consist of three (3) members
who are residents of the city. No person who is an officer or employee of the
city or whose duties with the city involve the enforcement of city housing,
building, plumbing, fire or related codes shall be a member of the
Commission. Each member shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.



      (2)   The members of the Commission shall be responsible for
certifying unto the City Council properties which they have determined to be
blighted or deteriorated based on the following criteria:



         (a)   That the owner of the property or designated agent
has been sent an order by the appropriate city agency to eliminate the
conditions which are in violation of local codes or laws.



         (b)   That the property is vacant.



         (c)   That the property is blighted and deteriorated as
defined in KRS 99.705.



         (d)   The Commission has notified the property owner or
designated agent that the property has been determined to be blighted or
deteriorated and the time period for correction of such condition has expired
and the property owner or agent has failed to comply with the notice.



         (e)   The Commission shall notify the owner of the
property or a designated agent that a determination of blight or
deterioration has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions
causing the blight shall render the property subject to condemnation by the
city under this subchapter.  Notice shall be mailed to the owner or
designated agent by certified mail, return receipt requested.  However, if
the address of the owner or a designated agent is unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the Commission in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies
of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property
affected.  The written notice sent to the owner or his agent shall describe
the conditions that render the property blighted and deteriorated and shall
demand abatement of the conditions within ninety (90) days of the receipt of
such notice.



         (f)   An extension of the ninety (90) day time period
may be granted by the Commission if the owner or designated agent
demonstrates that such period is insufficient to correct the conditions cited
by the notice.



(KRS 99.720)



   (C)   The Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor.



   (D)   The Commission shall meet and establish its own rules and
meeting dates for the proper conduct of their duties.



(Ord. 84-16, passed 10-15-84)



CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD



§ 37.50  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   ABATEMENT COSTS.  A city's necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing
all or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other action with
regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to
maintain and preserve the public health, safety and welfare in accordance
with any city ordinance.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.  An administrative body created and acting
under the authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, KRS
65.8801 to 65.8839.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  A city police officer, safety officer,
citation officer, or other public law enforcement officer with the authority
to issue a citation.



   FINAL ORDER. Any order:



      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing
in accordance with § 37.58(E) of this subchapter;



      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested
the citation within seven (7)  days as provided in § 37.57(F) of this
subchapter; or



      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing
the violator requested to contest the citation as provided in § 37.58(C) of
this subchapter.



   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



   ORDINANCE. An official action of the local government body, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law
and shall include any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the city
legislative body which embodies all or part of an ordinance.



   OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity having a legal or equitable title in real property.



   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon
it.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.51  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   There is hereby created within the city pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to KRS
65.8839, a Code Enforcement Board which shall be composed of three (3)
members, all of whom shall be residents of the city for a period of at least
one (1) year prior to the creation of the Board and shall reside there
throughout the term in office.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.52  ENFORCEMENT POWERS.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue
remedial orders and impose civil fines as a method of enforcing city
ordinances when a violation of the ordinance has been classified as a civil
offense.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to
enforce any ordinance regulating conduct which would also, under any
provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, constitute a criminal offense or
a moving motor vehicle offense.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.53  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; OATH;
COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by
the executive authority of the city, subject to the approval of the
legislative body.



   (B)   The initial appointment to the Code Enforcement Board shall be
as follows:



      (1)   One-third (1/3) of the membership or one-third (1/3) of
the membership and one (1) member of the Board shall be appointed for a term
of one (1) year;



      (2)   One-third (1/3) of the membership or one-third (1/3) of
the membership and one (1)  member of the Board shall be appointed for a
term of two (2) years; and



      (3)   One-third (1/3) of the membership or one-third (1/3) of
the membership and one (1)  member of the Board shall be appointed for a
term of three (3) years.



   (C)   All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three (3)
years. A member may be reappointed, subject to the approval of the
legislative body.



   (D)   The executive authority may appoint, subject to the approval
of the legislative body, two  (2) alternate members to serve on the Code
Enforcement Board in the absence of regular members. Alternate members shall
meet all of the qualifications and shall be subject to all of the
requirements that apply to regular members of the Code Enforcement Board.



   (E)   Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the executive
authority, subject to approval of the legislative body, within sixty (60)
days of the vacancy. If the vacancy is not filled within that time period,
the remaining Code Enforcement Board members shall fill the vacancy. A
vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (F)   A Board member may be removed from office by the executive
authority for misconduct, inefficiency, or willful neglect of duty. The
executive authority shall submit a written statement to the member and the
legislative body setting forth the reasons for removal. The member so removed
shall have the right of appeal to the Circuit Court.



   (G)   All members of the Code Enforcement Board shall, before
entering upon the duties of their office, take the oath of office prescribed
by § 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.



   (H)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be reimbursed for
actual expenses and compensated in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25)
per meeting.



   (I)   No member of the Code Enforcement Board shall hold any elected
or nonelected office, paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the
city.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.54  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall annually elect a Chair from
among its members. The Chair shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board. In the absence of the Chair, the remaining members of
the Board shall select a member to preside in place of and exercise the
powers of the Chair.



   (B)   Regular meetings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held
on the second Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m. Meetings other than those
regularly scheduled shall be special meetings or emergency meetings held in
accordance with the requirements of the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.



   (C)   All meetings and hearings of the Code Enforcement Board shall
be public meetings held in accordance with the requirements of KRS 65.8815(5)
and the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.



   (D)   The presence of at least a majority of the Board's entire
membership shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of a
quorum of the Board shall be necessary for any official action to be taken.



   (E)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Code
Enforcement Board and the vote of any member on any issue decided by the
Board shall be recorded in the minutes.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.55  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect
financial or personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the
nature of the interest, shall disqualify himself from voting on the matter in
which he has an interest, and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.56  POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.



   The City Code Enforcement Board shall have the following powers and
duties:



   (A)   To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and
the conduct of its hearings consistent with this subchapter.



   (B)   To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a violation
of an ordinance over which it has jurisdiction.



   (C)   To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to its
hearings. Subpoenas issued by the Code Enforcement Board may be served by any
code enforcement officer.



   (D)   To take testimony under oath. The Chairman shall have the
authority to administer oaths for the purpose of taking testimony.



   (E)   To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to remedy
any violation of a city ordinance or code provision which the Board is
authorized to enforce.



   (F)   To impose civil fines, as authorized, on any person found to
have violated an ordinance over which the Board has jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.57  ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings
before the Code Enforcement Board:



   (A)   Enforcement proceedings shall only be initiated by the
issuance of a citation by a code enforcement officer.



   (B)   Except when immediate action is necessary pursuant to § 37.65
of this subchapter, if a code enforcement officer believes, based on his
personal observation or investigation, that a person has violated a city
ordinance, he shall issue a notice of violation allowing the alleged violator
a specified period of time to remedy the violation without incurring a fine,
if the alleged violator fails or refuses to remedy the violation within the
time specified, the code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a
citation.



   (C)   The code enforcement officer shall issue a citation by one (1)
of the following methods:



      (1)   Personal service to the alleged violator;



      (2)   Leaving a copy of the citation with any person eighteen
(18) years of age or older who is on the premises, if the alleged violator is
not on the premises at the time the citation is issued; or



      (3)   Posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on
the premises and mailing a copy of the citation by regular, first-class mail
to the owner of record of the property, if no one is on the premises at the
time the citation is issued.



   (D)   The citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The date and time of issuance;



      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;



      (3)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;



      (4)   The date and time the offense was committed;



      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;



      (6)   The section of the code or the number of the ordinance
violated;



      (7)   The name of the code enforcement officer;



      (8)   The civil fine that may be imposed for the violation,
including, if applicable:



         (a)   The civil fine that will be imposed if the person
does not contest the citation; and



         (b)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the
person elects to contest the citation;



      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay
the civil fine or to contest the citation; and



      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil
fine set forth in the citation or contest the citation within the time
allowed: the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation; the determination
that the violation was committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall
be deemed a final order determining that the violation was committed and
imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.



   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code
enforcement officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering the
citation to the Mayor, who will notify the Board.



   (F)   (1)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall
respond to the citation within seven  (7) days of the date of issuance by
either paying the civil fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing to contest
the citation. If the person fails to respond to the citation within seven (7)
days, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and
the determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final.
In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order
determining that the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine as
set forth in the citation, and the person shall be deemed to have waived the
right to appeal the final order to District Court.



      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual
place of residence with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.58  HEARING; NOTICE; AND FINAL ORDER.



   (A)   When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board
or its administrative staff shall schedule a hearing.



   (B)   Not less than seven (7) days before the date of the hearing,
the Code Enforcement Board shall notify the requester of the date, time, and
place of the hearing. The notice may be given by regular first-class mail;
certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving
the notice at the person's usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and who is
informed of the contents of the notice.



   (C)   (1)   Any person requesting a hearing who fails to appear
at the time and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the
right to a hearing to contest the citation, and the determination that a
violation was committed shall be final. In this event, the citation as issued
shall be deemed a final order determining the violation was committed and
imposing the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the alleged violator
shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to
District Court.



      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual
place of residence with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18)
years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.



   (D)   All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath and
recorded. Testimony shall be taken from the code enforcement officer, the
alleged violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the code
enforcement officer or alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not
apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the
proceedings.



   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence,
determine whether a violation was committed. If it is determined that no
violation was committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be entered,
if it is determined that a violation was committed, an order may be issued
upholding the citation. The Board may impose a fine up to the maximum
authorized by ordinance, or require the offender to remedy a continuing
violation to avoid a fine, or both.



   (F)   (1)   Every final order following a hearing shall be
reduced to writing, which shall include the findings and conclusions reached
and the date the order was issued. A copy shall be furnished to the person
named in the citation.



      (2)   If the person named in the citation is not present when
the final order is issued, the order shall be delivered to the person by
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence
with any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or
older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.59  PRESENTATION OF CASES.



   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board shall be presented by an
attorney selected by the city, a code enforcement officer for the city, or by
a member of the city's administrative staff. The city attorney may either be
counsel to the Code Enforcement Board or may present cases before the Code
Enforcement Board, but shall in no case serve in both capacities.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.60  APPEALS; FINAL JUDGEMENT.



   (A)   An appeal from a final order of a Code Enforcement Board
following a hearing conducted pursuant to § 37.58(E) of this subchapter may
be made to the Bullitt County District Court within thirty (30) days of the
date the order is issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a
complaint and a copy of the final order in the same manner as any civil
action under the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.



   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board
is filed within the time period set in division (A) of this section, the Code
Enforcement  Board's order shall be deemed final for all purposes.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.61  ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.



   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by the city Code Enforcement
Board shall be subject to the following schedule of civil fines:



   (A)   If a citation for a violation of an ordinance is not contested
by the person charged with the violation, the penalties set forth in this
subsection shall apply:



      Violation      1st Offense   2nd Offense   All Others



      Animals      $25      $50      $100



      Business Violation   $50      $75      $100



      Noise         $25      $50      $100



      Parades      $10      $20      $50



      Rubbish/debris



        accumulation    $50      $75      $100



      Street/sidewalk



        violation      $25      $50      $100



      Swimming pools   $25      $50      $100



      Weeds/grass      $25      $50      $100



   (B)   If the citation is contested and a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board is required, the following maximum penalties may be imposed
at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Board:



      Violation      1st Offense   2nd Offense   All Others



      Animals      $100      $125      $175



      Business Violation   $125      $150      $175



      Noise         $100      $125      $175



      Parades      $85      $95      $125



      Rubbish/debris    $125      $150      $175



        accumulation



      Street/sidewalk   $100      $125      $175



        violation   



      Swimming pools   $100      $125      $175



      Weeds/grass      $100      $125      $175



   (C)   A fine for any other violation shall be at the discretion of
the Code Enforcement Board and not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars
($250) for each offense.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.62  LIEN; FINES, CHARGES, AND FEES.



   (A)   The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person
found by a nonappealable final order as defined by § 37.50(D) of this
subchapter, or by a final judgment of the court, to have committed a
violation of a city ordinance. The lien shall be for all civil fines assessed
for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the city in
connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs.
An affidavit of the code enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the amount of the lien and regularity of the proceedings pursuant
to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.



   (B)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and
shall bear interest until paid. The lien shall continue for ten (10) years
following the date of the nonappealable final order or final court judgment.



   (C)   Subject to § 37.64 of this subchapter, the lien shall take
precedence over all other liens, except state, county, school board, and city
taxes, and may be enforced by judicial proceedings, including a foreclosure
action.



   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) of this
section, the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of all civil fines assessed for the violation and
for all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in connection
with the enforcement of the ordinance. The city may bring a civil action
against the person and shall have the same remedies as provided for the
recovery of a debt.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.63  LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.



   The city shall obtain and maintain priority over previously filed
liens, as provided in § 37.62 of this subchapter, in accordance with the
following provisions:



   (A)   Individuals and entities, including but not limited to
lienholders, may register with the city to receive electronic notification of
final orders entered pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   In order to receive the notification, the registrant shall
submit the following information to the City Clerk:



      (1)   Name;



      (2)   Mailing address;



      (3)   Phone number; and



      (4)   Electronic mailing address.



   (C)   A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the city
website to submit the information required by division (B) of this section.
It shall be the responsibility of the registrant to maintain and update the
required contact information with the city. The city shall inform a
registrant of any evidence received that the electronic mailing address is
invalid or not functional so that the registrant may provide an updated
electronic mailing address.



   (D)   Once per month, the city shall send electronic mail
notification of all final orders entered pursuant to this chapter since the
last date of notification to each party registered pursuant to this section.
The notification shall provide an electronic link to the city code
enforcement database located on the city website. The database shall include
the following information regarding each final order:



      (1)   The name of the person charged with a violation;



      (2)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;



      (3)   The last known mailing address for the owner of the
premises where the violation occurred;



      (4)   A copy of the full citation;



      (5)   A copy of the full final order; and



      (6)   The status of the final order regarding its ability to
be appealed pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   If an appeal is filed on a final order pursuant to this
chapter, the city shall send electronic mail notification to all registrants.



   (F)   Within ten (10) days of the issuance of a final order pursuant
to this chapter, the city shall update its code enforcement database to
reflect the issued final order, and shall post the notification required by
division (D) of this section containing an updated link to the code
enforcement database on the city website.



   (G)   The city shall maintain the records created under this section
for ten (10) years following their issuance.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.64  LIENS.



   (A)   A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to §
37.63(B) of this subchapter may, within forty-five (45) days from the date of
issuance of notification under § 37.63(D) of this subchapter:



      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already been
abated; or



      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of the
ordinance, including abatement costs.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action if necessary under § 37.65 of this subchapter.



   (C)   The lien provided by § 37.62 of this subchapter shall not
take precedence over previously recorded liens if:



      (1)   The city failed to comply with the requirements of §
37.63 of this subchapter for notification of the final order; or



      (2)   A prior lienholder complied with division (A) of this
section.



   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded
liens under division (C) of this section shall, if the final order remains
partially unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent
liens except liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.



   (E)   The city may record a lien before the forty-five (45) day
period established in division (A) of this section expires. If the lien is
fully satisfied prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period,
the city shall release the lien in the County Clerk's office where the lien
is recorded within fifteen (15) days of satisfaction.



   (F)   Failure of the city to comply with §§ 37.63 and 37.64 of
this subchapter, or failure of a lien to take precedence over previously
filed liens as provided in division (C) of this section, shall not limit or
restrict any other remedies the city has against the property of the violator.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



§ 37.65  IMMEDIATE ACTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason
to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of
the violation will be irreparable or irreversible.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 8-1-16)



CHAPTER 38:  TAXATION



Section



Real Property



   38.01   Ad valorem tax levied



   38.02   Purpose



   38.03   County assessment adopted



   38.04   List of persons subject to taxation



   38.05   Bills; required notifications



   38.06   Payments



   38.07   Delinquency



Personal Property



   38.15   Ad valorem tax levied



   38.16   Purpose



   38.17   County assessment adopted



   38.18   Motor Vehicle Tax Rate Certification



   38.19   Payment



Public Service Companies



   38.30   Ad valorem tax levied



   38.31   Purpose



   38.32   Collection and enforcement



   38.33   Payment



REAL PROPERTY



§ 38.01  AD VALOREM TAX LEVIED.



   A real property ad valorem tax in the amount as established by
ordinance of City Council on each one hundred dollars ($100) of value of all
real property taxable for municipal purposes except property assessed by the
state in said city is hereby levied.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 94-17,
passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 95-15, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 96-13, passed
9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 9-21-98; Am.
Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord.
2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 2003-16,
passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13, passed
9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed 9-24-07;
Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord.
2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2012-07,
passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08, passed
8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed 9-21-16;
Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.02  PURPOSE.



   The levy is made for the purpose of raising revenue to pay salaries of
officers and employees; for the repair and maintenance of streets, public
ways, and public buildings in the city; to pay for lighting city streets; and
to pay all proper charges and legal demands against the city.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-13,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-16, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13,
passed 9- 19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.03  COUNTY ASSESSMENT ADOPTED.



   The assessment made by the Bullitt County Property Valuation
Administrator for state and county purposes shall be and is hereby adopted as
the assessment for city purposes. The city tax bills shall be made from the
county list in the Property Valuation Administrator’s books after they have
been supervised and corrected by the County Board of Equalization.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-13,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-16, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13,
passed 9- 19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.04  LIST OF PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAXATION.



   The City Clerk shall take the list of all persons subject to city
taxation who are not shown on the County Property Valuation Administrator’s
books and shall add to the city tax rolls all property a portion of which is
in the city where the value of the portion of the city is not shown on the
County Property Valuation Administrator’s books.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-13,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord 98-10, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-16, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13,
passed 9- 19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.05  BILLS; REQUIRED NOTIFICATIONS.



   The City Clerk shall prepare tax bills for all persons and
organizations in the city against whom taxes have been levied, and shall
notify such persons and organizations by mail that on and after January 1
following their due dates, any tax bill remaining unpaid will be declared
delinquent and bear interest at twelve percent (12%) per annum or one percent
(1%) per month, or a fraction thereof, until paid; and in addition thereto, a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount for general purposes shall be
added for non-payment when due. The Clerk shall also indicate that a discount
of two percent (2%) will be allowed on bills paid before November 1 after
they become due.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-13,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-16, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13,
passed 9- 19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.06  PAYMENTS.



   All payments of taxes provided for herein shall be made to the City
Clerk/Treasurer at the business office of the city.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-13,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-16 passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13,
passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.07  DELINQUENCY.



   After January 1 following its due date, the City Clerk will mark all
unpaid tax bills in red ink “DELINQUENT” and add a penalty of ten percent
(10%), as provided herein, and report to the City Council the number of
unpaid bills and the amount thereof. The Mayor will check all tax bills and
correct errors, if any, and deliver the tax books back to the City Clerk. The
City Clerk will proceed with the collection of all delinquent taxes,
penalties, and interest, and will report to the City Council at its regular
meeting each month.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-13,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-10, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-06, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-16, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2004-10, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2005-13,
passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-11, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-09, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-08,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-28-15; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 9-17-18)



PERSONAL PROPERTY



§ 38.15  AD VALOREM TAX LEVIED.



   A personal property ad valorem tax in the amount as established by
ordinance of City Council on each one hundred dollars ($100) of value of all
personal property taxable for municipal purposes, except property assessed by
the state in the city, is hereby levied. A tangible personal property ad
valorem tax in the amount as established by ordinance of City Council on each
one hundred dollars ($100) of value of all tangible personal property taxable
for municipal purposes, except property assessed by the state in the city, is
hereby levied.



(Ord. 88-13, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 94-18,
passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 95-16, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 96-14, passed
9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-11, passed 9-21-98; Am.
Ord. 99-13, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-10, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord.
2001-11, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 2003-17,
passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 2004-11, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2004-12, passed
9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-14, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed 9-19-05;
Am. Ord. 2006-12, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord.
2007-12, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2008-11,
passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-10, passed
9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2009-11, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed 9-20-10;
Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-08, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-11,
passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-09, passed
8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-08, passed 9-21-15;
Am. Ord. 2015-09, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-23, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord.
2016-24, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15,
passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed
9-17-18)



§ 38.16  PURPOSE.



   The levy is made for the purpose of raising revenue to pay salaries of
officer and employees; for the repair and maintenance of streets, public
ways, and public buildings in the city; to pay for lighting city streets; and
to pay all proper charges and legal demands against the city.



(Ord. 88-13, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-14,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-11, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-13, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-10, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-11, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-17, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 2004-11, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2004-12,
passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-14, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed
9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-12, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 9-18-06;
Am. Ord. 2007-12, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord.
2008-11, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-10,
passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2009-11, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed
9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 9-19-11;
Am. Ord. 2012-08, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2013-11, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-09,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-08, passed
9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2015-09, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-23, passed 9-21-16;
Am. Ord. 2016-24, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord.
2017-15, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2018-14,
passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.17  COUNTY ASSESSMENT ADOPTED.



   The assessment made by the Bullitt County Property Valuation
Administrator for state and county purposes shall be and is hereby adopted as
the assessment for city purposes. These taxes as they relate to motor
vehicles and boats shall be collected by the Bullitt County Court Clerk as
provided by KRS 132.487 et seq.



(Ord. 88-13, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-14,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-11, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-13, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-10, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-11, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-17, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 2004-11, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2004-12,
passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-14, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed
9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-12, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 9-18-06;
Am. Ord. 2007-12, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord.
2008-11, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-10,
passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2009-11, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed
9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 9-19-11;
Am. Ord. 2012-08, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2013-11, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-10,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-08, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2015-09, passed
9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-23, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2016-24, passed 9-21-16;
Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord.
2018-13, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.18  MOTOR VEHICLE TAX RATE CERTIFICATION.



   The City Clerk shall forward to the Department of Property Valuation a
Motor Vehicle Tax Rate Certification for the year.



(Ord. 88-13, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-14,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-11, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-13, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-10, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-11, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-17, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 2004-12, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-15,
passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed
9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-11, passed 9-8-09;
Am. Ord. 2010-14, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord.
2012-09, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-10,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-09, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-24, passed
9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 9-18-17;
Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 9-17-18)



§ 38.19  PAYMENT.



   All payments of taxes provided for herein shall be received by the City
Clerk/Treasurer at the business office of the city.



(Ord. 88-13, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 9-18-89; Am. Ord. 96-14,
passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-11, passed
9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-13, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-10, passed 9-12-00;
Am. Ord. 2001-11, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord.
2003-17, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 2004-11, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2004-12,
passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-14, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed
9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-12, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 9-18-06;
Am. Ord. 2007-12, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2007-13, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord.
2008-11, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-10,
passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2009-11, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-13, passed
9-20-10; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 9-19-11;
Am. Ord. 2012-08, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2013-11, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-09,
passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-08, passed
9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2015-09, passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-24, passed 9-21-16;
Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord.
2018-13, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 9-17-18)



PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES



§ 38.30  AD VALOREM TAX LEVIED.



   An ad valorem tax in the amount as established by ordinance of City
Council on each one hundred dollars ($100) of value of all property in the
city, of public service companies, which are assessed by the Department of
Revenue, is hereby levied.



(Ord. 88-12, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 95-17,
passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 96-15, passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-13, passed
9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-12, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-14, passed 9-21-99; Am.
Ord. 2000-11, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 2001-12, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord.
2002-08, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 2003-18, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 2004-13,
passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-16, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-14, passed
9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-14, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 9-15-08;
Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-15, passed 9-20-10; Am. Ord.
2011-08, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord. 2013-13,
passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-10, passed
9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-25, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-16, passed 9-18-17;
Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 9-17-18)




§ 38.31  PURPOSE.




   The levy is made for the purpose of raising revenue to pay salaries of
officers and employees; for repair and maintenance of streets, public ways,
and public buildings in the city; to pay for lighting city streets; and to
pay all proper charges and legal demands against the city.



(Ord. 88-12, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 96-15, passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-13,
passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-12, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-14, passed
9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-11, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 2001-12, passed 9-4-01;
Am. Ord. 2002-08, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 2003-18, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord.
2004-13, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-16, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-14,
passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-14, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed
9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-15, passed 9-20-10;
Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2013-13, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-10,
passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-25, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-16, passed
9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 9-17-18)




§ 38.32  COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.




   Provisions of §§ 38.04 through 38.07 as to method of collection and
enforcement shall apply to the tax levied herein.



(Ord. 88-12, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 96-15, passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-13,
passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-12, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-14, passed
9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-11, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 2001-12, passed 9-4-01;
Am. Ord. 2002-08, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 2003-18, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord.
2004-13, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-16, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-14,
passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-14, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed
9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-15, passed 9-20-10;
Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2013-13, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-10,
passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-25, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-16, passed
9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 9-17-18)




§ 38.33  PAYMENT.




   All payments of taxes provided for herein shall be received by the City
Clerk/Treasurer at the business office of the city.



(Ord. 88-12, passed 9-19-88; Am. Ord. 96-15, passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-13,
passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 98-12, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 99-14, passed
9-21-99; Am. Ord. 2000-11, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 2001-12, passed 9-4-01;
Am. Ord. 2002-08, passed 9-23-02; Am. Ord. 2003-18, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord.
2004-13, passed 9-27-04; Am. Ord. 2005-16, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2006-14,
passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2007-14, passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed
9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. 2010-15, passed 9-20-10;
Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 9-17-12; Am. Ord.
2013-13, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 2015-10,
passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 2016-25, passed 9-21-16; Am. Ord. 2017-16, passed
9-18-17; Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 9-17-18)



CHAPTER 39:  PERSONNEL POLICY



Section



General Provisions



   39.01   Application of chapter



   39.02   Equal opportunity employer



   39.03   Administration of the plan



   39.04   Appointments



   39.05   Status of present employees



   39.06   Announcement of vacancies



   39.07   Applications



   39.08   Determination of appointments



   39.09   Orientation



   39.10   Probation



   39.11   Wage and hour laws



   39.12   Outside employment



   39.13   Demotion



   39.14   Suspension



   39.15   Separation



   39.16   Dismissal



   39.17   Resignation



   39.18   Layoff



   39.19   Reinstatement



   39.20   Employment of relatives



   39.21   Pay periods



   39.22   Holidays



   39.23   Vacation



   39.24   Sick leave



   39.25   Personal days



   39.26   Bereavement leave



   39.27   Special leave



   39.28   Military leave



   39.29   Court leave



   39.30   Disability leave



   39.31   Fringe benefits



   39.32   Voting leave



   39.33   Personnel records



   39.34   Political activity



   39.35   Grievance procedure



   39.36   Expense reimbursement



   39.37   Transportation of unauthorized persons



   39.38   Unauthorized persons in city vehicles



   39.39   Accidents involving city vehicles



   39.40   Purchase orders



   39.41   Educational assistance



   39.42   Inclement weather



   39.43   Classification plan



   39.44   Compensation plan



Job Classifications



   39.60   Animal Control Warden



   39.61   Police Chief; Assistant Police Chief



   39.62   Police Officer



   39.63   Public Works



   39.64   City Clerk/Treasurer



   39.65   City Treasurer



   39.65A   Deputy City Clerk/Treasurer



   39.66   Recreational Coordinator



   39.67   Dog Warden



   39.68   Custodian



   39.69   Wage scale



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 39.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   The following personnel policies and procedures here have been adopted
by the City Council and are applicable to all persons appointed to positions
at all levels in the city government, with the exception of the following:



   (A)   All elected officials;



   (B)   All members of boards and commissions of the city;



   (C)   Attorney for the city;



   (D)   Consultants, advisors and counsel rendering temporary
professional services; and



   (E)   Independent contractors.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.02  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER.



   The city is an equal opportunity employer. As such there is no
discrimination for employment on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age or disability.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.03  ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 83A.130, the Mayor shall supervise the conduct
of all city departments and employees. The Mayor shall promulgate procedures
to "insure orderly administration of the functions of city government,"
subject to the disapproval of the Council.



   (B)   The text of the personnel plan may be changed by ordinance
amendment only. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall perform the functions of
personnel officer for the city.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.04  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   There are five (5) types of appointments:



      (1)   Probationary.



         (a)   The first six (6) months of service of each
employee, except untrained individuals employed to become a police officers,
shall constitute a probationary period. Upon successful completion of the
probationary period the employee shall be considered a regular employee. If
at any time during the probationary period the appointing authority
determines for any reason that the services of the employee are
unsatisfactory or unnecessary, the employee may be separated from his/her
position without a hearing or any right of appeal. The appointing authority
shall notify the employee in writing of the decision to terminate employment
and such notification shall be delivered to the employee personally on a date
within the probationary period.



         (b)   The first twelve (12) months of service on any
individual employed as a police officer who has not completed the required
training offered by the Department of Criminal Justice Training Academy shall
constitute a probationary period. Upon successful completion of the
probationary period and the training offered by the Department of Criminal
Justice Training Academy the employee shall be considered a regular employee.
If at any time during the probationary period the appointing authority
determines for any reason that the services of the employee are
unsatisfactory or unnecessary, the employee may be separated from his/her
position without a hearing or any right of appeal. The appointing authority
shall notify the employee in writing of the decision to terminate employment
and such notification shall be delivered to the employee personally on a date
within the probationary period.



      (2)   Full-time. After successful completion of a probationary
period, regular full-time appointments are made on a full-time basis to
full-time established positions for an indefinite period.



      (3)   Part-time. Appointments may be made on a part-time basis
to part-time positions for an indefinite period.



      (4)   Temporary. Temporary appointments are made on a
full-time or part-time basis to a temporary or permanently established
position for a specified time period usually not to exceed three (3) months,
unless otherwise approved by the City Council.



      (5)   Seasonal. An appointment for a temporary period
(full-time or part-time) which occurs at a specific season each year shall be
a seasonal appointment.



   (B)   Regular full-time employees shall be entitled to all benefits
as provided in these policies and procedures. Probationary, part-time,
seasonal or temporary employees shall not be entitled to any benefits unless
otherwise noted in this personnel policy.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01; Am. Ord. 2009-05, passed 6-15-09)



§ 39.05  STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.



   An employee who holds a regular full-time position with the city on the
effective date of these policies shall:



   (A)   Have regular full-time status on the effective date of this
policy if he or she has held the position throughout the previous six (6)
months.



   (B)   Not be accorded regular full-time status until he or she has
held the position for six (6) months subsequent to the effective date.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.06  ANNOUNCEMENT OF VACANCIES.



   (A)   Notice of employment opportunities shall be publicized in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.



   (B)   Such notices shall:



      (1)   List the class in which vacancies are anticipated;



      (2)   List the nature of the work to be performed;



      (3)   List the qualifications for employment in the position;



      (4)   Tell when and where to file applications for employment
in the position;



      (5)   Give whatever other pertinent information the City
Council deems advisable; and



      (6)   Indicate that the city is an equal opportunity employer.



   (C)   All current city employees shall be notified at work of any
vacancy. Such vacancies shall be filled by promotion of qualified employees
whenever practical.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.07  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   The form by which a person applies for a position shall
require:



      (1)   Information about the applicant's training, experience
and character; and



      (2)   Whatever additional information is required for an
evaluation of the applicant's fitness for the position for which he or she
applies.



   (B)   Each application shall be reviewed by the appropriate
department head who makes recommendations to the Mayor.



   (C)   All application forms filed with the city shall be kept for
the time required by law.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.08  DETERMINATION OF APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The qualifications of an applicant for a position shall be
ascertained on the basis of the following, if applicable to the position:



      (1)   Information the applicant supplies on an application
form prescribed and applied by the city;



      (2)   Written, performance, or physical examinations;



      (3)   Interviews;



      (4)   Information and evaluations supplied by the references
whom the applicant names on the application;



      (5)   Any other appropriate information; and



      (6)   A background investigation.



   (B)   The names of all applicants who qualify for an appointment to
a position of a particular class shall be submitted to the Mayor. No person
may be appointed to a position unless verified information on an official
application form indicated that the person has minimum qualifications set
forth in the position descriptions.



   (C)   All non-elected city officers whose offices have been created
as set forth in KRS 83A.080 shall be appointed by the Mayor solely in his
discretion and without Council approval. All other city officers and
employees, including police officers, shall be appointed by the Mayor,
without Council approval (see KRS 83A.130 (9)). No regular full-time officer
or employee of the city may be dismissed at will. Regular full-time officers
and employees may only be dismissed for the reasons set forth in these
personnel policies and only after the proper procedures have been followed.



   (D)   In the filling of a vacancy in a position above the entrance
level, preference shall be given to promotion of present employees at the
time the vacancy occurs.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.09  ORIENTATION.



   Newly-employed personnel shall be given an orientation to city
government by the personnel officer as soon as possible following the first
day of employment.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.10  PROBATION.



   (A)   Every person entering city service shall be required to
successfully complete a probationary period of six (6) months unless a longer
probationary period for a particular position is required by statute.



   (B)    Prior to completion of the first forty-five (45) days of
employment but not less than sixty (60) days, the employee's performance will
be evaluated by their supervisor.



   (C)   During the first three (3) months of employment a new employee
is not allowed vacation or sick time. If an employee terminates before the
end of the probationary period of six (6) months, no payment will be made for
any benefits.



   (D)   If employed by the city as a regular full-time employee at the
end of the probationary period, sick leave and vacation time shall accrue
from the first day worked.



   (E)   After successful completion of the probationary period,
employees will be continually evaluated on the quality of their work.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.11  WAGE AND HOUR LAWS.



   (A)   The hours of work of all city employees and the compensation
paid for work performed shall fully comply with the federal and state wage
and hour laws and shall be in compliance with the classification and pay
scale of this chapter.



   (B)   An employee whose duties require an irregular work schedule
shall work according to the schedule established by the department head or
the Mayor.



   (C)   If an employee is unable to report for work, the department
head or supervisor shall be notified promptly, if possible, giving the cause
and probable length of absence.



   (D)   Overtime, as defined in KRS Chapter 337, shall not be
scheduled on a regular basis. Overtime shall be permitted only under the
following circumstances:



      (1)   Where necessary to accommodate the work schedule deemed
appropriate by the Mayor;



      (2)   Where necessary to provide adequate coverage and
services;



      (3)   If an emergency situation; or



      (4)   If the city is awarded a federal grant to compensate for
overtime.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



Cross-reference:



   Vacation and sick leave, see §§ 39.25 and 39.26



Statutory reference:



   Wage and hour laws, see KRS Ch. 337



§ 39.12  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.



   City employees owe their primary work allegiance and energies to their
city job. Any outside employment which interferes with or creates a conflict
of interest with the employee's city employment is prohibited. Any such
outside employment must be approved by the Mayor.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.13  DEMOTION.



   (A)   Upon the department head's recommendation and with the
approval of the Mayor, an employee may be demoted provided the employee
possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which he or she is
demoted. Reasons for the demotion may be:



      (1)   Inability to carry out the duties of the position in
accordance with the standards prescribed for the position by these policies.



      (2)   For disciplinary reasons.



   (B)   Before a demotion becomes effective, written notice shall be
given the employee by the department head with a copy to be kept in the
personnel file.



   (C)   The demoted employee may request a grievance hearing.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.14  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Upon the department head's recommendation and with the Mayor's
approval, an employee may be temporarily suspended with or without pay:



      (1)   For disciplinary reasons; or



      (2)   In anticipation of the results of an investigation of
charges against an employee.



   (B)   Any suspended employee shall receive a written notice of the
suspension. The notice shall state:



      (1)   The reasons for the suspension; and



      (2)   The duration of the suspension.



   (C)   A copy of the notice shall be kept in the employee's personnel
file.



   (D)   The suspended employee may request a grievance hearing.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.15  SEPARATION.



   An employee may be separated by:



   (A)   Dismissal;



   (B)   Resignation;



   (C)   Retirement; or



   (D)   Layoff because of temporary lack of work or funds.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.16  DISMISSAL.



   (A)   The department head may request disciplinary action by the
Mayor because of:



      (1)   Unsatisfactory performance of duties;



      (2)   Any action that reflects discredit upon the city; or



      (3)   Any hindrance of the performance of any city functions.



   (B)   The dismissing authority shall give to the employee, in
writing, specific reasons for dismissal. A copy of the notice shall be kept
in the personnel file. A regular full-time employee who has received notice
of dismissal shall be entitled, upon written request, to a hearing prior to
the effective date of the dismissal. The hearing shall be conducted by the
Mayor, unless otherwise required by statute.



   (C)   If an employee is absent for three (3) consecutive work days,
without notification to the department head or Mayor from the employee or a
member of his or her immediate family as to the reason for the absence, he or
she shall be dismissed after reasonable attempts to contact the employee by
the department head have been made and documented. A letter from the Mayor
with a copy to the City Clerk/Treasurer shall be sent by certified mail to
the absent employee stating the reason for dismissal.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.17  RESIGNATION.



   (A)   In order to resign in good standing an employee shall submit
to the Mayor through the department head written notice of his or her
resignation at least two (2) weeks before the date it is to take effect.
However, the Mayor may agree to a shorter notice because of extenuating
circumstances. A resignation made without the notice required by city policy
may be regarded as cause for denying the resigning employee future employment
by the city and payment of accrued vacation leave.



   (B)   An employee's resignation and circumstances pertinent to it
shall be recorded in his or her personnel file.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.18  LAYOFF.



   (A)   Upon the department head's recommendation and the Mayor's
approval an employee may be laid off because of lack of work or funds.



   (B)   Layoffs shall be:



      (1)   Determined on the basis of the needs of the city.



      (2)   Determined with consideration to merit and job
performance of the person considered for layoff.



      (3)   Determined with part-time, temporary, seasonal and
probationary employees in a class being considered for a layoff prior to
permanent employees.



   (C)   Two (2) weeks before the effective date of the layoff of a
permanent employee the Mayor, through the department head, shall in writing:



      (1)   Notify the employee of the layoff;



      (2)   Explain to him or her the reasons for the layoff; and



      (3)   Certify whether his or her service has been satisfactory.



   (D)   An employee who has a satisfactory record of service, and is
laid off, shall be eligible for re-employment in another position, provided
that the employee meets the qualifications for the position and that the
position is vacant.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.19  REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   Upon the department head's recommendation and approval of the
Mayor, the city:



      (1)   May re-employ any former employee:



         (a)   Who has resigned from the city service with a good
record;



         (b)   Who has been laid off because of lack of work or
funds.



      (2)   Shall reinstate any employee who has been demoted,
suspended or dismissed for a reason prohibited by local, state or federal
employment regulations.



      (3)   May reinstate into the former position any employee who
fails during his or her probationary period to serve satisfactorily in a
position to which he or she has been promoted.



   (B)   Reinstatement of any employee shall:



      (1)   Restore the employee to his or her former position;



      (2)   Place him or her in a position of the same class or a
class comparable to that of his or her former position or another class for
which he or she must meet the required minimum standards.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.20  EMPLOYMENT OF RELATIVES.



   (A)   The city does not expressly prohibit the employment of
qualified relatives as long as one does not directly hire or supervise the
work of the other.



   (B)   In special circumstances where an individual has the required
skill and expertise and where it is in the particular interest of the city,
this restriction may be waived by the Mayor. Relatives are defined as those
persons who are as husband/wife, mother/daughter, mother/son,
father/daughter, father/son or brother/sister.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



Cross-reference:



   Nepotism prohibited, § 40.30



§ 39.21  PAY PERIODS.



   Each employee shall be paid bi-weekly with checks to be issued two (2)
working days after the end of the pay period.



   (A)   The Mayor may approve advance vacation checks.



   (B)   Employees shall complete time sheets, and all time sheets must
be signed by the employee and approved by the supervisor. Pay checks will not
be issued without an approved time sheet.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.22  HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   The following days are declared paid holidays at the regular
rate of pay for full-time and permanent part-time employees:



      (1)   New Year's Day.



      (2)   Good Friday.



      (3)   Memorial Day.



      (4)   Independence Day.



      (5)   Labor Day.



      (6)   Thanksgiving Day.



      (7)   Friday following Thanksgiving.



      (8)   Christmas Eve.



      (9)   Christmas Day.



      (10)   New Year's Eve.



      (11)   Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday, which shall be
observed by the city on the second Friday of each January.



   (B)   When any holiday listed falls on Sunday, the following
business day shall be considered a holiday. When any holiday listed above
falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered a holiday. In
addition to the above, any day may be designated as a holiday by the Mayor or
City Council.



   (C)   All employees occupying full-time and regular part-time
positions shall receive holiday pay. Employees who work on a holiday shall be
compensated for actual hours worked at the regular rate of pay in addition to
holiday pay, or receive another working day off with pay.



   (D)   In order to be eligible for a holiday with pay, an employee
must work the day before, the day of (if scheduled), and the day after, with
the following exceptions:



      (1)   If an employee is on vacation, he or she will be paid
for the holiday and have his or her vacation extended one day.



      (2)   If an employee is absent because of a verified illness
on the day before or after a holiday, the employee will receive his or her
holiday pay.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.23  VACATION.



   (A)   (1)   All regular full-time employees shall be entitled to
receive vacation leave at the rate of:



         Years of Service      Annual Leave Days



            1         5 working days



            2         10 working days



      (2)   After two (2) years, one (1) additional day of vacation
leave per year worked shall be added until a maximum of fifteen (15) days
vacation leave is earned.



      (3)   After fifteen (15) years of service an employee shall be
entitled to one (1) additional day of vacation leave per year until a maximum
of twenty (20) days of vacation leave is earned.



   (B)   Annual vacation leave shall not be accumulated and/or carried
over to the next anniversary date of full time employment.



   (C)   Upon termination of employment, employees shall be paid a lump
sum for any accumulated unused annual vacation leave for the year of
termination of employment, not to exceed the maximum amounts set forth above.



   (D)   Any permanent part-time employee who is scheduled to work no
less than twenty (20) hours per week (hired after January 25, 1999) of the
city shall be eligible to participate in the vacation benefits provided by
the city at a rate of one-half (1/2) the rate of regular full-time employees.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01; Am. Ord. 2006-16, passed 11-20-06; Am. Ord.
2007-03, passed 2-19-07)



§ 39.24  SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Sick leave is provided so that an employee will not be
seriously handicapped financially if he or she is unable to work because of
illness. Sick leave abuse may be cause for dismissal.



   (B)   All regular full-time employees shall be granted one-half
working day (four (4) hours), sick leave credit with pay for each completed
calendar month of continuous service. If discharged, no sick pay will be
paid. Up to forty-five (45) days (360 hours) of sick leave may be carried
over to the following year.



   (C)   An employee on sick leave shall inform his or her department
head of the fact as soon as possible.



   (D)   Absence for a part of a day that is chargeable to sick leave
shall be charged proportionally in an amount not smaller than one hour.



   (E)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep record of sick leave
allowance, sick leave taken, and balance of sick leave allowance for
individual employees.



   (F)   Absences on account of sickness, injury disability in excess
of that authorized for such purposes may, at the request of the employee, be
charged to vacation leave.



   (G)   Sick leave exceeding three (3) working days will require a
doctor's statement.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.25  PERSONAL DAYS.



   Three (3) days (24 hours) of the six (6) sick leave days (48 hours) per
year may be used as personal days. Personal days cannot be carried over.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.26  BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.



   (A)   All regular full-time employees may be absent for up to three
(3) regular scheduled work days without loss of pay in case of death in the
immediate family.



   (B)   Immediate family for this purpose shall be deemed to include
the following:



      (1)   Parents;



      (2)   Spouse;



      (3)   Children;



      (4)   Brothers and sisters (in any case);



      (5)   Immediate in-laws; and



      (6)   Grandparents.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.27  SPECIAL LEAVE.



   (A)   In addition to authorized leave, the Mayor may authorize an
employee to be absent without pay for personal reasons for a period or
periods not to exceed thirty (30) working days in any calendar year.



   (B)   The Mayor may authorize a special leave of absence with or
without pay for regular full-time employees for any period for the purpose of
attending college or other training that is deemed to be beneficial to the
city service.



   (C)   Any full-time employee who is selected for jury duty or is
called as a government witness, shall receive a paid leave of absence for the
time spent on such duty. If an employee is summoned as a plaintiff or a
defendant in a proceeding involving or arising from outside employment, he or
she shall not be paid.



   (D)   Leave shall be granted as required under the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



Cross-reference:



   Court leave, see § 39.29



§ 39.28  MILITARY LEAVE.



   Any regular or full-time employee who is a member of the active reserve
or National Guard of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be entitled
to military leave.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.29  COURT LEAVE.



   (A)   In the event an employee is requested, on a work day, to serve
on a jury, or as a witness in a case not involving the employee, he or she
shall be compensated at regular pay. All employees serving on court duty
shall be absent from work only during the times required by the courts, and
are expected to report to work immediately upon his or her release from
court. In the event he or she fails to return immediately to work he or she
will forfeit his or her right to that day's pay by the city.



   (B)   Police officers required to appear in court with regard to a
case in which they are officially involved shall be paid at their regular
rate of pay. When court time and normal work hours exceed forty (40) hours
per week, the officer shall be paid at one and one-half (1 1/2) times the
regular hourly rate for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours in a
single work week.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.30  DISABILITY LEAVE.



   Any employee who suffers injury or illness as a result of an
employment-connected accident or illness shall be compensated as required by
workers' compensation laws of the Kentucky Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.31  FRINGE BENEFITS.



   (A)   (1)   Any new full-time city employee (hired after February
23, 2004) shall be eligible to participate in the group health insurance plan
after successful completion of the first sixty (60) days of their
probationary period. 



      (2)   The employee shall be enrolled with the city’s group
health insurance plan on the first of the month following the successful
completion of the first sixty (60) days of their probationary period.



      (3)   Eligible employees are entitled to participate in the
group health insurance plan furnished by the city at no cost to the employee.
Employees desiring to add their spouse or eligible dependents to the group
health insurance shall do so at their own expense in excess of allotted
amount paid by city.



   (B)    All full-time employees and all part-time employees working
on a five (5) day week schedule shall be entitled to the life insurance in
the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) furnished at no cost to the
employee.



   (C)   All eligible employees shall participate in the retirement
plan through the county employees retirement system, of which the City of
Hillview is a member. The county employees retirement system shall determine
the eligibility of all employees.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01; Am. Ord. 2004-04, passed 2-16-04 )



§ 39.32  VOTING LEAVE.



   Voting leave shall be permitted as required by KRS 118.035.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.33  PERSONNEL RECORDS.



   (A)   For each city employee a personnel file shall be maintained in
the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   The file shall contain:



      (1)   The employee's name;



      (2)   The title of his or her position;



      (3)   The department to which he or she is assigned;



      (4)   His or her salary, including designation of grade and
step;



      (5)   Past changes in his or her status as a city employee; and



      (6)   Whatever additional information and documentation these
policies and procedures or other governing laws require.



   (C)   Every change in the status of the employee shall be recorded
in his or her personnel file.



   (D)   Upon termination of employment for whatever cause the
personnel file shall be retained in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer in
a central inactive file for the time period required by law.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.34  POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



   City employees are encouraged to support the governments in our federal
system in an appropriate fashion, and in accordance with the constitution,
laws, ordinances and court decision of our nation and state.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.35  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.



   A grievance is an employee's expressed dissatisfaction with something
related to his or her job. Employees and supervisors shall work together to
resolve any grievance which arises. Any grievance or dispute not resolved
shall be settled in the following manner:



   (A)   The employee shall present the grievance and a suggestion as
to how it may be resolved to his or her department head within seven (7)
calendar days of its occurrence. The department head shall then attempt to
adjust the matter and shall respond to the employee in writing within seven
(7) calendar days.



   (B)   If the grievance remains unresolved, the employee may request
a meeting with the Mayor through the City Clerk/Treasurer. The employee shall
present the grievance in writing within seven (7) calendar days after the
response of the department head is due, and the Mayor shall respond in
writing within ten (10) calendar days.



   (C)   A copy of all previous written documents involved in the
action shall be attached to the grievance and made a part thereof.



   (D)   There will be no reprisal against any employee because he or
she submitted a grievance.



   (E)   The decision of the Mayor is final.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.36  EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.



   Economy is required. Cost should be the most economical consistent with
the city's best interest.



   (A)   Any employee of the city incurring expense for prior approved
city connected business or travel outside the city shall be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred with prior department head approval and rates.



   (B)   When using a personnel vehicle, an employee shall be
reimbursed at the rate of twenty-six cents ($.26) per mile. Use of a personal
vehicle must be approved in advance to travel.



   (C)   Receipts for all expenditures are to be obtained and attached
to the reimbursement request, which must be completed as soon as possible
upon completion of travel.



   (D)   All reimbursement forms shall be signed by the employee and
their immediate supervisor.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.37  TRANSPORTATION OF UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.



   Transportation of unauthorized persons in city owned vehicles is not
permitted.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.38  UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS IN CITY VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person other than a city employee shall be permitted to
ride in or on a city vehicle unless it is a case of emergency or with prior
approval of the Mayor or his designate.



   (B)   Transportation of prisoners by police is authorized.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.39  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING CITY VEHICLES.



   Each employee shall promptly report to the City Clerk/Treasurer any
accident involving a city vehicle.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.40  PURCHASE ORDERS.



   (A)   An approved, signed, purchase order must be obtained before
any purchase is made for a sum greater than one hundred dollars ($100).



   (B)   A log of all purchase orders shall be kept in the office of
the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (C)   A purchase order must be signed by the Mayor and/or his or her
designee by either of the preceding parties.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.41  EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   The city may pay for training and development classes for its
employees in an effort to enhance their professional and personal growth and
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the city's programs and
operation.



   (B)   The city's ability to provide for this training will depend
upon the availability of funds. The assistance will be determined on an
individual basis and in a consistent and fair manner.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.42  INCLEMENT WEATHER.



   (A)   In the event of occurrence of weather conditions in which
travel to and from work may jeopardize the safety of employees, city offices
may be closed at the direction of the Mayor or his or her designee. Employees
will be notified of this action in an appropriate manner.



   (B)   Where individual circumstances exist, such as longer than
average distance of travel to and from the work place, the employee must
notify his or her supervisor, and may exercise his or her own judgment in not
reporting for work. If city offices are not subsequently closed, this time
off will be charged against annual leave or leave without pay at the
employee's discretion.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.43  CLASSIFICATION PLAN.



   (A)   Allocations. In the classification plan authorized by this
personnel policy, each permanent position shall be assigned to an appropriate
class on the basis of the duties and responsibilities of the position.



   (B)   Written specifications.



      (1)   Each class shall have a specification that includes:



         (a)   A concise, descriptive title;



         (b)   A description of duties and responsibilities of
the class; and



         (c)   A statement of minimum qualifications for the
position.



      (2)   All positions in a class shall be sufficiently alike to
permit:



         (a)   The use of a single descriptive title;



         (b)   A description of each of the duties in the class;



         (c)   The same qualifications for each position;



         (d)   The use of the same tests of competence for each
position;



         (e)   Application of the same pay range to each position.



   (C)   Reclassification.



      (1)   The department head shall recommend reclassification of
a position after its duties and responsibilities change materially and it is
no longer comparable with other positions in the class.



      (2)   Whenever the duties of a position so change that no
appropriate class for it exists, the department head shall prepare an
appropriate class specification for the position and recommend the position
be assigned to the class.



      (3)   Reclassification of a position may not be used to avoid
a restriction concerning demotion, promotion or compensation.



      (4)   When creating a new class, the format of existing
specifications shall be maintained, including all required sections.



   (D)   Categories of employment.



      (1)   All employees of the city shall be classified full-time,
part-time, temporary or seasonal, or assigned. The definition of each is as
follows:



         (a)   Full-time employee. An employee who works forty
(40) hours or more per week on a regularly scheduled basis.



         (b)   Part-time employee. An employee who is scheduled
to work less than forty (40) hours per week and may be of a temporary nature.



         (c)   Temporary or seasonable employee. An employee who
works in a position which is of a temporary nature.



         (d)   Assigned employee. An employee made available to
the city by another agency.



      (2)   Only full-time or part-time employees may occupy
permanent positions.



      (3)   Full-time employees in permanent positions shall be
entitled to all benefits provided by the city. All other employees shall not
be entitled to any benefits (except the benefits required by federal or state
law and as specified in this chapter.)



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.44  COMPENSATION PLAN.



   (A)   Pay plan. A pay plan prepared pursuant to the personnel
policies shall prescribe for each class a minimum or maximum rate of pay, and
all employees shall be compensated at a rate no less than the minimum amount
and no more than the maximum amount of the pay range assigned to the class.



   (B)   Pay adjustments. Subject to the availability of funds and the
financial ability of the city, the annual budget may include salary increases
effective July 1 for the budget year. However, the Mayor, when the
circumstances warrant, may authorize individual adjustments, subject to
availability of revenues and the current budget.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



Cross-reference:



   Wage scale, § 39.69



JOB CLASSIFICATIONS



§ 39.60  ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 4401.



   (A)   Classification: Part-time hourly.



   (B)   The main responsibility of the Animal Control Warden is the
control of stray and/or unattended dogs and cats within the city limits of
Hillview, Kentucky.



      (1)   He or she is responsible to see that all dogs and cats
are licensed and have current rabies shots.



      (2)   He or she is authorized to issue citations to violators
in accordance with Ordinance 74.



         (a)   First time offenders may be warned either verbally
or in writing, at the discretion of the warden.



         (b)   Second time offenders should be issued a citation
for the specific offense.



      (3)   The warden will maintain a daily log of all activities
and the specific times of them. Keep accurate time of the hours he or she is
on duty. Keep accurate listing and descriptions of all animals taken into
custody (e.g., color, breed, size, and sex of animal).



      (4)   He or she is responsible for the care, feeding and
watering of all animals in his or her custody, and the cleaning and
maintenance of the facilities.



      (5)   He or she will keep an accurate count of all animals in
custody and the length of time they remain in custody.



      (6)   Any animal not claimed or otherwise disposed of within
seven (7) days will be delivered to the Bullitt County Animal Pound. He or
she will obtain a receipt for all animals from the pound representative and
turn the receipt over to the City Clerk/Treasurer for record keeping. He or
she will make an entry on the daily log of the number and description of
these animals.



      (7)   The warden will periodically patrol the entire city
area. He or she will canvass, on a door-to-door basis, all animals in their
possession and verify that they have a current city license and rabies shots.



   (C)   Other duties as required.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



Cross-reference:



   Dog Warden, see § 39.67



§ 39.61  POLICE CHIEF; ASSISTANT POLICE CHIEF.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 2201, 2202.



   (A)   Classification: Salaried full-time positions.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class. Under general administrative
direction, plans, organizes, directs and coordinates the activities of the
Police Department in the enforcement of laws and ordinances, the prevention
of crime and the protection of life and property; does related work as
required.



   (C)   Examples of duties. Plans, directs, and exercises general
supervision over the work of the department. Formulates and enforces rules
and regulations, work methods, and procedures. Makes or reviews activities
and reports of officers. Makes recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
for the appointment, promotion, and dismissal of officers. Enforces
disciplinary measures when necessary. Ascertains that officers receive
adequate training in modern police methods and procedures. Directs the
preparation and maintenance of police methods and procedures. Directs the
investigation of major criminal offenses. Cooperates with the state and
federal officers in the apprehension of wanted persons. Sees that reports are
prepared for the City Council, National Safety Council, and Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Prepares budget estimates and controls the expenditures of
department funds. Conducts department correspondence, requisition supplies,
and recommends the purchase of necessary equipment. Meets with and answers
questions for the public. Attends police conferences and meets with various
citizens' groups.



   (D)   Minimum qualifications.



      (1)   Training and experience. Extensive successful experience
as police officer, including a minimum of four (4) years progressively
responsible experience; completion of an accredited high school course
supplemented by training in police administration or any equivalent
combination of experience and training which provides the desired knowledge,
skills and abilities.



      (2)   Special knowledge, skills and abilities. Thorough
knowledge of police administration and of police methods; thorough knowledge
of scientific methods of criminal detection, criminal identification, and
radio communication; thorough knowledge of the geography of the city;
demonstrated ability to lead and direct the activities of police officers;
ability to maintain cooperative relationships with other city officials and
with the general public; high social intelligence; resourcefulness and sound
judgment in emergencies; demonstrated integrity; tact; good physical
condition.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.62  POLICE OFFICER.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 2203, 2204.



   (A)   Classification: Full-time hourly or part-time hourly.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class. This is general duty police a
work in enforcing laws and ordinances. Work involves responsibility for the
protection of life and property; for the prevention, direction, and
investigation of crimes; and for maintaining law and order. Work involves an
element of personal danger and generally is performed in uniform. Specific
assignments are received from a superior and are carried out in accordance
with established rules and procedures; however, employees  must be able to
act without direct supervision in meeting emergencies. Work is reviewed
through reports, inspection, and observation of results obtained.



   (C)   Example of duties.



      (1)   Patrols a designated area of the city in a patrol car to
prevent and discover the commission of crime and to enforce traffic
regulation; answers calls and complaints; administers first aid; serves
warrants; and answers questions for the public.



      (2)   Conducts preliminary investigations at the scenes of
crimes and serious accidents; gathers evidence; locates and interviews
witnesses; makes arrests and interrogates prisoners; compiles accident
statistics.



      (3)   Directs traffic at intersections and at accidents and
fires; maintains order in crowds, at parades, and other public meetings.



      (4)   Operates electronic equipment for speed detection.



      (5)   Processes prisoners, provides for their needs and
supervises their activities; appears in court to present evidence and testify
against persons accused of crimes.



      (6)   Prepares and maintains necessary records and reports.



      (7)   Participates in training activities.



      (8)   Gives advice on laws and ordinances and general
information to the public.



      (9)   Performs related work as required.



   (D)   Training and experience as required by state statute:
Completion of a standard high school course; age 21.



   (E)   Special knowledge, skills and abilities:



      (1)   Ability to analyze situations quickly and objectively
and to determine the proper course of action.



      (2)   Ability to cope with situations firmly, courteously, and
tactfully, and with respect for the rights of others.



      (3)   Ability to react quickly and calmly under emergency
conditions.



      (4)   Ability to obtain information through interview,
interrogation, and observation.



      (5)   Ability to understand and execute difficult oral and
written instructions.



      (6)   Ability to express ideas clearly, orally and in writing
and to prepare comprehensive records and reports.



      (7)   Ability to develop skills in the use and care of
firearms.



      (8)   Ability to develop and maintain good public relations.



      (9)   Ability to meet such specific physical requirements as
may be established by competent authority.



      (10)   Excellent physical condition.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.63  PUBLIC WORKS.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 3301.



   (A)   Classification: May be full-time hourly or part-time hourly,
temporary or seasonal.



   (B)   Characteristics of class.



      (1)   An employee of this class is responsible for repair or
replacement of traffic control devices, and the like, stop, speed and street
name signs. Ditch work will include clean out and removal of debris that may
hinder the flow of water.



      (2)   Keep on hand materials to perform assigned duties.



   (C)   Requirements of work.



      (1)   Must have valid drivers license;



      (2)   Operate machinery, vehicles and equipment,



      (3)   Perform maintenance on machinery, vehicles and
equipment, public streets, rights-of-way, and city owned buildings as
required;



      (4)   Remove snow from city streets and parking lots.



   (D)   Training experience.



      (1)   Ability to read and write in the English language and
must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. Working knowledge of supplies
and equipment that will be used in his or her line of duty. Ability to
understand and carry out oral and written instructions.



      (2)   Perform related work as required.



      (3)   Prepare and maintain necessary records and reports, such
as time sheets and daily activity logs.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.64  CITY CLERK/TREASURER.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 1101.



   (A)   Classification: Full-time salaried non-elected city officer.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class. This is responsible
administrative and clerical work serving as City Clerk and Tax Collector.
Work involves responsibility for billing and collecting city taxes and all
other accounts receivable. Work includes attending City Council meetings,
recording proceedings of the meetings, and maintaining records. Work involves
the handling of routine complaints, correspondence and inquiries not
requiring Council action. Assists in preparing annual budget. Does related
work as required.



   (C)   Examples of duties. Responsible for duties set forth in KRS
83A.085 and other pertinent statutes. Responsible for setting up agenda for
City Council meetings and records official transactions and proceedings of
the meetings. Responsible for the collection of taxes authorized by law.
Responsible for all clerical work required by the Mayor, Council members, and
general city operations. Administers business licenses.



   (D)   Minimum requirements: High school graduate with five (5) years
experience in clerical, administrative or accounting work. Thorough knowledge
of computers.



      (1)   Training and experience. Graduation from high school.
Five (5) years experience in responsible administrative or clerical work.



      (2)   Special knowledge, skills and abilities. Skilled in the
use of office machines and computers. Thorough knowledge of the organization
and functions of city government and of the laws and regulations governing
city government. Ability to write clear and accurate reports on complex
subjects. Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with the general public, city officials employees. Knowledge of standard
office procedures.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.65  CITY TREASURER.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 1101.



   (A)   Classification: salaried full-time non-elected city officer.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class. This is responsible
administrative and clerical work serving as City Treasurer. Work involves
responsibility for maintaining various journals and ledgers in accounting for
all financial transactions, and preparing financial statements and budget
reports. Does related work as required.



   (C)   Examples of duties.



      (1)   Responsible for quarterly reports.



      (2)   Responsible for the accounting of city revenue.



      (3)   Responsible for the custody and disbursement of all city
revenue budget.



      (4)   Prepares city payroll and maintains payroll records.



      (5)   Prepares monthly reports.



      (6)   Assists in preparing annual budget for approval by
Council.



   (D)   Minimum requirements.



      (1)   Training and experience. Graduation from high school.
Course in bookkeeping or accounting. One (1) year of experience in
bookkeeping or related field.



      (2)   Special knowledge, skills and abilities. Thorough
knowledge of standard accounting procedures. Thorough knowledge of the
organization and functions of city government and of the laws and regulations
governing city government. Ability to write clear and accurate reports on
complex subjects. Ability to establish and maintain effective working
relationships with the general public, city officials and employees.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.65A  DEPUTY CITY CLERK/TREASURER.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 1102.



   (A)   Classification: Full time hourly, part-time hourly, temporary
hourly and seasonal hourly are authorized in this position as dictated by the
annual budget.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class: Works under the direction of the
City Clerk/Treasurer and the Mayor. Assists the City Clerk/Treasurer in the
performance of his or her duties and responsibilities.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities: Billing and collecting city
taxes, billing and collecting all other accounts either payable or
receivable; maintaining city records; assisting in the preparing of reports;
performing clerical work for the Mayor and City Council. Assisting the
Clerk/Treasurer in all phases of his or her duties.



   (D)   Minimum requirements: High school graduate with two (2) years
experience in clerical work, using modern office equipment.



   (E)   Special knowledge, skills, and abilities: Skilled in the use
of office machines and equipment. Ability to follow complex instructions.
Ability to maintain dignity and decorum in difficult situations.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.66  RECREATIONAL COORDINATOR.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 5501.



   (A)   Classification: Part-time salaried.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class. Under general administrative
direction, plans, organizes, directs and coordinates the activities of the
Recreation Department. Maintains recreational areas inside and outside in an
orderly and clean manner. Does related work as required.



   (C)   Examples of duties.



      (1)   Plans, directs and does scheduling of department
activities.



      (2)   Responsible for opening/closing gym.



      (3)   Responsible for rental contract to be signed by renters.



      (4)   Responsible for collection of rental fees.



      (5)   Responsible for routine custodial work in and around
public buildings.



   (D)   Illustration of work. Sweeps, mops, washes walls, windows,
cleans woodwork, and vacuums carpets, cleans offices, cleans restrooms, and
replenishes supplies, and maintains grounds. Requires renters to sign
contracts, collects fees and deposits with City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (E)   Requirements of work.



      (1)   Working knowledge of recreation activities and
scheduling.



      (2)   Ability to understand and carry out oral and written
instructions.



      (3)   Some skills in making minor repairs to building and
equipment.



   (F)   Desirable experience and training. Some experience in
recreation, sports and custodial work and ability to read and write or any
equivalent combination of experience and training.



   (G)   Tools to be used. Power mower, hammer, pliers, screwdriver,
mops, broom, paint brush, shovel (snow), vacuum-shampoo (carpet).



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.67  DOG WARDEN.



   (A)   Duties. The Dog Warden shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Enforcing all of the requirements of Ordinance 74 and
all appropriate Kentucky Revised Statutes dealing with the protection of the
public and animals.



      (2)   Maintaining all records relating to the operation of the
office.



      (3)   Filing any and all required federal and/or state forms.



      (4)   Meeting with and answering questions from the public.



   (B)   Qualifications. The applicant for the position of Dog Warden
shall have graduated from high school or have a high school equivalency
certificate; and be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, and have no felony
convictions.



   (C)   Tenure. The person filling this position shall be employed
and/or terminated by action of the Mayor.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



Cross-reference:



   Animal Control Warden, see § 39.60



§ 39.68  CUSTODIAN.



   Job description, duties and responsibilities. Class Code 6601.



   (A)   Classification. Regular part-time hourly employee.



   (B)   Characteristics of the class. This is general janitorial work
in cleaning, sanitizing, and trash removal in all city owned buildings.
Employee shall work under the direction of the Mayor. Some grounds keeping
may be required.



   (C)   Examples of duties. Vacuum carpets in offices; mop, wax, and
buff tile floors; clean and sanitize restrooms and fixtures; clean windows,
doors and mirrors; dust furniture; replace light bulbs and all other work as
directed.



   (D)   Minimum qualifications. Must be an honest, reliable and sober
individual at least eighteen (18) years of age. Must be able to read and
write the English language and carry out both verbal and written directions.



   (E)   Training and experience. Should be thoroughly familiar with
janitorial supplies and equipment. Previous experience in this field is
desirable.



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01)



§ 39.69  JOB CLASSIFICATION AND WAGE SCALE.



   (A)   The employees of the city shall upon initial employment be
assigned to one of the following:



1101 City Clerk/Treasurer



1102 Deputy Clerk



1103 Assistant Clerk



2201 Police Chief



2202 Assistant Police Chief



2203 Police Major



2204 Police Sergeant



2205 Police Patrolman



2206 Code Enforcement Officer



2207 Part-Time Code Enforcement Officer



3301 Public Works Director



3302 Public Works Level 2



3303 Public Works Level 1



4401 Animal Control Warden



4402 Assistant Animal Control Warden



5501 Recreational Director



5502 Recreation Assistant Level 2



5503 Recreation Assistant Level 1



6601 Custodian Level 2



6602 Custodian Level 1



   (B)   The minimum wage and maximum wage for each adopted job
classification of an employee of the city shall be as follows:



 

Class
 
Minimum
 
Maximum




1101
 
$23,000 annually
 
$46,000 annually


1102
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$17.50 hourly


1103
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$14.50 hourly


2201
 
$27,000 annually
 
$46,000 annually


2202
 
$25,480 annually
 
$36,000 annually


2203
 
$10.50 hourly
 
$20.00 hourly


2204   
 
$9.00 hourly   
 
$18.50 hourly


2205
 
$9.00 hourly   
 
$17.50 hourly


2206
 
$9.00 hourly
 
$16.00 hourly


2207
 
$9.00 hourly
 
$16.00 hourly


3301   
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$16.50 hourly


3302
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$15.50 hourly


3303
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$14.50 hourly


4401   
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$14.50 hourly


4402
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$11.50 hourly


5501
 
$10.00 hourly
 
$15.50 hourly


5502
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$13.50 hourly


5503
 
$8.50 hourly
 
$11.50 hourly


6601
 
$7.00 hourly
 
$14 .00 hourly


6602
 
$7.00 hourly
 
$14.00 hourly




 



(Ord. 01-03, passed 1-15-01; Am. Ord. 2004-08, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 40:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



General Provisions



   40.01   Definitions



Standards of Conduct



   40.10   Conflicts of interest in general



   40.11   Conflicts of interest in contracts



   40.12   Receipt of gifts



   40.13   Use of city property, equipment and personnel



   40.14   Representation of interests before city government



   40.15   Misuse of confidential information



   40.16   Post-employment restriction



   40.17   Honoraria



Financial Disclosure



   40.20   Who must file



   40.21   When to file statements; amended statements



   40.22   Form of the statement of financial interests



   40.23   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial
interests



   40.24   Contents of the financial interests statements



   40.25   Noncompliance with filing requirement



Nepotism



   40.30   Nepotism prohibited



Enforcement



   40.40   Board of Ethics created



   40.41   Alternate members



   40.42   Facilities and staff



   40.43   Power and duties of the Board of Ethics



   40.44   Filing and investigation of complaints



   40.45   Notice of hearings



   40.46   Hearing procedure



   40.47   Appeals



   40.48   Limitation of actions



   40.49   Advisory opinions



   40.50   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited



 



   40.99   Penalties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 40.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning:



   BUSINESS.  Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional
service corporation, or any legal entity through which business is conducted
for profit.



   BOARD OF ETHICS or BOARD.  The City of Hillview Board of Ethics which
is created and vested by this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing
the requirements of the City's Code of Ethics.



   CANDIDATE.  Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city
office. An individual is a candidate when the individual files a notification
and declaration for nomination for office with the County Court Clerk, or
files a declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County
Court Clerk.



   CITY.  The City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky.



   FAMILY MEMBER.  A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or
grandchild and any person who is cohabitating with the city officer or
candidate for city office.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER.  A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in
the officer's household, or a person claimed by the officer or employee, or
the officer's or employee's spouse, as a dependent for tax purposes.



   OFFICER.  Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid
or unpaid, who is one of the following:



      (1)   The Mayor.



      (2)   City Councilperson.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



STANDARDS OF CONDUCT



§ 40.10  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.



   Every officer and employee of the city shall comply with the following
standards of conduct:



   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any
officer or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any
business, transaction or activity which is in substantial conflict with the
proper discharge of the officer's or employee's public duties.



   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to
use his official position with the city to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself or others.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or refrain
from taking any discretionary action, or agree to take or refrain from taking
any discretionary action, or induce or attempt to induce any other officer or
employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary action, on any
matter before the city in order to obtain a financial benefit for any of the
following:



      (1)   The officer or employee.



      (2)   A family member.



      (3)   An outside employer.



      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or any
family member has a financial interest.



      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any
family member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other
business or professional relationship.



   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any
provision in this section if, by reason of the officer's or employee's
participation, vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit
accrues to the officer or employee, a family member, an outside employer, or
a business as defined in subsection (C) (4) and (C) (5) of this section, as a
member of any business, occupation, profession, or other group, to any
greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of the business, occupation, profession, or other group.



   (E)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial
interest which the officer or employee believes or has reason to believe may
be affected by his participation, vote, decision or other action taken within
the scope of his public duties shall disclose the precise nature and value of
the interest, in writing, to the governing body of the city served by the
officer or employee, and the disclosure shall be entered on the official
record of the proceedings of the governing body.  The officer or employee
shall refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that is the
subject of the disclosure.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.11  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall directly or through
others undertake, execute, hold, or enjoy, in whole or in part, any contract
made, entered into, awarded, or granted by the city, except as follows:



      (1)   The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply to contracts entered into before an elected officer filed as a
candidate for city office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a
city office, or before an employee was hired by the city.  However, if any
contract entered into by a city or city agency officer or employee before he
became a candidate, was appointed to office, or was hired as an employee, is
renewable after he becomes a candidate, assumes the appointed office, or is
hired as an employee, the prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
apply to the renewal of the contract.



      (2)   The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply if the contract is awarded after public notice and competitive
bidding, unless the officer or employee is authorized to participate in
establishing the contract specifications, awarding the contract, or managing
contract performance after the contract is awarded.  If the officer or
employee has any of the authorities set forth in the preceding sentence, then
the officer or employee shall have no interest in the contract, unless the
requirements set forth in subpart (3) below are satisfied.



      (3)   The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall
not apply in any case where the following requirements are satisfied:



         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction
and the nature of the officer's or employee's interest in the contract are
publicly disclosed at a meeting of the governing body of the city.



         (b)   The disclosure is made a part of the official
record of the governing body of the city before the contract is executed.



         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the
city that the contract with the officer or employee is in the best interests
of the public and the city because of price, limited supply, or other
specific reasons.



         (d)   The finding is made a part of the official record
of the governing body of the city before the contract is executed.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered
into in violation of this section.  Additionally, a violation of this
section shall be grounds for removal from office or employment with the city
in accordance with any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances,
rules or regulations of the city.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.12  RECEIPT OF GIFTS.



   No officer or employee of the city shall directly or indirectly through
any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift having a fair market
value of more than one hundred dollars ($100), whether in the form of money,
service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any
other form under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that
the gift was intended to influence or could reasonably be expected to
influence the officer or employee in the performance of his  public duties.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.13  USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.



   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any
city time, funds, personnel, equipment, or other personal or real property
for the private use of any person, unless:



   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated city policy.



   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to
the extent and upon the terms that such use is available to the general
public.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.14  REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall represent any person
or business, other than the city, in connection with any cause, proceeding,
application or other matter pending before the city.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from
representing another employee or employees where the representation is within
the context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee
from representing himself in matters concerning his own interest.



   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from
making any inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no
compensation, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or
accepted by the officer, whether directly or indirectly, in return for the
inquiry.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.15  MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   No officer or employee of the city shall intentionally use or disclose
information acquired in the course of his official duties, if the primary
purpose of the use or disclosure is to further his personal financial
interest or that of another person or business. Information shall be deemed
confidential if it is not subject to disclosure pursuant to the Kentucky Open
Records Act, KRS 61.872 to 61.884, at the time of its use or disclosure.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.16  POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.



   No officer or employee of the city shall appear or practice before the
city with respect to any matter on which the officer or employee personally
worked while in the service of the city for a period of one (1) year after
the termination of the officer's or employee's service with the city.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.17  HONORARIA.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall accept any
compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market value greater than one
hundred dollars ($100) in consideration of an appearance, speech or article
unless the appearance, speech or article is both related to the officer's or
employee's activities outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the
officer's or employee's service with the city.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer or employee
of the city from receiving and retaining from the city or on behalf of the
city actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the officer or
employee in connection with an appearance, speech or article, provided that
the officer or employee can show by clear and convincing evidence that the
expenses were incurred or received on behalf of the city and primarily for
the benefit of the city or city agency and not primarily for the benefit of
the officer or employee or any other person.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE



§ 40.20  WHO MUST FILE.



   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the Board
of Ethics:



   (A)   Elected city officials.



   (B)   Candidates for elected city office.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.21  WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.



   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this
section shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics,
no later than 4:00 p.m., April 1, 1995. All subsequent statements of
financial interest shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m. on February 15 each
year provided that:



      (1)   An officer or employee newly-appointed to fill an office
or position of employment with the city file his initial statement no later
than thirty (30) days after the date of the appointment.



      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his initial
statement no later than thirty (30) days after the date on which the person
becomes a candidate for elected city office.



   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time
for filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.



   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information
contained in a financial statement that has been filed  with  the 
Board,  the  officer  or  employee shall,  no  later  than  thirty
(30) days after becoming aware of the material change, file an amended
statement with the Board.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.22  FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics or the administrative official designated
by the Board of Ethics.  The Board, or the designated administrative
official, shall deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee
required to file the statement, by first class mail or hand delivery, no
later than January 15 of each year.  The failure of the Board or the
designated administrative official to deliver a copy of the form to any
officer or employee shall not relieve the officer or employee of the
obligation to file the statement.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.23  CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the "OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN" of the
statements of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance
of the statements of financial interests. The statements of financial
interests shall be maintained by the Board of Ethics, or its designated
administrative official designated by the Board of Ethics as the "custodian"
as public documents, available for public inspection immediately upon filing.



   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the
Board or the designated administrative official for a period of five (5)
years after filing; provided that:



      (1)   Upon the expiration of three (3) years after a person
ceases to be an officer or employee of the city, the Board shall cause to be
destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of those statements
filed by the person.



      (2)   Upon the expiration of one (1) year after any election
at which a candidate for elected city office was not elected or nominated,
the Board of Ethics shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial
interests or copies of those statements filed by the person.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.24  CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.



   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the
following information for the preceding calendar year:



      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone
number, and home address of the filer.



      (2)   The title of the filer's office or office sought.



      (3)   The occupation of the filer.



      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the
filer and the filer's immediate family members exceeding ten thousand dollars
($10,000) during the preceding calendar year and the nature of the income
(e.g., salary, commission, dividends, retirement fund distribution, etc.)



      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the
state in which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had at
any time during the preceding calendar year an interest of twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000) at fair market value or five percent (5%)
ownership interest or more.



      (6)   The location of all real property within the county,
other than the filer's primary residence, in which the filer had during the
preceding calendar year an interest of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) or more.



      (7)   Each source by name and address of gifts or honoraria
having a fair market value of one hundred dollars ($100) or more from any
single source, excluding gifts received from family members, received by the
filer or any member of the filer's immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.



      (8)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than
thirty thousand dollars ($30,000), except debts arising from the purchase of
a primary residence or the purchase of consumer goods which are bought or
used primarily for person, family or household purposes.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
officer or employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of
individual clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.25  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative
official, shall notify by certified mail each person required to file a
statement of financial interests who fails to file the statement by the due
date, files an incomplete statement, or files a statement in a form other
than that prescribed by the Board.  The notice shall specify the type of
failure or delinquency, shall establish a date by which the failure or
delinquency shall be remedied, and shall advise the person of the penalties
for a violation.



   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who
fails or refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the
notice under subsection (A) within the time period established in the notice
shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine
imposed by the Board in an amount not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25) per
day, up to a maximum total civil fine of five hundred dollars ($500). Any
civil fine imposed by the Board under this section may be recovered by the
city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses
to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.



   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial
interests which he knows to contain false information or intentionally omits
required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



NEPOTISM



§ 40.30  NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall advocate, recommend
or cause the:



      (1)   employment;



      (2)   appointment;



      (3)   promotion;



      (4)   transfer; or



      (5)   advancement



of a family member to an office or position of employment with the city.



   (B)   No officer or employee of the city shall supervise or manage
the work of a family member.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action
relating to the employment or discipline of a family member, except that this
prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed official from voting on
or participating in the development of a budget which includes compensation
for a family member, provided that the family member is included only as a
member of a class of persons or a group and the family member benefits to no
greater extent than any other similarly situated member of the class or group.



   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any
relationship or situation that would violate the prohibitions, but which
existed prior to January 1, 1995.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 40.40  BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of three (3) members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city, subject to the approval of the
City Council.  The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed
within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter.  No member of
the Board of Ethics shall hold any elected or appointed office, whether paid
or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city.  The members shall
serve for a term of three (3) years; except that with respect to the members
initially appointed one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1)
year, one ( 1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and one
(1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.  Thereafter,
all appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years.  No more than two
(2) of the members shall be of the same political party.  Each member of the
Board of Ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least two (2)
years prior to the date of the appointment and shall reside in the city
throughout the term in office.  The members of the Board of Ethics shall be
chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for integrity and
their knowledge of local government affairs.  The members may be
re-appointed for no more than two (2) consecutive terms.



   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the City Council for misconduct, inability,
incompetence or willful neglect of duties.  Before any member of the Board
of Ethics is removed from office under this section, the member shall be
afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Mayor and the City Council.



   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within sixty
(60) days by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council.  If a
vacancy is not filled by the Mayor within sixty (60) days, the remaining
members of the Board of Ethics shall fill the vacancy.  All vacancies shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall be compensated at the
rate of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year which will not include the
attendance at any investigative hearings.  If any investigative hearings are
held each member of the Board of Ethics shall be compensated at the rate of
thirty dollars ($30.00) per day.  A day shall be defined as no less than
four (4) hours.



   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members and annually thereafter, elect a chairperson from among the
membership.  The chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full
voting member of the Board.



   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary,
upon the call of the chairperson or at the written request of a majority of
the members.



   (H)   The presence of two (2) or more members shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of two (2) or more members shall be necessary
for any official action to be taken.  Any member of the Board of Ethics who
has a conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the
Board shall disqualify himself from voting on the matter and shall not be
counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.



   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of
Ethics and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be
recorded in the minutes.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.41  ALTERNATE MEMBERS.



   The Mayor of the city, with the approval of the City Council, may
appoint two (2) alternate members of the Board of Ethics who may be called
upon to serve when any regular member of the Board is unable to discharge his
duties.  An alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one (1)
year.  Alternate members shall meet all qualifications and be subject to all
of the requirements of this chapter that apply to regular members.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.42  FACILITIES AND STAFF.



   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the City Council in the
annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics, either directly or
by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials, supplies and staff
needed for the conduct of its business.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.43  POWER AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.



   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To receive and investigate complaints, hold hearings, and make
findings of fact and determinations with regard to alleged violations of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and
hearings requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and
answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order
testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual designated by the
Board who has the power to administer oaths.



   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary
evidence relating to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board.



   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter
to the Mayor of the city, the City Council, the County Attorney, or other
appropriate person or body, as necessary.



   (E)   To render advisory opinions to city officers and employees
regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would constitute a
violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (F)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all
officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to its
terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this
chapter.



   (G)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests
that are required to be filed by this chapter and to insure that the
statements are available for public inspection in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Kentucky Open Records Act.



   (H)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the Mayor or the City Council.



   (I)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
rules, regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter or any state or federal law.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.44  FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics.  All complaints shall be in
writing, signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other requirements
established by the Board of Ethics.  The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge
receipt of a complaint to the complainant within  ten (10) working days from
the date of receipt.  The Board shall forward within ten (10) working days
to each officer or employee of the city who is the subject of the complaint a
copy of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)    Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a complaint meeting
the requirements of subsection (A) herein, the Board of Ethics shall conduct
a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations contained in the
complaint.  The Board shall afford a person who is the subject of the
complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the complaint. 
The person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear and
be heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.



   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry
being conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board except the Board may turn over to the
Commonwealth's Attorney or County Attorney evidence which may be used in
criminal proceedings.



   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary
inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether
it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this
chapter.  If the Board concludes that the complaint is outside of its
jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Board shall immediately
terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy
of its decision to the complainant and to all officers or employees against
whom the complaint was filed.



   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary
inquiry, that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains
allegations sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a
violation, the Board shall notify the officer or employee who is the subject
of the complaint and may:



      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances issue, in writing, a
confidential reprimand to the officer concerning the alleged violation and
provide a copy of the confidential reprimand to the Mayor and City Council.



      (2)   Conduct a hearing to determine whether there has been a
violation.



   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer
or employee of the city shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.45  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.



   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order
setting the matter for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the date the
order is issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the Board
consents to a later date. The order setting the matter for hearing, along
with a copy of any pertinent regulations of the Board relating to the hearing
shall be sent to the alleged violator within forty-eight (48) hours of the
time the order setting a hearing is issued.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.46  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules
of Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics;
however, the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and
in accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board
so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights required by
law.



   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged
violator, or his representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity to
examine all documents and records including any exculpatory evidence obtained
or prepared by the Board in connection with the matter to be heard.



   (C)   All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer.  All parties shall have the right to
call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine
witnesses, to submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All
witnesses shall have the right to be represented by counsel.



   (D)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless
the members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.



   (E)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics
shall, as soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for
the purpose of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination
whether a violation of this chapter has been proven. Within thirty (30) days
after completion of the hearing, the Board shall issue a written report of
its findings and conclusions.



   (F)   If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this
chapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint
and to the party who filed the complaint.



   (G)   If the Board concludes in its report that there is clear and
convincing proof of a violation of this chapter, the Board may:



      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and
desist the violation.



      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the
violations and provide a copy of the reprimand to the Mayor and City Council.



      (3)   In writing, recommend to the Mayor and the City Council
that the violator be sanctioned as recommended by the Board, which may
include a recommendation for removal from office.



      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000).



      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or
state laws to the County Attorney or Commonwealth's Attorney of the
jurisdiction for prosecution.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.47  APPEALS.



   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the Bullitt Circuit
Court within thirty (30) days after the date of the final action of the Board
of Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board.  The Board
shall transmit to the Clerk of the Court the entire record considered by the
Board in making its determination.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.48  LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.



   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state
law, an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one (1)
year after the violation is discovered.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.49  ADVISORY OPINIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning
matters under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, when requested by any officer or candidate for elective office
of the city.



   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall
state relevant facts and ask specific questions.



   (C)   The Board may adopt regulations, consistent with the Kentucky
Open Records Law, to establish criteria under which it will issue
confidential advisory opinions.  All other advisory opinions shall be public
documents, except that before an advisory opinion is made public, it shall be
modified so that the identity of any person associated with the opinion shall
not be revealed.



   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived
either:



      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion.



      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Board, if a
person makes or purports to make public the substance or any portion of an
advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of the person.



   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be
binding on the Board in any subsequent proceeding concerning the facts and
circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or circumstances
arise.  However, if any fact determined by the Board to be material was
omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the Board shall not be
bound by the opinion.



   (F)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.50  REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall subject to reprisal
or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any official authority or
influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to discourage, restrain,
deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate against any person
who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to the
attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency or official of the city
or the Commonwealth any facts or information relative to an actual or
suspected violation of this chapter.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed as:



      (1)   Prohibiting disciplinary or punitive action if an
officer or employee of the city discloses information which he knows:



         (a)   To be false or which he discloses with reckless
disregard for its truth or falsity.



         (b)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the
provisions of the Kentucky Open Records Act, 61.870 to 61.884.



         (c)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



§ 40.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city who is found by the Board of
Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board of
Ethics not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), which may be recovered by
the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails to pay
the penalty within a prescribed period of time.



   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter, any officer or employee of the city who is found by the Board
of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall forfeit to the
city an amount equal to the economic benefit or gain which the officer or
employee is determined by the Board to have realized as a result of the
violation.  The amount of any forfeiture may be recovered by the city in a
civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender fails to pay the amount
of the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.



   (C)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter or state law, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer
or employee of the city is guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal.  Any action to remove any officer or employee
for a violation of this chapter shall be taken in accordance with all
applicable laws of the Commonwealth.



(Ord. 94-21, passed 10-26-94)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   SEWERS





         51.   STORM DRAINAGE





         52.   SOLID WASTE




CHAPTER 50:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   50.001   Purpose; policy



   50.002   Definitions



   50.003   Abbreviations



Use of Public Sewers



   50.015   Mandatory sewer connections



   50.016   Unlawful discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets



   50.017   Compliance with local, state and federal laws



   50.018   Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewers



   50.019   Prohibited discharges



Private Wastewater Disposal



   50.030   Public sewer not available



   50.031   Requirements for installation



Building Sewer and Connections



   50.045   Permits



   50.046   Prohibited connections



   50.047   Design; installations



   50.048   Inspection



Pollutant Discharge Limits



   50.060   General conditions



   50.061   Dilution of wastewater discharge



   50.062   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   50.063   Special industrial pretreatment requirements



   50.064   Protection from accidental and slug discharges



   50.065   State requirements



   50.066   City’s right of revision



   50.067   Federal categorical pretreatment standards



Pretreatment Program Administration



   50.080   Wastewater discharges



   50.081   Industrial user discharge permits



   50.082   Permit modifications



   50.083   Permit conditions



   50.084   Alternative discharge limits



   50.085   Permit duration



   50.086   Permit transfer



   50.087   Compliance data reporting



   50.088   Periodic compliance reports



   50.089   Permit violations



   50.090   Monitoring



   50.091   Inspection; sampling



   50.092   Pretreatment



   50.093   Annual publication



   50.094   Significant non-compliance



   50.095   Confidential information



   50.096   Signatory requirements



Fees



   50.110   Purpose



   50.111   Charges and fees



Powers and Authority of Inspectors



   50.120   Right to enter premises



   50.121   Right to obtain information regarding discharge



   50.122   Access to easements



   50.123   Safety



Enforcement



   50.135   General



   50.136   Notice of violation



   50.137   Administrative orders



   50.138   Show cause hearing



   50.139   Additional enforcement remedies



 



   50.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.001  PURPOSE; POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Hillview and enables the city to comply with all applicable state
and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system inadequately
treated into receiving waters so as to cause violations of the city's KPDES
permit or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewaters and sludges from the system;



      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
municipal wastewater system;



      (5)   To provide for the safety of the treatment plant
employees; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its KPDES
or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge permit conditions, including use
and disposal requirements and any other federal or state environmental laws
to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contribution to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to the City of Hillview and to
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city,
users of the city publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



§ 50.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Secretary of the Kentucky Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Cabinet or an authorized representative thereof.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE.



      (1)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of a user may be:



         (a)   A principal executive officer of at least the
level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation;



         (b)   A general partner or proprietor if the user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;



         (c)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.



      (2)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of the city may be any
person designated by the city to act on its behalf.



   BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR).  A report submitted by categorical
industrial users within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of a categorical standard which indicates the compliance status of the
user with the applicable categorical standard (40 CFR 403.12(b))



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°) Celsius expressed in terms of weight
and concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, water, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.  Also called HOUSE CONNECTION.



   BUILDING SEWER PERMIT.  As set forth in § 50.045.



   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD).With chemical inhibition
of nitrification, the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5)
days at twenty degrees (20°) Celsius expressed in terms of concentration in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards which have been promulgated by the EPA.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of
industrial users.



   CITY. The City of Hillview, Kentucky.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). (Also known as the FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION
CONTROL ACT.) Enacted by Public Law 92-500, October 18, 1972; 33 USC 1251 et
seq.; as amended by PL 95-217, December 28, 1977; PL 97-117, December 29,
1981; PL 97-440, January 8, 1983; and PL 100-04, February 4, 1987.



   COMBINED SEWER.  Any conduit designed to carry both sanitary sewage
and storm water or surface water.



   COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA (CWF). Procedure for calculating
alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated
wastestream is combined with other non-regulated wastestreams prior to
treatment (40 CFR 403.7).



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and
fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the
POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such
pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants so as to ensure
compliance with the POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit.



   CONCENTRATION-BASED LIMIT.  A limit based on the relative strength of
a pollutant in a wastestream, usually expressed in mg/l.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The term CONTROL AUTHORITY shall refer to the city
when there exists an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40
CFR 403.11.



   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum allowable value for any single observation
in a given day.



   DILUTE WASTESTREAM. Boiler blowdown, sanitary wastewater, noncontact
cooling water and certain process wastestreams that have been excluded from
regulation in categorical pretreatment standards because they contain none or
only trace amounts of the regulated pollutant.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   DISCHARGER. Any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a
public sewer.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from
non-commercial or non-industrial activities and which result from normal
human living processes.



   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.



   EFFLUENT. The liquid overflow of any facility designed to treat, convey
or retain wastewater.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of that
agency.



   EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater
treatment process.



   FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
proportional to the flow of the wastestream at the time of sampling.



   FLOW-WEIGHTED AVERAGING FORMULA (FWA). A procedure used to calculate
alternative limits for a categorical pretreatment standard where regulated
and nonregulated wastestreams combine after treatment, but prior to the
monitoring point as defined in 40 CFR 403.



   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.



   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants as defined in this section.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33
U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).



   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU). A source of indirect discharge.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial or commercial
processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.



   INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to separate and
retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal wastes which
permits normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the sewer or
drainage system by gravity. Also commonly referred to as a GREASE, OIL OR
SAND TRAP.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and/or



      (2)   Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405
of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title
II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act (40 CFR 403.3).



   MAY.   This is permissive (see SHALL).



   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The maximum allowable value for the average of all
observations obtained during one month.



   MULTI-UNIT SEWER CUSTOMER.  A location served where there are two (2)
or more residential units or apartments, two (2) or more businesses in the
same building or complex or where there is any combination of business and
residence in the same building or complex.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD.
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act which applies
to a specific category of industrial users. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.



   NATIONAL (or KENTUCKY) POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES/KPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1332), or a permit issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky under this
authority and referred to as KPDES.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)    The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.



      (2)   In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.



      (3)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of (1)(a) or (b) above but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.



   NINETY (90) DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report submitted by a categorical
industrial user, within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical standards that documents and certifies
the compliance status of the user (40 CFR 403.12(d)).



   ORDINANCE. This chapter, unless otherwise specified.



   PASS THROUGH. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated
adequately by the POTW, and therefore exits into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation)(40 CFR 403.3).



   PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report on compliance status submitted by
significant industrial users to the control authority at least semi-annually
(40 CFR 403.12(e)).



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estates, government
entity of any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution.



   POLLUTION. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.



   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into water, including medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, CBOD, COD, toxicity,
or odor).



   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.



   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process change(s), or other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).



   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production of
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product,
by-product, or waste product.



   PRODUCTION-BASED STANDARD. A discharge limitation expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant mass discharge rate per unit of production and is applied
directly to an industrial user's manufacturing process.



   PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the
authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, § 403.(5).



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2)
inch in any dimension.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by
§  212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the
city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city,
users of the city's POTW.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or
public utility. In general, the PUBLIC SEWER shall include the main sewer in
the street and the service branch to the curb or property line, or a main
sewer on private property and the service branch to the extent of ownership
by public authority.



   REGULATED WASTESTREAM. An industrial process wastestream regulated by a
national categorical pretreatment standard.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.



   SEWAGE. Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping,
treating and disposing of wastewater.



   SEWERAGE. Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying,
pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.



   SEWER USER CHARGES. A system of charges levied on users of a POTW for
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement of such works.



   SEWERS SYSTEM ORWORKS.  All facilities for collecting, transporting,
pumping, treatment and disposing of sewage and sludge, namely the sewerage
system and the POTW.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



   SHALL. This is mandatory (see MAY).



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). Defined by EPA guidance as:



      (1)   All industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment
Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N; and



      (2)   Any noncategorical industrial user that:



         (a)   Discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons
per day or more of process wastewater (process wastewaters);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
to five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
(BOD, TSS, and the like) capacity of the treatment plant; or



         (c)   Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the
control or approval authority, to adversely affect the pollutants, sludge
contamination or endangerment of POTW workers).



   SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary batch
discharge or any discharge of water or wastewater in which the concentration
of any given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds, for any duration longer
than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four
(24) hour concentration or flow rate during normal operation which adversely
affects the POTW.



   SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant (including biochemical oxygen demand) released
in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration which will cause interference
with the operation of the treatment works or which exceeds limits set forth
in the industry's discharge permit and which include accidental spills.



   SPILL PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN. A plan prepared by an industrial
user to minimize the likelihood of a spill and to expedite control and
cleanup activities should a spill occur.



   SPLIT SAMPLE. Portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to
another agency to verify or compare laboratory results.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification scheme based
on the type of industry or process at a facility.



   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the recent editions of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control
Federation as specified at 40 CFR 136.



   STATE. Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STORM DRAIN. (Sometimes termed STORM SEWER). A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, surface water, or unpolluted water from any
source.



   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the city to supervise the
publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter or his or her duly authorized representative.



   SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic sewer user
and debt service charges, for those users whose contributions contain
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), chemical  oxygen demand (COD), total
suspended solids (TSS), oil & grease or ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) in
concentrations which exceed limits specified herein for such pollutants.
Where authorized by the control authority, payment of a surcharge will
authorize the discharge of the referenced pollutants so long as the discharge
does not cause pass through or interference.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.



   TIME PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
with fixed volumes taken at special time intervals.



   TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN. Written plan submitted by industrial
users as an alternative to TTO monitoring, which specifies toxic organic
compounds used, the method of disposal used and procedures for assuring that
toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak into wastewater discharge to
the POTW.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of EPA under the
provisions of the Clean Water Act § 307(a) or any amendments thereto.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
treatment works effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.



   UNREGULATED WASTESTREAM. A wastestream that is not regulated by a
national categorical pretreatment standards.



   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.



   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. SANITARY OR DOMESTIC WASTES
shall mean the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
building and institutions as distinct from industrial waste.



   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT (WDP). A permit issued to industrial users
which authorizes discharges to the public sewer as set forth in §§ 50.080
through 50.096.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, treat domestic and industrial wastes, and
dispose of the effluent.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT



PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT or SEWAGE
TREATMENT PLANT.



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



§ 50.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:



   ADMI.  American Dye Manufacturers Institute.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BMP.  Best management practices.



   BOD.  Biochemical oxygen demand.



   BPJ.  Best professional judgment.



   CFR.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   CIU.  Categorical industrial user.



   COD.  Chemical oxygen demand.



   CWA.  Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.).



   CWF.  Combines wastestream formula.



   EPA.  Environmental Protection Agency.



   FR.  Federal Register.



   FWA.  Flow weighted average.



   gpd.  Gallons per day.



   IU.  Industrial user.



   KPDES.  Kentucky pollutant discharge elimination system.



   l.  Liter.



   mg.  Milligram.



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES.  National pollutant discharge elimination system.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works.



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIC.  Standard industrial classification.



   SIU.  Significant industrial user.



   SWDA.  Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901, et. seq.



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   TTO.  Total toxic organics.



   USC.  United States Code.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 50.015  MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect with such facilities directly with the
proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public
sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater where public sanitary sewer service is available, as
defined in division (A) above, except as provided for in §§ 50.030 and
50.031.



   (C)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public system within sixty (60) days in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater
disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable
material or salvaged and removed.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.016  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWERS OR NATURAL OUTLETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited any pollutant in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the City of Hillview or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City of Hillview except in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or
storm sewer within the City of Hillview or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the city, any sanitary wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment or management has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter. No provision of this chapter shall be
construed to relieve the owner of a discharge to any natural outlet of the
responsibility for complying with applicable state and federal regulations
governing such discharge.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.017  COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.



   The discharge of any wastewater into the public sewer system by any
person is unlawful except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and any more stringent state or federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, the Clean Water Act
of 1977, and subsequent amendments, and 40 CFR 403.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.018  DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS INTO SEWER.



   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
through any leak, defect, or connection any unpolluted waters such as storm
water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer,
building sewer, building drain or building plumbing. The Superintendent or
his or her representative shall have the right, at any time, to inspect the
inside or outside of buildings or smoke test for connections, leaks, or
defects to building sewers and require disconnection or repair of any pipes
carrying such water to the building sewer. No sanitary drain sump or sump
pump discharge by manual switch-over of discharge connection shall have a
dual use for removal of such water.



   (B)   The owners of any building sewers having such connections,
leaks, or defects shall bear all costs incidental to removal of such sources.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.019  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with performance
of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW
whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to the
POTW:



   (A)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature
or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with
other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way
to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall the wastewater
exhibit a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees
(140°) Fahrenheit or sixty degrees (60°) Celsius using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



   (B)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five (5) or higher
than ten (10) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the POTW.



   (C)   Any slug load of pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or concentration that will
cause interference with the normal operation of the POTW.



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities (i.e., wood, glass,
ashes, sand, cinders, unshredded garbage, paper products such as cups,
dishes, napkins and milk containers, and the like).



   (E)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
POTW that will result in a treatment plant influent temperature which exceeds
forty degrees (40°) Celsius (one hundred four degrees (104°) Fahrenheit).



   (F)   Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.



   (G)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scum, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the
POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under §
405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.



   (H)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES/KPDES permit and/or sludge disposal system permit.



   (I)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through at
the POTW.



   (J)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points
designed by the POTW.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



§ 50.030  PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of §§ 50.015 through 50.019, the building sewer shall be
connected, until the public sewer is available, to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of Bullitt County Health
Department and all applicable local and state regulations.



   (B)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.



   (C)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
applicable local or state regulations.



   (D)   Holders of NPDES/KPDES permits may be excepted. Industries
with current NPDES/KPDES permits may discharge at permitted discharge points
provided they are in compliance with the issuing authority.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04) 



§ 50.031  REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all local or state regulations.



   (B)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
local and state authorities.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 50.045  PERMITS.



   (A)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits
required: (i) for residential, and (ii) for service to commercial and
industrial establishments. In either case, the owner(s) or his or her agent
shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. Applicants
for service to commercial and industrial establishments shall be required to
furnish information about all waste producing activities, wastewater
characteristics and constituents. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. Details regarding commercial
and industrial permits include, but are not limited to those required by this
chapter. Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed.



   (B)   Users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
POTW. The Superintendent may deny or condition the new introduction or change
in discharge based on the information submitted in the notification or
additional information as may be requested.



   (C)   No person(s) shall uncover, plug or make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining permission from the Superintendent.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.046  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement
wall seepage or floor seepage, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
Any such connections which already exist on the effective date of this
chapter shall be completely and permanently disconnected within sixty (60)
days of the effective date of this chapter. The owner(s) of any building
sewers having such connections, leaks or defects shall bear all costs
incidental to removal of such sources.



   (B)   Pipes, sumps, and pumps for such sources of ground and surface
water shall be separate from wastewater facilities. Removal of such sources
of water without presence of separate facilities shall be evidence of
drainage to public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.047  DESIGN; INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. The
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not
assume any obligations or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting
from any such single connection aforementioned.



   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. Permit and
inspection fees for new buildings using existing building sewers shall be the
same as for new building sewers. If additional sewer customers are added to
the old building sewers, additional sewer tap fees shall be charged
accordingly even though no new sewer tap is actually made into the city
system.



   (C)   Extension of customer service lines from any point on the
customer's side of the tap for delivery of waste from any location other than
that of the customer in whose name the tap is registered shall not be
permitted.



   (D)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM A-74,
latest revision, PVC (polyvinyl-chloride) sewer pipe, ASTM D-3034, latest
version, or ductile iron pipe, AWWA specification C-151 cement lined, and
shall meet requirements of the state plumbing code. Joints shall be as set
out hereinafter. Any part of the building sewer that is located within five
(5) feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed with cast iron soil
pipe or ductile iron pipe, unless the building sewer is at least one (1) foot
deeper in the ground than the water service line. Cast iron soil pipe or
ductile iron pipe shall be used in filled or unstable ground, in areas where
the cover over the building sewer is less than three (3) feet, or in areas
where the sewer is subject to vehicular or other external loads.



   (E)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the local and state building and plumbing codes and other
applicable rules and regulations of the city.



   (F)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection to the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s)
shall indemnify the city for any loss of damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Fees for
connection shall be as established by the city.



   (G)   The owner shall ensure all excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city.



   (H)   In all buildings in which any sanitary facility drain is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by
such drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the same
building sewer. Drain pipe and sump for collection of such sanitary drainage
shall be above basement floor or in separately watertight or drained sump or
channel.



   (I)   The building sewer shall be connected into the public sewer at
the easement or property line. Where no property located service branch is
available, an authorized agent of the city shall cut a neat hole into the
main line of the public sewer and a suitable wye or tee saddle installed to
receive the building sewer. The invert of the building sewer at such point of
connection with a saddle shall be in the upper quadrant to the main line of
the public sewer. A neat workmanlike connection, not extending past the inner
surface of the public sewer, shall be made and the saddle made secure and
watertight by encasement in epoxy cement specially prepared for this purpose.
A wye and H bend fitting shall be installed at the property line between the
public sewer and the building sewer. This fitting shall serve the purpose of
a clean out and for applying the smoke test during inspection of the line.
After testing, a cast iron or ductile iron riser will be inserted in this
fitting and brought flush with the ground surface. A stopper or plug,
outfitted with a type joint applicable to the pipe used, shall seal this
riser against the intrusion of ground or surface water.



   (J)   All building sanitary sewer lines will be installed so as to
meet or exceed the most current revision of the state plumbing code.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



Cross-reference:



   Fees, see § 50.111



§ 50.048  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative. The connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing.



   (B)   All building sewers shall be smoke tested through the wye
branch at the public sewer connection, with public sewer tightly plugged off,
after connections at both ends are made and after all pipe is properly bedded
and backfilled at least to top of pipe and if backfill is completed, within
two (2)  weeks after completion of backfill. At time of test, any openings
into the building drain inside the building shall be water trapped or
plugged. Any leakage of smoke from building sewer or building drain and
plumbing shall be located at test and repaired to stand repetition of smoke
test without leakage. When smoke-testing is completed, the temporary flow
line plug shall be removed and a permanent watertight plug shall be placed in
branch of test wye-branch and carefully backfilled by hand and tamped to at
least six (6) inches above the top of the branch.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITS



§ 50.060  GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentration or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will maintain and protect water quality in the receiving stream,
and will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. The Superintendent may set additional limitations or limitations
more stringent than those established in the provisions below if in his or
her opinion more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of a
discharge, the Superintendent shall give consideration to such factors as the
quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process
employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors.



   (A)   Wastewater containing more than fifty milligrams per liter (50
mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral
oil origin.



   (B)   Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat, or grease, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l)
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
thirty-two to one hundred fifty degrees (32-150°) Fahrenheit (zero to
sixty-five degrees (0-65°) Celsius).



   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, motels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for
the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.



   (D)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which: injure
or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, causes the city to violate the terms of its KPDES permit,
prevents the use of acceptable sludge disposal methods, or exceed a
limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard.



   (E)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.



   (F)   Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.



   (G)   Any wastewater with objectable color which cannot be removed
to an acceptable level within the operation of the wastewater treatment
process.



   (H)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed to
the extent required by the city's NPDES/KPDES permit.



   (I)   Any waste(s) or wastewater(s) classified as a hazardous waste
by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) without a sixty (60) day
prior notification of such discharge to the Superintendent. This notification
must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number,
type of discharge, volume/mass of discharge and time of occurrence(s). The
Superintendent may prohibit or condition the discharge(s) at any time.



   (J)   Wastewater identified as causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.



   (K)   Recognizable portions of human or animal anatomy.



   (L)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or
other substances which will cause excessive foaming in the municipal
wastewater system.



   (M)   (1)   Any water or wastes which have characteristics based
on a twenty-four hour (24-hour) composite sample, grab or a shorter period
composite sample, if more representative, that exceed the following normal
maximum domestic wastewater parameter concentrations:



 

Parameter
 
Maximum allowable concentration without surcharges


BOD
 
250 mg/l


COD
 
375 mg/l


TSS
 
250 mg/l


NH3-N
 
40 mg/l


Oil & grease (total)
 
100 mg/l



 



      (2)   Any person discharging wastewater exceeding the maximum
allowable concentration as noted above, will be subject to a surcharge fee
for each pound loading over and above the set limit. Any other amenable
constituents requiring the additional of specific chemicals for proper
treatment will also be subject to a surcharge as noted on the wastewater
discharge permit. Exceedance of the effluent limits specified above shall not
be deemed to constitute a violation of a permit condition of this chapter if
the appropriated surcharge fee is paid and the discharge does not cause
interference or pass through of the POTW.



   (N)   The following limitations are established for characteristics
of any wastewaters to be discharged into the municipal sewer system. All
significant industrial users must comply with these limitations where they
are more stringent than applicable state and/or federal regulations.



 



Parameter
 
Maximum daily concentration (mg/l)


Arsenic
 
To be determined by amendment if and when applicable.


Cadmium


Chromium


Copper


Cyanide, total


Lead


Mercury


Nickel


Silver


Zinc


Total toxic organics




 



   (O)   The city has received authority through the U.S. EPA and state
statutes to enforce the requirements of 40 CFR Subchapter N, 40 CFR 403, and
40 CFR Part 35. All users shall comply with the requirements of those
regulations.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.061  DILUTION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any pollutant specific
limitation developed by the city or state.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.062  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptor shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates, and means of disposal. The city may require that hauling of the
collected materials not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms. Interceptors shall also comply with
applicable regulations of the County Health Department.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.063  SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the requirements imposed on publicly owned
wastewater treatment works by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 and later amendments, all pretreatment standards
promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for new and existing
industrial dischargers to public sewer systems are hereby made a part of this
chapter. Any industrial waste discharge which violates these EPA Pretreatment
Standards shall be in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided
or required for any waters or wastes, the industry shall be solely
responsible for the continued maintenance in satisfactory and effective
operation of such facilities at their own expense. The city may agree to
assume these responsibilities if proper and appropriate arrangement for
reimbursement of costs are made.



   (C)   (1)   Any person who transports septic tank, seepage pit or
cesspool contents, liquid industrial waste or other batch liquid waste and
wishes to discharge such waste to the public sewer system shall first have a
valid discharge permit. All applicants for a discharge permit shall complete
the application form, pay the appropriate fee, and receive a copy of the
city's regulations governing discharge to sewers of liquid wastes from
trucks. All persons receiving such permits shall agree, in writing, to abide
by all applicable provisions of this chapter, and any other special
provisions that may be established by the city as necessary for the proper
operation and maintenance of the sewerage system.



      (2)   In addition, any person holding a valid permit and
wishing to discharge to the wastewater treatment plant must submit to the
chief operator a sample of each load prior to discharge. A fee and payment
schedule shall be established in the permit to cover cost of the required
analysis.



      (3)   It shall be illegal to discharge any batch liquid waste
into any manhole or other part of the public sewer system, or any building
sewer or other facility that discharges to the public sewer system, except at
designated points of discharge specified by the city for such purpose.



      (4)   Any liquid waste hauler illegally discharging to the
public sewer system or discharging wastewater not authorized in the permit
shall be subject to immediate revocation of discharge privileges and further
subject to the penalties and enforcement actions prescribed in § 50.999,
including fines and imprisonment.



      (5)   Waste haulers who have been granted permission to
discharge to the public sewer system shall pay fees for such discharge in
accordance with a fee schedule established by the Superintendent and approved
by the city.



      (6)   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve waste haulers of
the responsibility for compliance with County Health Department, state, or
federal regulations.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.064  PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL AND SLUG DISCHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   Each significant industrial user shall provide
protection from accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials or
other substances regulated by this ordinance which adversely affects the
POTW. Facilities to prevent accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost
and expense. Once every two (2) years, the Superintendent will determine
whether each industrial user needs to develop or update a plan to control
slug discharges. If the Superintendent determines that a slug control plan or
revision is necessary, the plan shall contain the following:



         (a)   Description of discharge practices;



         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;



         (c)   Procedures for notifying the POTW; and



         (d)   Prevention procedures for spills.



      (2)   In the case of all possible or actual accidental and/or
slug discharges, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.



   (B)   Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this subchapter, the
enforcement response plan or other applicable law.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.065  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



§ 50.066  CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations, or
requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



§ 50.067  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Upon the promulgation of federal categorical pretreatment standards for
a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent
than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION



§ 50.080  WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any wastewater
except as authorized by the city in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Any agency, nondomestic user, and/or industry outside the
jurisdiction of the city that desires to contribute wastewater to the POTW
must execute (through an authorized representative) an interjurisdictional
agreement, whereby the agency and/or industry agrees to be regulated by all
provisions of this chapter and state and federal regulations. An industrial
user permit may then be issued by the Superintendent in accordance with §
50.081.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.081  INDUSTRIAL USER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the POTW shall obtain an industrial user permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW.



   (B)   Users required to obtain an industrial user permit shall
complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the
city, and accompanied by a permit fee. New users shall apply at least ninety
(90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. Existing permit
holder shall apply no later than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of
permit. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, and location if different from the
address;



      (2)   SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, United States Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;



      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as
determined by an analytical laboratory acceptable to the city; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as
amended;



      (4)   Time and duration of contribution;



      (5)   Average daily and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater
flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by the city, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;



      (9)   (a)   If additional pretreatment will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standards;



         (b)   The following conditions shall apply to this
schedule:



            1.   The schedule must be acceptable to the city;



            2.   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards; and



            3.   Not later than fourteen (14) days following
each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall
submit a progress report to the Superintendent including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment
of progress and the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user
to return the construction to the schedule established.



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and the rate of production;



      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (12)   Number of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



      (13)   Any other information as may be deemed by the city to
be necessary to evaluate the permit application; and



      (14)   A copy of the industry's written environmental control
program, comparable document, or policy.



   (C)   The city shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the City Engineer or his or her designee may issue an industrial
wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.082  PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.



   Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standards, the industrial wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to required compliance with such
standards within the time frame prescribed by such standards. Where a user,
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, has not previously
submitted an application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit as
required, the user shall apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit
within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, the user with an existing
industrial wastewater discharge permit shall submit, to the City Engineer
within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of an applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.083  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to
all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following:



   (A)   The unit surcharges or schedule of other charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



   (B)   Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics;



   (C)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



   (D)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities;



   (E)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling location; frequency of sampling; number, type and standards for
tests; and reporting schedule;



   (F)   Compliance schedules;



   (G)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;



   (H)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a minimum of
three (3) years, all plant records relating to pretreatment and/or wastewater
discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto as
required by 40 CFR 403.12(o)(2);



   (I)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;



   (J)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;



   (K)   The permit may require the user to reimburse the city for all
expenses related to monitoring, sampling and testing performed at the
direction of the City Engineer and deemed necessary by the city to verify
that the user is in compliance with the permit; and



   (L)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.084  ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMITS.



   (A)   Where an effluent from a categorical industrial process(es) is
mixed prior to treatment with wastewater other than that generated by the
regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived for the
discharge permit by the Superintendent. These alternative limits shall be
applied to the mixed effluent and shall be calculated using the combined
wastestream formula and/or flow-weighted average formula as defined in §
50.002.



   (B)   Where the effluent limits in a categorical pretreatment
standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutants per unit of
production (production-based standard), the Superintendent may convert the
limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day or of effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent permit limitations applicable to the permittee. The permittee shall
be subject to all permit limits calculated in this manner under 40 CFR
403.6(c) and must fully comply with these alternative limits.



   (C)   All categorical users subject to production-based standards
must report production rates annually so that alternative permit limits can
be calculated if necessary. The categorical user must notify the
Superintendent thirty (30) days in advance of any major change in production
levels that will affect the limits for the discharge permit.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.085  PERMIT DURATION.



   (A)   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to
exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for
permit reissuance a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the
user's existing permit.



   (B)   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements as identified in §§ 50.060 through 50.067 are modified or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes
in their permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.086  PERMIT TRANSFER.



   Industrial user permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. An industrial user permit shall not be reassigned or transferred
or sold to a new owner, new user, difference premises, or a new or changed
operation without a thirty-day (30-day) prior notification to the
Superintendent and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new
owner. The Superintendent may deny the transfer of the permit if it is deemed
necessary.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.087  COMPLIANCE DATA REPORTING.



   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new user,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards and requirements
shall submit, to the Superintendent, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and requirements and
the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's
facility which are limited by such categorical standards and requirements.
The report shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional pretreatment and time schedule is necessary to bring the user
into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative
of the user.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.088  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall submit, to the
superintendent, every six (6) months (on dates specified in the industrial
user permit) unless required more frequently by the permit, a report
indicating, at a minimum, the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards or discharge
permit. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows
which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow. At the
discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as
local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, and the like, the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.



   (B)   All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory acceptable to
the city. Analytical procedures shall be in accordance with procedures
established by the U.S. EPA Administrator pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR. Part 136 and amendments thereto and 40 CFR 261 or
with any other test procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator.
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
U.S. EPA Administrator.



   (C)   Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant(s) in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or
with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the U.S. EPA
Administrator.



   (D)   A baseline monitoring report (BMR) must be submitted to the
Superintendent by all categorical industrial users at least ninety (90) days
prior to initiation of discharge to the sanitary sewer. The BMR must contain,
at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Production data: a process description, SIC code number,
raw materials used, chemicals used, final product, pretreatment industrial
category (if applicable), and a schematic which indicates points of discharge
to the sewer system;



      (2)   Identifying information to include name, address of
facility, owner(s), contact person and any other permits held by the facility;



      (3)   Wastewater characteristics: total plant flow, types of
discharges, average and maximum flows from each process;



      (4)   Nature/concentration of pollutants: analytical results
for all pollutants regulated by this chapter and/or any applicable federal
pretreatment standard and sample type and location. All analyses must conform
with 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto; and



      (5)   Information concerning any pretreatment equipment used
to treat the facility's discharge.



   (E)   New sources shall give estimates of the information requested
in divisions (D)(3) and (4) above, but at no time shall a new source commence
discharge(s) to the public sewer of substances that do not meet provisions of
this chapter. All new sources must be in compliance with all provisions of
this chapter, state and federal pretreatment regulations prior to
commencement of discharge to the public sewer.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.089  PERMIT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users must notify the
Superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of first becoming aware of a
permit violation. This notification shall include the date of violation, the
parameter violation and the amount in exceedance.



   (B)   The user shall immediately repeat the sampling and analysis of
the parameter(s) in question and submit the results to the Superintendent
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Exception to
this regulation is only if the city performs the sampling within the same
time period for the same parameter(s) in question.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.090  MONITORING.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall require significant users to provide
and operate, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities and equipment
necessary to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building
sewer and/or internal drainage system. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the
facility to be constructed in a public right-of-way. The Superintendent shall
review and approve the location, plans, and specifications for such
monitoring facilities and may require them to be constructed to provide for
the separate monitoring and sampling of industrial waste and sanitary sewage
flows.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility shall be designed and maintained in a manner such that
the safety of city and industrial personnel shall be foremost. The facility,
sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days
following approval of the location, plans and specifications.



   (B)   All sampling analyses done in accordance with approved federal
EPA procedures by the industrial user during a reporting period shall be
submitted to the superintendent regardless of whether or not that analysis
was required by the industrial user's discharge permit.



   (C)   The industrial user must receive the approval of the
Superintendent before changing the sampling point and/or monitoring
facilities to be used in all required sampling.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.091  INSPECTION; SAMPLING.



   (A)   The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, copying records, records examination or in the
performance of any of their duties.



   (B)   The city, approval authority, and EPA shall have the right to
set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require property
identification and clearance before entry onto their premises, the user shall
make the necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval
authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes
of performing their specific responsibilities.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.092  PRETREATMENT.



   All significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this chapter and achieve compliance with
any applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. The city
may require the development of a compliance schedule for installation of
pretreatment technology and/or equipment by any industrial user that cannot
meet discharge limits required by this chapter. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level required by this chapter shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of
the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent that complies with the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the
user's initiation of the changes.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.093  ANNUAL PUBLICATION.



   (A)   The city shall annually publish in its largest daily newspaper
a list of significant users which were in significant noncompliance with any
pretreatment requirements or standards. The notification shall also summarize
any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12)
months.



   (B)   All records relating to the city's pretreatment program shall
be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request.
All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(0)(2).



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.094  SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.



   A user is defined as being in significant noncompliance when it commits
one or more of the following conditions:



   (A)   Causes imminent endangerment to human health or the
environment or results in the exercise of emergency authority;



   (B)   Involves failure to report noncompliance accurately;



   (C)   Results in a chronic violation defined here as sixty-six
percent (66%) or more of all measurements taken during a six (6) month period
that exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the monthly average
limit for the same pollutant parameter;



   (D)   Results in a technical review criteria (TRC) violation defined
here as thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period that equal or exceed
the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, and oil & grease and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);



   (E)   Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the
control authority determines has caused, along or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through or has endangered the health of the
POTW personnel or the public;



   (F)   Any discharge causing imminent endangerment to human
health/welfare or to the environment or resulting in the POTWs use of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   (G)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, failure to
comply with schedule milestones for starting or completing construction or
attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule
date;



   (H)   Failure to provide required reports within thirty (30) days of
the due date;



   (I)   Any violation or group of violations which the control
authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.095  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests in writing and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to
all governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES/KPDES
permit, sludge disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs upon
request. Such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or
any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to
the public without restriction.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.096  SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.



   All applications, reports or information submitted to the city shall be
signed and certified.



   (A)   All permit applications shall be signed:



      (1)   For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of
at least the level of vice president;



      (2)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general
partner or the proprietor, respectively.



   (B)   All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports
shall be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized
representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized representative
only if:



      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by a person
described above;



      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager,
superintendent or position of equivalent responsibility.



   (C)   Any person signing a document under this section shall make
the following certification:



"I certify under penalty of law that I am familiar with the information
contained in this report and its attachments and that to the best of my
knowledge and belief such information is true, complete and accurate."



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



FEES



§ 50.110  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter provides for the recovery of costs from users of the
POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



§ 50.111  CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:



      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the city's pretreatment program;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance
procedures;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;



      (4)   Fees for permit applications;



      (5)   Fees for filing appeal;



      (6)   Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of excessive
strength conventional pollutants; and



      (7)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.



   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS



§ 50.120  RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.



   The Superintendent and other duly promulgated employees and
representatives of the city and authorized representatives of applicable
federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to
discharges to the public sewer system in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.121  RIGHT TO OBTAIN INFORMATION REGARDING DISCHARGE.



   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city and
authorized representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory
agencies bearing proper credentials and identification are authorized to
obtain information including but not limited to copying of records concerning
character, strength and quantity of industrial wastes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



§ 50.122  ACCESS TO EASEMENTS.



   Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purpose of, but not limited to, construction, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portions of the
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.123  SAFETY.



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 50.122, all duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The
company shall be held blameless for injury or death to city employees. The
city shall secure the company against loss or damage to its property by city
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



ENFORCEMENT



§ 50.135  GENERAL.



   (A)   The city, through the Superintendent or his or her designee,
to insure compliance with this chapter, and as permitted through 40 CFR
Subchapter N, and 401 KAR 5:055, may take the following enforcement steps
against users in noncompliance with this chapter. The remedies available to
the POTW include injunctive relief, civil and criminal penalties, immediate
discontinuance of discharges and/or water service and the publishing of the
list of significant violators annually. The enforcement authority shall be
vested in the Superintendent or their designee.



   (B)   The Superintendent may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or an industrial user permit when such suspension is necessary,
in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes
interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its
NPDES/KPDES permit.



   (C)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the industrial user permit shall immediately stop or eliminate
the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as
deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The city shall reinstate the industrial user permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen
(15) days of the date of occurrence.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.136  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any user found to be violating any provisions of this chapter,
wastewater permit, or any order issued hereunder, shall be served by the city
with written notice stating the nature of the violation(s). Within ten (10)
days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and
a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of potential liability
for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.



   (B)   If the violations persist or the explanation and/or plan are
not adequate, the city's response shall be more formal and commitments (or
schedules as appropriate) for compliance will be established in an
enforceable document. The enforcement response selected will be related to
the seriousness of the violation. Enforcement responses will be escalated if
compliance is not achieved expeditiously after the initial action. A
significant noncompliance as defined in § 50.094 will require a formal
enforcement action.



   (C)   The full scale of enforcement actions will be as detailed in
the enforcement response plan.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.137  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.



   (A)   Any user who after receiving a notice of violation shall
continue to discharge in violation of this chapter or other pretreatment
standards or requirements or is determined to be a chronic or persistent
violator or who is determined to be a significant violator, shall be ordered
to appear before the city. At that appearance, a compliance schedule will be
given to the non-conforming user and an administrative fine assessed. The
fine shall be determined on a case-by-case basis which shall consider the
type and severity of violations, duration of violation, number of violations,
severity of impact on the POTW, impact on human health, users economic
benefit from the violation, history of violations, good faith of the user,
and shall be a non-arbitrary but appropriate amount.



   (B)   The administrative order may take any of the following three
(3) forms:



      (1)   Consent orders. The Superintendent or their designee is
hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the
user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force
and effect as orders issued pursuant to division (B)(3) below.



      (2)   Compliance order.  When the Superintendent or their
designee finds that an user has violated or continues to violate this chapter
or a permit or order issued thereunder, he or she may issue an order to the
user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specific time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and
are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as
might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance,
including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional
self-monitoring and management practices.



      (3)   Cease and desist orders.  When the Superintendent finds
that an user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit
or order issued hereunder, the Superintendent may issue an order to cease and
desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to (i)
comply forthwith, or (ii) take such appropriate remedial or preventative
action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.138  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   (A)   The Superintendent or their designee may issue to any user who
causes or contributes to violations of this chapter, wastewater permit or
order issued hereunder, an order to appear and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of the hearing to be held by the Superintendent
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause, before the
Superintendent, why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of the industrial user.
Whether or not a duly notified industrial user or its representative appears,
immediate enforcement action may be pursued.



   (B)   The city may, itself, conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or designate a representative to:



      (1)   Issue, in the name of the city, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;



      (2)   Take the evidence;



      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city for
action thereon.



   (C)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded  stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to
the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.



   (D)   After the city has received the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are property
operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may
be issued.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.139  ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Performance bonds.  The Superintendent may decline to reissue
a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder
unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the
POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Superintendent to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance.



   (B)   Liability insurance.  The Superintendent may decline to
reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or pervious permit issued hereunder,
unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its
discharge.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Written notice.



      (1)   Any user found to be violating any provision of this
chapter or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, shall be served by
the Superintendent or their designee with written notice stating the nature
of the violation. The offender shall permanently remedy all violations upon
receipt of this notice.



      (2)   As contained in §§ 50.135 through 50.139, the notice
may be of several forms. Also as contained in §§ 50.135 through 50.139,
penalties of various forms may be levied against users for violations of this
chapter. The penalties, if levied, shall range from publication of violators
in the local newspaper to administrative fines of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000) per day per violation.



   (B)   Revocation of permit.



      (1)   Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter
or a wastewater permit order issued hereunder, may be subject to termination
of its authority to discharge sewage into the municipal sewer system. Such
termination may be immediate if necessary for the protection of the POTW. The
user may also have water service terminated.



      (2)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this
chapter, or applicable state or federal regulations, is subject to having his
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this chapter:



         (a)   Failure of a user to factually report the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;



         (b)   Failure of the user to report significant changes
in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



   (C)   Liability.  Any user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, discharge permit or other order issued hereunder shall become liable
to the City of Hillview for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation. This civil liability is as provided by
state and federal regulations.



   (D)   Misrepresentation and/or falsifying of documents.  Any user
who knowingly and/or negligently makes any false statements, representations
or certification of any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required pursuant to this chapter or industrial user discharge
permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly and/or negligently renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall
be punished by a fine of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by
imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months or by both.



   (E)   Destruction of POTW and legal action.  No person(s) shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part
of the POTW. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to
immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. It shall be noted that
the Clean Water Act does not require proof of specific intent to obtain
conviction.



   (F)   Legal action.  If any person discharges sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to
the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements or
any order of the city, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal
and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court of this jurisdiction.



   (G)   Injunctive relief.  Whenever a user has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued
hereunder, the Superintendent, through counsel may petition the court for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be
appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the
industrial user.



   (H)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Any user who has significantly violated or continues to
violate this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, may be liable
to the Superintendent for a civil penalty of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100) per day plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation
per day for as long as the violation continues. Each day in which such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to
the above described penalty and damages, the Superintendent may recover
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other
expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.



      (2)   The Superintendent may petition the court to impose,
assess and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (I)   Criminal prosecution; violations - general.



      (1)   Any user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100) per violation per day or imprisonment for
not more than one (1) year or both.



      (2)   In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more that three (3) years or both.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 51:  STORM DRAINAGE



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Applicability



   51.03   Responsibility for administration



   51.04   Ultimate responsibility



   51.05   Discharge prohibitions



   51.06   Suspension of MS4 access



   51.07   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   51.08   Monitoring of discharges



   51.09   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   51.10   Watercourse protection



   51.11   Notification of spills



   51.12   Enforcement; Notice of Violation



   51.13   Appeal on Notice of Violation



   51.14   Enforcement measures after appeal



   51.15   Cost of abatement of the violation



   51.16   Injunctive relief



   51.17   Compensatory action



   51.18   Permits



   51.19   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan



   51.20   Design requirements



   51.21   Inspection



   51.22   Enforcement; revocation of permit



   51.23   Remedies not exclusive



   51.24   Violations deemed a public nuisance



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.  Employees or designees of the city
designated to enforce this chapter.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS).  Schedules of activities,
prohibition of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management and construction practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or
stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices,
operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   CERTIFIED CONTRACTOR.  An individual who has received training and is
certified by EPA and/or Public Protection Cabinet to construct, inspect and
maintain erosion and sediment control practices.



   CLEAN WATER ACT.  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CLEARING.  Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.



   DRAINAGE WAY.  Any natural or constructed feature that conveys
concentrated surface runoff throughout a site.



   EROSION CONTROL.  Measures that prevent erosion.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.  A set of plans prepared by or
under the direction of a licensed professional engineer or landscape
architect indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used
controlling sediment and erosion on a development site both before, during
and after construction.



   GRADING.  Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge
to the storm drain



system, except as exempted in § 51.05.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  An illicit connection is defined as either of
the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether the drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits
as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to Waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   PERIMETER CONTROL.  A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site either by filtering sediment-laden runoff; or diverting it to a sediment
trap or basin.



   PHASING.  Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   SEDIMENT CONTROL.  Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving
the site.



   SITE.  A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  A permit issued by the municipality for
which the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures
for the control of erosion, runoff and grading.



   STABILIZATION.  The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility.



   WATERCOURSE.  Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the city.



   WATERWAY.  A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or
to the public storm drain.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted
by the city or its designated agent.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.03  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The City Council or its designee/agent shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed
upon the city may be delegated in writing by the city to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the city.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.04  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.05  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.  No person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. The commencement,
conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:



      (1)   Discharges specified in writing by the city or its
designated agent as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



      (2)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
verbal notification to the city or its designated agent.



      (3)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.06  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations.  The city, or its designee/agent may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent
and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails
to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.  Any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City
Council for a reconsideration and hearing.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the city.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.07  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity KPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.08  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to all facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The city or its designated agent shall be permitted to
enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The
owner/lessee/operator of the facilities shall make the necessary arrangements
to allow access to representatives of the city.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city or its
designated agent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city or its designated agent shall have the right to
set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm
water discharge.



      (4)   The city or its designated agent has the right to
require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the designated city
agent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the designated city
agent access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water
discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a
facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the designated
city agent reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.



      (7)   If the designated city agent has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of
a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the designated city agent
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.09  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The city will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or Waters
of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at the person's expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.10  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.11  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain
system, or Waters of the United States, that person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In
the event of such a release of hazardous materials, that person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous
materials, the person shall notify the city in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice, addressed and mailed to the city
within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.12  ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Notice of Violation.  Whenever the city or its designated
agent finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, the city or its designated agent may order
compliance by written Notice of Violation to the responsible person. The
notice may require without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a
contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.13  APPEAL ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination
of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days
from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the
City Council or its designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from
the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal
authority or their designee shall be final.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.14  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
thirty (30) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the designated city agent, then representatives of the city shall
enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and
all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.15  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment within thirty (30) days. If the amount due is
not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the
municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.16  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city or its
designated agent may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.17  COMPENSATORY ACTION.



   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this chapter, the city  may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.18  PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall be granted a site development permit for
land-disturbing activity which would require the uncovering of one (1) or
more acres without the approval of the city or its designated agent.



   (B)   No site development permit is required for the following
activities:



      (1)   Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary
for the protection of life, property or natural resources.



      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted
as a permitted main or accessory use.



   (C)   Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner, developer or designated contractor of the site, and of any consulting
firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as
may be established by the city.



   (D)   Each application shall include a statement that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall
be in accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.



   (E)   Review and approval.



      (1)   The city or its designated agent will review each
application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an
application, the city or its designated agent shall, in writing:



         (a)   Approve the permit application;



         (b)   Approve the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these
conditions; or



         (c)   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.



      (2)   Failure of the city or its designated agent to act on
original or revised applications within thirty (30) days of receipt shall
authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed
unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the city
or its designated agent. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan,
development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with
conditions established by the city or its designated agent.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.19  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.



   (A)   The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include:



      (1)   A soil survey map identifying soils, and existing
vegetative cover. A soil survey will be available at the city, or the local
ASCS office.



      (2)   A sequence of construction of the development site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated
duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing,
installation of temporary erosion and sediment measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.



      (3)   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to
meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently, after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the
complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required
at the close of each season.



      (4)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures.



      (5)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities,
including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.



   (B)   Modifications to the plan:



      (1)   Major amendments of the Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan shall be submitted to the city or its designated agent and shall be
processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original
plans.



      (2)   Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized
by the city or its designated agent by written authorization to the permittee.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.20  DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control
practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth by
the city, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from
the site to the satisfaction of the city.



   (B)   Clearing and grading.



      (1)   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as
forests and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with
all statutes and ordinances.



      (2)   Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and
retain natural drainage patterns, shall be used to the satisfaction of the
city.



      (3)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment
control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been
installed and have been stabilized.



      (4)   Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 2:1, except
as approved by the city or its designated agent to meet other community or
environmental objectives.



   (C)   Erosion Control.



      (1)   Soil must be stabilized using appropriate temporary
measures if construction activity is halted for a period of fourteen (14)
days.



      (2)   If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding,
have not become established within two (2) weeks, the city or its designated
agent may require that the site be reseeded, or that a non-vegetative option
be employed.



      (3)   On steep slopes or in drainage ways, special techniques
that meet the design criteria established by the city shall be used to ensure
stabilization.



      (4)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end
of any period of inactivity exceeding fourteen (14) days.



      (5)   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of
dust or sediment from the site.



      (6)   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed
slopes shall be employed.



   (D)   Sediment controls.



      (1)   Sediment controls shall be provided in the form of
settling basins or sediment traps or tanks, and perimeter controls.



      (2)   Where possible, settling basins shall be designed in a
manner that allows adaptation to provide long term stormwater management.



      (3)   Adjacent properties when possible may be protected by
the use of a vegetated buffer strip, in combination with perimeter controls.



   (E)   Waterways and watercourses.



      (1)   When a wet watercourse must be crossed regularly during
construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided, and an approval
obtained from the city and any required state agency.



      (2)   When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be
stabilized before, during and after work.



      (3)   All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be
designed according to the criteria established by the city.



      (4)   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be
provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.



   (F)   Construction site access.



      (1)   A temporary access road shall be provided at all sites.



      (2)   Other measures may be required at the discretion of the
city or its designated agent in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked
onto public streets by construction vehicles, or washed into storm drains.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.21  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The city or its designated agent shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved. Plans for grading,
stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the approval of the city
shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. In order to
obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the city or its designated
agent at least two (2) working days before the following:



      (1)   Start of construction;



      (2)   Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and
stabilized;



      (3)   Rough grading has been completed; and



      (4)   Final stabilization.



   (B)   The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections
of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined
on the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan(s).  The purpose of such
inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control
plan, and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be
documented in written form and maintained at the site and produced upon
request of the city or its designated agent.



   (C)   The city or its designated agent shall enter the property of
the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the
validity of the reports filed under division (B).



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.22  ENFORCEMENT; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Stop-work order; revocation of permit.  In the event that any
person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates
the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as
to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the city may suspend or revoke the site
development permit.



   (B)   Violation and penalties.  No person shall construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or remitted, shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each offense; each day shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense
of such restoration.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.23  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the city or its designated agent to seek cumulative
remedies.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



§ 51.24  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. 2004-17, passed 11-15-04)



CHAPTER 51:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   52.01   Mandatory pick up of garbage



§ 52.01  MANDATORY PICK UP OF GARBAGE.



   (A)   The exclusive trash and garbage hauler within the city limits
of the City of Hillview, Kentucky shall be that person, or legal entity
awarded the franchise for the term of the franchise as set forth by any
ordinance awarding such.



   (B)   Except as provided in the franchise ordinance, and contract
entered into therefrom, it shall be a civil and criminal violation for any
other garbage and trash hauler to operate within the city limits of the City
of Hillview and each day of operation shall constitute a violation subject to
penalties, civil and criminal, as hereinafter set forth.



   (C)   Each residential property which is occupied by the owner(s) or
anyone with the owner's consent, for a total of seven (7) days during any
monthly period shall be responsible for and indebted to the franchisee for
the established monthly charge as set forth in the franchise agreement.



   (D)   Each commercial property which is occupied by the owner(s), or
anyone with the owner's consent, for a total of seven (7) days during any
monthly period shall be responsible for and indebted to the franchisee for
the established monthly charge as set forth in the franchise agreement.



   (E)   The franchisee shall invoice those entities as set forth in
divisions (C) and (D) herein and payment shall be due and payable to the
franchisee on or before fifteen (15) days from the date of said invoice. If
said invoice is not paid within fifteen (15) days, the franchisee may add a
ten percent (10%) penalty or a five dollar ($5) handling fee, whichever is
greater, to said invoice. Said invoice together with any and all additional
fees shall be paid no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the
invoice.



   (F)   In the event an owner, or anyone with the owner's consent, as
described herein above shall fail to pay within thirty (30) days from the
date of invoicing, such failure shall not relieve the franchisee of its duty
to continue collecting the garbage and trash from said property.



   (G)   (1)   If such owner, or anyone with the owner's consent,
fails to pay within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice, the
franchisee shall notify the City Clerk in writing of the name and address of
such owner, or anyone with the owner's consent, who have failed to pay the
invoice. For the first violation the City Clerk shall take a criminal
complaint against the owner, and anyone with the owner's consent, failing to
pay in the District Court of Bullitt County. The penalty for the first
violation shall be two dollars ($2) per day from the date of invoice, plus
all additional penalties fees until paid, plus all applicable court costs.



      (2)   For the second violation, the penalty shall be five
dollars ($5) per day from the date of invoice, plus all additional penalty
fees until paid together with all applicable court costs.



      (3)   For the third and subsequent offenses the penalty shall
be ten dollars ($10) per day from the date of invoice plus all additional
penalties fees until paid, plus all applicable court costs.



      (4)   In addition to the criminal violation penalties provided
for hereinabove, the city shall also have a civil claim against the owner(s)
and anyone with the owner's consent, for the amount due plus penalty fees and
including court costs, and attorney's fees in collecting the total amount due.



      (5)   The franchisee shall, with the first billing send notice
of the penalties, both civil and criminal, which are applicable to the
invoice to each of the owner(s), or anyone with the owner's consent, set
forth hereinabove and shall annually notify all owner(s), or anyone with the
owner's consent, of the penalties provided. Further, the franchisee shall
provide a copy or notice of such penalties to all new subscribers within the
City of Hillview, as they become property residents.



   (H)   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit an owner from
requiring a tenant to pay or reimburse the owner for payment as provided for
herein. Nevertheless, should such tenant or others fail to pay any invoice it
shall be the responsible of the property owner of the residential or
commercial real estate to make such payment and it shall be the owner who
shall be liable for the penalties provided for herein.



   (I)   Any garbage and/or trash hauler who violates division (B)
hereof shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250) per day. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2003-24A, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 2003-24A, passed 4-19-10)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC RULES





         72.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions



   70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department



   70.04   Authority for enforcement



   70.05   Temporary regulations



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.15   Signal legends



   70.16   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices



   70.17   Obedience to signals



   70.18   Interference with signals



   70.19   Unauthorized signals or markings



   70.20   Device to be legible and in proper position



   70.21   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers



 



   70.99   General penalty



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or
Police Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney's office when on
official business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.



   BOULEVARD.   Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is
required to stop before entering or crossing such boulevard.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between two (2)
consecutive intersections in which fifty percent (50%) or more of the
frontage on either side of the street is used for business purposes.



   CROSSWALK.   That portion of the roadway included within the extension
of the sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of the
roadway between two (2) intersections, as may be legally designated as
crossing places and marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.



   CURB.   The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles
whether marked by curbstones or not.



   FUNERAL PROCESSION.   Two (2) or more vehicles accompanying the body
of a deceased person when each vehicle has its headlights on or is displaying
a pennant attached in such a manner as to be clearly visible to approaching
traffic.



(KRS 189.378 (1))



   INTERSECTION.  That part of the public way embraced within the
extensions of the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle
whether or not one such street crosses the other.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.   All signs, signals, warnings,
directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by
authority of the Chief of Police.



   ONE-WAY STREET.   A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in
one direction only.



   OPERATOR.   Every person who is in actual physical control of the
guidance, starting, and stopping of a vehicle.



   PARK.   When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.



   PEDESTRIAN.   Any person afoot.



   PLAY STREET.   Any street or portion thereof so designated by the
Chief of Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all
traffic is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT.   The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of § 70.03 or any other acts necessary to
implement and enforce this traffic code.



   PUBLIC WAY.   The entire width between property lines of every way,
dedicated passway, or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths
and foot paths.



   REVERSE TURN.   To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to
proceed in the opposite direction.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.   The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of
the street.



   ROADWAY.   That portion of any street, improved, designated, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SIDEWALK.   That portion of the street between the curb and the
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STOPPING.   As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is
actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers.



   STREET.   Every public way, including alleys.



   TRAFFIC.   Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses, and
other conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for
the purpose of travel.



   VEHICLE.   Includes all agencies for the transportation of persons or
property over or upon the public highways of the Commonwealth and all
vehicles passing over or upon the highways.  MOTOR VEHICLE.   Includes all
vehicles, as defined above except, road rollers; road graders; farm tractors;
vehicles on which power shovels are mounted; construction equipment
customarily used only on the site of construction and which is not practical
for the transportation of persons or property upon the highways; vehicles
that travel exclusively upon rails; vehicles propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead wires while being operated within any municipality or
where the vehicles do not travel more than five (5) miles beyond the city
limits of any municipality; and vehicles propelled by muscular power.



(KRS 189.010 (19)



§ 70.02  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction given by a uniformed
police officer, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic
regulations of this traffic code.



   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver
of any vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States Government,
this state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.



   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an
animal on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can
have no application.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in
the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions.



§ 70.04  AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.



   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to
alleviate unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized
city official shall, at his discretion, have authority to impose such traffic
regulations as he may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed two
weeks.  If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall be notified in writing of the
extended order.



TRAFFIC -CONTROLS DEVICES



§ 70.15  SIGNAL LEGENDS.



   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a
traffic-control sign or signs exhibiting the words  "Go," "Caution," or
"Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights for purposes of traffic
control, the following colors only shall be used, and these terms and lights
shall indicate and be obeyed as follows:



   (A)   Green alone or "Go":  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn.  However, vehicular traffic shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.



   (B)   Steady yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the
green or "Go" signal: Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is
thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a
red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular
traffic shall not enter the intersection.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady
yellow signal may enter and clear the intersection.



   (C)   Red alone or double red or "Stop":  Vehicular traffic facing
the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible
line, and shall remain  standing untilgreen or "Go" is shown alone.



   (D)   Flashing red alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such
other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not
again proceed until it can do so without danger.



   (E)   Flashing yellow alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall reduce its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection
controlled by such signal.



   (F)   "Yield Right-of-Way": Vehicular traffic facing the 'Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering
the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  All traffic facing the
sign shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such
primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  No vehicle facing a 'Yield
Right-of-Way' sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a
speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, except that this speed limit
shall not apply to vehicles entering an expressway.



   (G)   Lane lights:  When lane lights are installed over any street
for the purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular
traffic shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. 
However, when flashing amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall
be made from that lane.  Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles
shall not move against them.  If flashing amber lights show above a lane,
that lane shall be used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at
such place prohibits such turn.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory-reference:



Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338



§ 70.16  ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control
devices necessary within the city. All traffic-control devices, including
signs, shall be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation,
shall be uniform, and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly.  All
traffic-control devices and signs shall conform to required state
specifications.



§ 70.17  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey
the signal of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier of sign erected
by any of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any
electric signal, gate, or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.  However, the type and the right to or
necessity for such barrier or sign must be approved by the city.



   (B)   Such sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same
authority as the personal direction of a police officer.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.18  INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.



   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down, or remove any official control device or any railroad
sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof. 



Penalty see § 70.99



§ 70.19  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or
display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking,
or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to
direct the movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any
railroad sign or signal.  No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal bearing any
commercial advertising. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
restricting any public department or public utility of the city in any
emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign
whose placing has been approved by the city.



   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to
be a public nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or
cause it to be removed.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.20  DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.



   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other
traffic-control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation the required
device was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person.



§ 70.21  TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.



   In an emergency any police officer may at his discretion disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.



§ 70.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code where no other
penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500).



CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES



Section



Operation Generally



   71.01   Obstructing traffic



   71.02   Reverse or U turns



   71.03   Backing vehicles



   71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks



   71.05   Flashing lights mounted in/on police vehicles



Accidents



   71.15   Duty of operator



   71.16   Accident report



Prohibitions



   71.25   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully



   71.26   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency
vehicles; driving over fire hose



   71.27   Smoke emission or other nuisance



   71.28   Vehicle weight limits



   71.29   Speed limit for certain roadways



Funeral Processions



   71.35   Funeral Processions



 



   71.99   Penalty



OPERATION GENERALLY



§ 71.01  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to
remain standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction
thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter
any intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the
indication of any traffic-control signal which may be located at the
intersection or crosswalk.



   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or
critical importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in such
distinctive manner as to indicate such importance.  Should the operator of
any vehicle enter any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room
on the other side of the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the
indication of any traffic-control signal notwithstanding, he shall be deemed
to have violated this division rather than division (B) above.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.02  REVERSE OR U TURNS.



   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
without interfering with other traffic.



(KRS 189.330 (8))  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  BACKING VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the
vehicle at any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning
movement.  A vehicle from any parking position shall be backed by the
operator in such manner as to proceed on the same side of the roadway in the
lawful direction of travel.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
within any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by
special permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
the vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building, or lot and across a
sidewalk, or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been
brought to a complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its
extension.  On entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or building
the operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.  The operator of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn
into an alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  FLASHING LIGHTS MOUNTED IN/ON POLICE VEHICLES.



   Based on the authority of KRS 189.920(3), each police vehicle of the
city shall be equipped with a combination of red and blue flashing, rotating
or oscillating lights visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle.  This
equipment shall be in addition to any other equipment required by the motor
vehicle laws.



(Ord. 2007-17, passed 11-19-07)



ACCIDENTS



§ 71.15  DUTY OF OPERATOR.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of, or passenger in any
motor vehicle which is involved in an accident in which any person is injured
or property damaged to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the
injury or damage and render such assistance as may be needed.



Penalty, see § 71.99



Statutory reference:



   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580



§ 71.16  ACCIDENT REPORT.



   The operator, owner or passenger involved in an accident resulting in
the injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is
damaged, shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the
Police Department.



Penalty, see § 71.99



PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.25  OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.



   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the
vehicle in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of
pedestrians and other vehicles upon the highway.



   (B)   No person shall willfully operate any vehicle on any highway
in such a manner as to injure the highway.



(KRS 189.290)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and
operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights
visible under normal conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the front of such vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in such position until the emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer or
firefighter.



   (B)   Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in
conformity with the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every
vehicle shall immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall keep such
position until the emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by
a police officer or firefighter.



   (C)   No operator of any vehicle, unless he is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than five hundred (500) feet, nor
shall he drive into, park the vehicle into, or park the vehicle within the
block where the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm,
unless he is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.



   (D)   No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any
street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire or fire alarm unless
the fire department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.



(KRS 189.930)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.27  SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.



   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a
minimum of noise, smoke, or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other
traffic, and to promote the public safety. 



(KRS 189.020)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.28  VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle
with the weight, including a load, in excess of that permitted by a state
traffic law for driving on improved highways, or with a weight distribution
in a manner not conforming to such law, or in violation of specific weight
limits provided for by signs posted.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in
the City which is maintained by the city when the gross weight on the surface
of the road through any axle of such vehicle exceeds twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds, and on any street where the weight of vehicles permitted on such
street is limited by resolution and signs indicating such limitation are
posted.  It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight
on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a
load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more
than the minimum distance necessary for that purpose.



(Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 94-03, passed 5-16-94)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.29  SPEED LIMIT FOR CERTAIN ROADWAYS.



   (A)   No operator of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, and/or moped shall
at any time operate said motor vehicle, motorcycle, or moped at a speed
greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour on any street within the City of
Hillview which is both a dead end street and of a length of eight hundred
(800) feet  or less. The speed limit for all other streets maintained by the
city shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour.



   (B)   Appropriate signs and markings shall be erected and posted
indicating the beginning and end of such fifteen (15) miles per hour speed
zones, as soon as practicable after the date of the adoption of this section.
The fifteen (15) miles per hour speed limit shall be effective from the time
such warning signs and markings are erected and posted.



   (C)   Dead end street. 



      (1)   Definition.



         DEAD END.  A street that is only connected to another
street at one end (not including a street that constitutes a circle).



      (2)   No operator of a motor vehicle, motorcycle and/or moped
shall at any time operate said motor vehicle, motorcycle and/or moped at a
speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour on any roadway within the city
which is a dead end street.



      (3)   Appropriate signs and markings shall be erected and
posted indicating the beginning and end of such fifteen (15) miles per hour
speed zones, as soon as practicable after the date of the adoption of this
section, and the fifteen (15) miles per hour speed limit shall be effective
from the time such warning signs and markings are erected and posted.



   (D)   Any person who violates divisions (A) and (C) of this section
shall be fined in accordance with provisions of KRS 189.394.



(Ord. 2006-08, passed 7-18-06; Am. Ord. 2008-15, passed 12-15-08; Am. Ord.
2018-02, passed 2-19-18)  Penalty, see § 71.99



FUNERAL PROCESSIONS



§ 71.35  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   A vehicle in a funeral procession has the right-of-way at an
intersection and may proceed through the intersection if the procession is
led by an escort vehicle displaying flashing yellow, red, or blue lights,
except:



      (1)   When the right-of-way is required by an emergency
vehicle as defined by KRS 189.910;



      (2)   When vehicles in the procession are directed otherwise
by a police or safety officer; or



      (3)   When the vehicle is a train or locomotive.



   (B)   Before assuming the right-of-way, a person who drives a
vehicle in a funeral procession shall exercise due caution with regard to
crossing traffic.



   (C)   A person who drives a vehicle that is not part of a funeral
procession shall not drive the vehicle between the vehicles of the funeral
procession or otherwise interfere with the progress of the procession,
except, when:



      (1)   The person is authorized to do so by a police or safety
officer; or



      (2)   The vehicle is an emergency vehicle as defined by KRS
189.910.



   (D)   A person who drives a vehicle that is not a part of a funeral
procession shall not illuminate the vehicle headlights or engage in any other
act for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted to funeral
processions.



   (E)   The escort vehicle, hearse, or other vehicles in a procession
may be equipped with flashing amber lights for the purpose of notifying the
general public of the procession and gaining the right-of-way at
intersections, or signaling the end of a procession.



   (F)   Persons authorized to use flashing lights as defined in KRS
189.920 may use them while accompanying a funeral procession to warn traffic
that a procession is approaching or that it is in progress.



   (G)   When a funeral procession is in progress, a person driving a
vehicle not in the procession shall not pass or overtake any vehicle in the
procession unless:



      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a police or safety
officer;



      (2)   The procession is on a street, road, or highway outside
the corporate limits of a city, town, or urban-county; or



      (3)   The procession is on an interstate highway or s state
parkway.



(KRS 189.378)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500).



   (B)   Any person who violates § 71.26 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than sixty dollars ($60) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500), or be imprisoned in the county jail for not
more than thirty (30) days, or both.



(KRS 189.993 (8))



   (C)   Whoever violates the weight limits established in § 71.28
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than sixty ($60)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500).



   (D)   Any person who violates § 71.35 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250)
or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.



(KRS 189.378)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Parking Generally



   72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking



   72.02   Manner of parking



   72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking



   72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets



   72.05   Parking restricted allow street cleaning



   72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited;
towing authorized



   72.07   Parking on parade route



   72.08   Parking on off-street facility



   72.09   Owner responsibility



   72.10   Parking in parks



   72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale



   72.12   Parking with permits for persons with disabilities



   72.13   No parking areas



   72.14   Parking at curb



   72.15   Vehicles for sale



   72.16   Parking in alleys



   72.17   Signs posted



Impounding



   72.20   Impoundment of vehicles authorized; redemption



   72.21   Required notice to owner



   72.22   Sale of vehicle



Snow Emergency



   72.35   Announcement of snow emergency



   72.36   Termination of emergency



   72.37   Snow emergency routes



 



   72.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS
65.120



PARKING GENERALLY



§ 72.01  OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or
any other thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction, or hindrance in or on
any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any
vehicle on the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped of parked at the
edge of curb of a street.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  MANNER OF PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop
or park the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward
and parallel with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the
left side of a one-way-street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and
except for commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street
unless its two right wheels are within twelve (12) inches of and parallel
with the curb, except that on one-way streets where parking is permitted on
the left side the two (2) left wheels are to be within twelve (12) inches of
and parallel with the curb.



   (C)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street, except
that wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading provided that
such loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not
consume more than thirty (30) minutes.  Such backing of trucks or wagons is
prohibited at all times and on all streets in the city where any truck or
wagon so backed interferes with the use of the roadway of moving vehicles or
occupies road space within ten (10) feet of the center line of the street.



   (D)   The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places,
requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a
certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking
shall not be established where the roadway space required therefor would be
within ten (10) feet of the center line of any street.  Such diagonal
parking places shall be designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by
markings on the pavement the required angle and the width of the roadway
space within which such vehicle shall park.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so
park such vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking
the side or the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or traffic-control device, in the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with
disabilities;



      (3)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (4)   Within an intersection or on a crosswalk;



      (5)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking;



      (6)   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a
roadway;



      (7)   On any controlled access highway;



      (8)   Within a highway tunnel;



      (9)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; or



      (10)   On an area between the roadways of a divided highway.



(KRS 189.450(5))



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any prohibited area.  (KRS 189.450(6))



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.



   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices.



   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on
parking shall not relieve any person from his duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.



   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time on any street so marked by official signs.



   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions
of division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or
adjacent to any curb so marked.



   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle between the hours specified by official signs on any day except
Sundays on any street so marked.



   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions
thereof stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited.  Whenever
under authority of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any parking
limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking
areas are restricted to parking for persons with disabilities, appropriate
signs shall be erected giving notice thereof.  However, in lieu of erecting
such signs or in conjunction therewith, the face and top of a curb or curbs
at or adjacent to which parking is prohibited at all times may be painted a
solid yellow color.



      (2)   No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective
unless the signs have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted
yellow at the time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those
parking restrictions which by their very nature would not require such signs
and markings.



   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above
in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a
time longer than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any
street so marked.



   (H)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and
no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(Ord. 84-15, passed 9-15-84)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.



   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall
provide suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting
parking on that particular day.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle to stop on any street so designated.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle on
any of the public ways or street of the city for a period of twenty-four (24)
hours or longer.  Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of the
public ways or streets of the city for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or
longer shall be deemed abandoned, and shall be subject to all existing
regulations of the city pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles.



Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Removal of abandoned vehicles, see § 72.21 et seq.



§ 72.07  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall
have the authority, whenever in his judgement it is necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting
a part of the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic
signs to that effect, and to prohibit and prevent such parking.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation of such signs or directions.



Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Parades, see Chapter 96



§ 72.08  PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park
or abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another's
property, or on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without
the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of any such the
property of facility.



   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise
trespasses in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee,
or person in charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized
motor vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 72.20 through
72.22.



   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking
facility shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or
facility is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at
the owner's expense before exercising the authorizing granted in division (B).



Penalty, see § 72.99



Statutory reference:



   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725



§ 72.09  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions
of this subchapter regulating stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and
the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.10  PARKING IN PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on
any section of any public park, playground, play lot, or tot lot within the
city not designated as a parking area or designated and regularly maintained
as a roadway.  However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed
as prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and
regularly maintained roadway in any such park or playground where at least
two (2) wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on such roadway.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.



   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a
motor vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street, or to
park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is
peddled.



(Ord. 84-15, passed 9-15-84)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  PARKING WITH PERMITS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor
vehicle bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk
pursuant to appropriate county ordinances for persons with disabilities when
operated by a person with disabilities or when transporting a person with
disabilities may be parked in a designated parking place for persons with
disabilities or when parked in a metered parking space may be parked for two
(2) hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking limit is imposed may
be parked for two (2) hours in excess of the parking limit.  The motor
vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for that period of time necessary to
permit entrance or exit of the person with disabilities to or from the parked
vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than thirty (30) minutes.



   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a "no stopping" or
"no parking" zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating
a fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon, or
evening hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.13  NO PARKING AREAS.



   At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle or other
personal property to stand in any of the following places; except, when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a policeman or traffic control device:



   (A)   In any intersection.



   (B)   In a crosswalk.



   (C)   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the
approach thereto.



   (D)   Within any designated fire lane.



   (E)   Within six (6) feet of any mail box.



   (F)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the
usable width of the roadway from moving traffic.



   (G)   Within six (6) feet of a fire hydrant.



   (H)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a
driveway, or ramp for persons with disabilities, or in such a manner as to
obstruct the vision of drivers approaching an intersection.



   (I)   On any sidewalk, parkway or highway right-of-way.



   (J)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 6-15-92)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.14  PARKING AT CURB.



   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle to the
curb, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street
right-of-way.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 6-15-92)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.15  VEHICLES FOR SALE.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business
street from which vehicle, merchandise is peddled.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 6-15-92)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.16  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 6-15-92)



IMPOUNDING



§ 72.20  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED; REDEMPTION.



   (A)   All police officers are empowered to authorize the impoundment
of a vehicle violating the vehicle-related ordinances after a citation has
been issued.



   (B)   A vehicle slated for impoundment will be tagged and placed
under control of the Police Department.  Should a vehicle be moved without
the consent and approval of the Police Department a warrant shall be issued
immediately for the violator's arrest.



   (C)   All fines, fees, and charges must be paid in full before a
release of impoundment can be issued for the vehicle's release.



§ 72.21  REQUIRED NOTICE TO OWNER.



   (A)   When a motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or
transported pursuant to order of police, other public authority, or private
person or business for any reason or when the vehicle has been stolen or
misappropriated and its removal from the public ways has been ordered by
police, other public authority, or by private person or business, or in any
other situation where a motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or
transported by order of police, other authority, or by private person or
business, the police, other authority, or private person or business shall
attempt to ascertain from the State Transportation Cabinet the identity of
the registered owner of the motor vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as
defined in KRS Chapter 281 and within ten (10) business days  of the removal
shall, by certified mail, attempt to notify the registered owner at the
address of record of the make, model, license number, and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, of the location of the vehicle, and of
the requirements for securing the release of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   If a vehicle described in division (A) is placed in a garage
or other storage facility, the owner of the facility shall attempt to provide
the notice provided in division (A) by certified mail to the registered owner
at the address of record of the motor vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as
defined in KRS Chapter 281 within ten (10) business days of recovery of, or
taking possession of the motor vehicle.  This notice shall contain the
information as to the make, model, license number, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle, the location of the vehicle, and the amount of
reasonable charges  for towing, recovery, storage, transporting, and other
applicable charges due on the vehicle.  When the owner of the facility fails
to provide notice as provided herein, the motor vehicle storage facility
shall forfeit all storage fees accrue after ten (10) business days from the
date of tow. This division (B) shall not apply to a tow lot or storage
facility owned or operated by the city.



(KRS 376.275 (1), (2))



§ 72.22  SALE OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor
vehicles, who has substantially complied with the aforementioned requirements
of § 72.21, shall have a lien on the motor vehicle and its contents, except
as set forth in KRS 376.275(4), for the reasonable or agreed charges for
towing, recovery, storage, transporting, and other applicable charges due on
the vehicle, as long as it remains in his possession.



   (B)   Prior to payment of fees and release of a vehicle, a towing or
storage company shall not refuse the right of physical inspection of the
towed vehicle by the owner or an insurance company representative. Release of
the vehicle shall occur to the owner or insurance company representative upon
payment and consent of the release from the owner or the owner's authorized
representative. Each additional service shall be set forth individually as a
single line item in the bill with an explanation and the exact charge for the
service.



   (C)   If after a period of forty-five (45) days, the reasonable or
agreed charges for  towing, recovery, storage, transporting, and other
applicable charges due on a motor vehicle and its contents have not been
paid, the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in KRS
376.275(4), may be sold to pay the charges after the owner has been notified
by certified mail ten (10) days prior to the time and place of the sale. If
the proceeds of the sale of any vehicle pursuant to this section are
insufficient to satisfy accrued charges for towing, transporting, and
storage, the sale and collection of proceeds shall not constitute a waiver or
release of responsibility for payment of unpaid towing, transporting, and
storage charges by the owner or responsible casualty insurer of the vehicle.
A lien on a vehicle under this section shall be subject to prior recorded
liens.



   (D)   A lien holder having a prior recorded lien listed on the title
issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be notified by certified mail
within the first fifteen (15) days of impoundment. The letter shall include
the make, model, license number, vehicle identification number, owner's name
and last known address, and tentative date of sale for the vehicle. If the
above-referenced certified letter is not sent within the fifteen (15) days by
the towing and storage company, then only fifteen (15) days of storage may be
charged. The lien holder has the right to take possession of the motor
vehicle after showing proof of lien still enforced, and paying the reasonable
or agreed towing and storage charges on the motor vehicle. Nothing in this
section shall allow the transfer of a vehicle subject to a lien, except as
provided in KRS 186A.190.



(KRS 376.275 (3))



SNOW EMERGENCY



§ 72.35  ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official finds
that falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain will create a condition which
makes it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency
routes be prohibited, or whenever he finds on the basis of a firm forecast of
snow, sleet, or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may
create a condition making it necessary that such parking be prohibited, he is
authorized to announce such prohibition, to become effective at a time
specified by him.  After the effective time of such prohibition no person
shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow
emergency route.  However, if a fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain occurs
after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking
on snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a
vehicle parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m.
following such fall.  The prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official under the authority of this section
shall remain in effect until he announces the termination of the snow
emergency, in part in whole, after which the prohibition of parking
authorized by this section shall no longer be in effect.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.36  TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall
find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency
prohibition no longer exists, he is authorized to declare the termination of
the emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement. If
such announcement is made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it
shall be repeated between those hours.



§ 72.37  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the
Chief of Police or other authorized city official.  On such street or
highway designated as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be posted
to this effect.



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in
the city for which a specific penalty is not provided shall be subject to a
fine established by the Code Enforcement Board in an amount not less than
twenty dollars ($20), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100).



(KRS 189.990 (1))



   (B)   Fines for violation of §§ 72.02, 72.03, 72.04 or 72.11 shall
be ten dollars ($10) for each violation, except for parking within a
designated parking space for persons with disabilities which shall be fifteen
dollars ($15). All citations which are not paid within seven (7) days of
their date of issue shall have added a late charge of two dollars ($2). 
Fines which are not paid in accordance with this section shall after
twenty-eight (28) days be processed by the Police Department through the Code
Enforcement Board for their collection.



   (C)   Any fine which is assessed by reason of this chapter shall be
payable to the City Clerk- Treasurer. These fines shall be payable to the
General Fund of the city and be expended for general city purposes.



(Ord. 84-20, passed 12-17-84)



   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 72.13 through
72.16 shall be subject to a fine established by the Code Enforcement Board of
not less than five dollars ($5) nor more than fifteen dollars ($15) for each
offense.



(Ord. 92-13, passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 2004-16, passed 11-15-04)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES



Section



   73.01   Operation of bicycles



   73.02   Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters



   73.03   Skating and coasting



   73.04   Clinging to vehicles



 



   73.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Required obedience to traffic directions, see § 70.02(C)



§ 73.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public
park, playground, play lot, or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking
area.



   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such
bicycle.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.



   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall carry another person  except on a seat attached thereto or in
a side car attached to the vehicle.



   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in a public park, except on a roadway or
in a parking area.



   (C)   No operator of a motor cycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  SKATING AND COASTING.



   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as "play
streets" by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be
unlawful for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle
of any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller
skates, or any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street,
or fasten or attach the vehicle on which he is riding thereto.



   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or
fenders of any vehicle.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than fifty dollars ($50).



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         92.   NUISANCES





         93.   FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION





         94.   LITTERING





         95.   FAIR HOUSING





         96.   PARADES





         97.   SWIMMING POOLS





         98.   CITY DUMPSTER




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Restraint required for animals



   90.03   Confinement of an animal when in heat



   90.04   Nuisance



   90.05   Humane treatment of animals



   90.06   Standards for kennels



   90.07   Standards for pet shops



   90.08   Exhibitions of wild or vicious animals prohibited



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Any living creature, domestic or wild, excluding livestock,
poultry, pet rodents, pet birds, and vermin.



   ANIMAL DEALER. Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the
business of buying any animal or animals for the purpose of resale to pet
shops, research facilities, or to another animal dealer.



   CIRCUS. A nonresident variety show which features animal acts.



   KENNEL. Any person, partnership or corporation maintaining an
establishment where animals of any species are kept for the purpose of
breeding, buying, selling, showing or boarding such animals or engaged in the
training of dogs for guard or sentry purposes, and which establishment is so
constructed that the animals cannot stray herefrom; this definition shall
however exclude noncommercial kennels as defined in KRS 100.365; or any
person who on private premises owns, harbors, or maintains five (5) or more
animals of the same species.



   LIVESTOCK. Horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams,
lambs, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets,
burros, goats, kids, swine and confined and domesticated hares and rabbits.



   OWNER. Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring animals.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, company or corporation.



   PET BIRDS. Any tamed or domesticated bird kept caged or within doors.



   PET RODENTS. Hamsters, gerbils, woodchucks, mice, or similar rodents
which are kept as domesticated or tamed animals and kept caged or within
doors at all times.



   PET SHOP. Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the
business of breeding, buying, selling at retail, or boarding animals of any
species for profit making purposes.



   POULTRY. All domesticated fowl and all game birds which are
legally-kept in captivity.



   QUALIFIED PERSON. Person granted a permit of the Kentucky State Board
of Health to vaccinate animals against rabies, and may include owners or
operators of licensed kennels.



   RESTRAINT. An animal shall be deemed to be under restraint if on the
premises of its owner and in a pen, cage, or on a leash or if accompanied by
a responsible person and under that person's control. If in a public way or
place, animals must be restrained by either a leash or an enclosure.



   THEATRICAL EXHIBIT. Any exhibition or act featuring performing animals.



   VACCINATION. The injection by a veterinarian or other qualified person
of vaccines approved by and administered in accordance with the regulations
of the Kentucky State Board of Health.



   VETERINARIAN. A licensed practitioner of veterinary medicine,
accredited by the Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of
Agriculture.



   VETERINARIAN HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals or for the boarding of animals.



   ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN. Any park or zoo operated by a person, partnership,
private corporation or governmental agency.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.02  RESTRAINT REQUIRED FOR ANIMALS.



   (A)   All animals shall be kept under restraint at all times. Dogs
owned for guard or sentry purposes must be kept in an enclosure so
constructed that the animals cannot stray therefrom. The premises must be
posted "Beware of Dog."



   (B)   Any person having control of any animal on or in a public way
or place shall be responsible for any and all mess made by such animal.



   (C)   If any dog or cat should be found dead in or upon any public
way or place, the owner shall be responsible for disposal of same.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.03  CONFINEMENT OF ANIMAL WHEN IN HEAT.



   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.04  NUISANCE.



   No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals
so as to prevent the following actions by them; excessive, continuous, or
untimely barking or howling; molesting of passersby; chasing of vehicles;
attacking other domestic animals; trespassing upon school grounds;
trespassing upon private property; or damaging of property of any nature.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.05  HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide his animals with good and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and
treatment. If any animal is restrained by a chain, leash, or similar
restraint, such chain or restraint shall not be less than ten (10) feet in
length and either on a swivel designed to prevent the animal from choking or
strangling itself or else on a chain run. No person shall beat cruelly, ill
treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise chase any animal, or cause
or permit any dog fight, cock fight or other combat between animals. No owner
shall abandon an animal, abandonment consisting of leaving such animal for a
period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours without providing for someone to
feed, water, and check on the animal's condition. In the event that an animal
is found so abandoned, the Office of Bullitt County Animal Control shall be
informed, at which time the animal may be taken by said officer to the
Bullitt County Animal Shelter in accordance with the ordinances of Bullitt
County. In the event that an animal is so abandoned, the owner, rather than
the person, if any, whom he has charged with the animal's care, shall be
liable for citation for violation of this section.



   (B)   No person shall crop a dog's ears except a licensed
veterinarian.



   (C)   No person shall place any poisonous substance which may be
harmful to any animal as described herein in any location where it may be
readily found and eaten by such animal.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.06  STANDARDS FOR KENNELS.



   All kennels as defined herein, shall, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this
section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or
revocation of a business license and the issuance of a citation subjecting
the owner to the penalties herein. Law enforcement shall have the authority
to inspect the premises of any kennel for compliance with this chapter.



   (A)   Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate
protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls
shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting.



   (B)   Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable
level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained.



   (C)   Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down,
and turn around in a natural position without touching the sides or top of
cages.



   (D)   Cages are to be of material and construction that permit
cleaning and sanitizing.



   (E)   Cage floors of concrete, unless radiantly heated, shall have a
resting board or some type of bedding.



   (F)   Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection
from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface.



   (G)   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry, and in
a sanitary condition.



   (H)   The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome,
palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal
daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.



   (I)   All animals shall have fresh water available at all times.
Water vessels shall be mounted or secure in a manner that prevents tipping
and be of the removable type.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.07  STANDARDS FOR PET SHOPS.



   All pet shops, as defined herein, including pet shops run in
conjunction with another holding facility, shall, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this
section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of or
revocation of a business license and the issuance of a citation subjecting
the owner to the penalties herein. Law enforcement shall have the authority
to inspect the premises of any pet shop for compliance with this chapter.



   (A)   There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of
160° degrees for washing cages and disinfecting and cold water easily
accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water shall be available to all
species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day.
All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot turn them over and
be removable for cleaning.



   (B)   Room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level
that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop.



   (C)   All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for
cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the
animal will have room to stand, turn, and lie down in a natural position.



   (D)   All animals under three (3) months of age are to be fed at
least three (3) times per twenty-four (24) hours. Food for all animals shall
be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it
over and be of the removable type.



   (E)   Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches
shall be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must be
cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold. Parrots
and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds.



   (F)   The water temperature for fish shall be maintained at a
constant temperature that is healthful.



   (G)   There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet the needs
of each individual animal.



   (H)   All animals must be fed, watered, and cages cleaned every day,
including Sundays and holidays.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.08  EXHIBITIONS OF WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or
vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously
or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a
zoological garden, theatrical exhibit or circus as defined herein, except
that no theatrical exhibit or act shall be held in which animals are
encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, electrical, or mechanical
devices.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine established by the Code Enforcement Board of not less than fifteen
dollars ($15) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500), for each occurrence,
with each day of violation being a separate occurrence.



(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-4-16)



CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Encroachment Permit



   91.01   Permit required



   91.02   Application, issuance



   91.03   Scope of permit approval



   91.04   Variance



   91.05   Inspections



   91.06   Barriers around excavations



   91.07   Warning lights



   91.08   Sidewalk construction



Construction/Reconstruction Minimum Requirements



   91.10   Definitions



   91.11   Requirements



   91.12   Drainage



Road and Bridge Projects



   91.15   Public hearing required



   91.16   Notice requirements



   91.17   Public may testify; effect of testimony



   91.18   Hearing to be held prior to construction



   91.19   Separate hearing for each project not required



   91.20   Exemptions from hearing requirement



Obstructions



   91.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   91.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   91.32   Materials on street or sidewalk



   91.33   Removal of ice and snow



 



   91.99   Penalty



ENCROACHMENT PERMIT



§ 91.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall disturb, remove or damage any part of the subsurface,
surface or pavement of any city-maintained street, alley, or highway without
first obtaining a permit to do so, signed by the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2005-09, passed 6-20-05)



§ 91.02  APPLICATION, ISSUANCE.



   The City Clerk shall issue a permit to any person desiring to remove,
ditch or excavate in, through or under any city-maintained street only upon
satisfaction of the following requirements:



   (A)   The applicant shall file a request for such permit with the
City Clerk upon a form provided by the City Clerk, stating therein the work
proposed to be done, the necessity therefor, the specific manner in which the
applicant will replace the surface or pavement, an estimate of the cost of
replacing the surface or pavement to its original condition and a fidelity
bond that the surface or pavement will be replaced in substantially the same
condition as before the proposed ditching or excavating.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall present the application to the Public
Works Department for approval or disapproval. The approval or disapproval by
the Public Works Department must be made within five (5) working days of
receipt.



   (C)   If approved by the Public Works Department, the City Clerk
shall issue a permit for the applicant to proceed with the work proposed, but
the City Clerk shall not issue the permit until the applicant has made bond
with sufficient surety, approved by the Public Works Department, that the
pavement, surface and subsurface materials will be replaced in substantially
their original condition, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the
work, indemnifying the city in the event of the failure of the applicant to
replace the pavement surface or subsurface within fifteen (15) days after the
date of the permit, or within such time as is designated by the Public Works
Department, when and if the application for permit is approved.



(Ord. 2005-09, passed 6-20-05)



§ 91.03  SCOPE OF PERMIT APPROVAL.



   The decision of the Public Works Department in approving or
disapproving an application for a permit under this subchapter shall be
final. The Public Works Department may impose additional requirements other
than those set out herein upon the applicant.



(Ord. 2005-09, passed 6-20-05)



§ 91.04  VARIANCE.



   It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted plans and
specifications unless such variances are submitted in an amended plan to the
Public Works Department and approved by it.



(Ord. 2005-09, passed 6-20-05)



§ 91.05  INSPECTIONS.



   The Public Works Department shall cause to be made such inspections as
are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter
and to make any test or examinations of materials or methods used for the
purpose of seeing that they comply with the provisions of this subchapter or
any other ordinance.



(Ord. 2005-09, passed 6-20-05)



§ 91.06  BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  WARNING LIGHTS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in
any manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way, at all times during the night season shall install and
maintain at least two (2) illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and
conspicuously posted on, at, or near each end of the obstruction or
excavation, and if the space involved exceeds fifty (50) feet in extent, at
least one (1) additional lamp for each added fifty (50) feet or portion
thereof excavated or obstructed.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.



   It shall be the duty of the authorized city official to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the city.  He shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the specifications to the legislative body for
approval.  When the specifications are approved, the legislative body shall
advertise for proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the city
in construction and repair of sidewalks, and shall authorize the Mayor to
contract therefore, for a period not exceeding one (1) year, with the lowest
responsible bidder, who shall furnish goods and sufficient sureties for the
faithful performance of the work.  The Mayor, if authorized by City Council,
may make separate contracts for the different kinds of work with different
parties.



CONSTRUCTION/RECONSTRUCTION MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS



§ 91.10  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   STREET.  Shall mean a  right-of-way dedicated to public use,
which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property. A
street may be designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard,
street, road, avenue, lane, drive, place or other appropriate name.



   (B)   Street Types:



      (1)   Arterial - Highways that are designated or utilized
primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic which
connect two (2) major arteries.



      (2)   Collector - Streets planned to facilitate the collection
of traffic from minor streets, and to provide circulation between
neighborhood areas providing convenient access to arterial highways.



      (3)   Minor - Local streets designed primarily to provide
access to abutting properties and to carry limited volumes of traffic.



      (4)   Marginal Access - Minor streets, parallel and adjacent
to arterial highways and serving to reduce the number of access points to the
arterial thereby increasing traffic safety.



(Ord. 2005-10, passed 6-20-05)



§ 91.11  REQUIREMENTS.



   The minimum construction/reconstruction requirements for streets,
within the city, which shall be accepted by the city for perpetual
maintenance, are as follows:



   (A)   The base of said roadway must be no less than eight (8) inches
of compacted dense grade aggregate. Prior to placement of any aggregate for
roadway construction, sub-base earth course shall be proof-rolled by the
contractor in the presence of the City of Hillview Public Works
representative. Deficient, unstable, or nonuniform area(s) shall be marked
with spray paint and corrected to the satisfaction of said representative.



   (B)   Four-tenths (4/10) of one (1) gallon tack coat (per square
yard) applied between the base and the asphalt coat.



   (C)   Surface base (Type 1.0 PG 70-22) or equivalent Class 2 Asphalt
Base no less than two (2) inches in thickness.



   (D)   The asphalt placed upon the base is to be no less than two (2)
inches (PG-76-22) or equivalent Class 3 Asphalt Surface.



   (E)   Street Design Standards to be followed for any street which is
dedicated to public use are as follows:



 


Street Classification:

 

Arterial

 

Collector and Secondary

 

Minor

 

Marginal Access

 

Cul-de-Sac




Minimum width of right-of-way:

 

60 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

100 feet




Minimum width of pavement:

 

32 feet

 

20 feet with 2-foot shoulder

 

20 feet with 2-foot shoulder

 

20 feet with 2-foot shoulder

 

70 feet with 2-foot shoulder




 


Street Classification:

 

Arterial

 

Collector and Secondary

 

Minor

 

Marginal Access

 

Cul-de-Sac




Minimum radius of horizontal curves:

 

400 feet

 

100 feet except for street intersection corners

 

100 feet except for street intersection corners

 

--

 

--




Minimum length of vertical curves as measured from center line of right-
of-way:

 

200 feet, but not less than 50 feet for each 1% algebraic difference of grade

 

100 feet, but not less than 25 feet for crest curve and 35 feet for sag curve
for each 1% algebraic difference of grade

 

100 feet, but not less than 25 feet for crest curve and 35 feet for sag curve
for each 1% algebraic difference of grade

 

80 feet

 

70 feet




Minimum length of tangents between reverse curves:

 

300 feet

 

100 feet except when excessive grades may be reduced to reasonable grades by
shortening tangent

 

100 feet except when excessive grades may be reduced to reasonable grades by
shortening tangent

 

50 feet

 

50 feet




Minimum allowable grade:

 

5%

 

7%

 

12%*

 

12%*

 

12%*




Minimum grade for drainage:

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%




Minimum site distance:

 

Over 300 feet as specific case requires

 

300 feet

 

100 feet

 

80 feet

 

80 feet




 



* Grades greater than 12% may be permitted by the city if recommended by the
City Engineer.



(Ord. 2005-10, passed 6-20-05)



   (F)   The owner or developer shall have prepared, by engineer, a
complete and accurate bond estimate for the construction of the final
bituminous surface course material, acceptable to the City of Hillview. The
bond estimate shall be based upon estimated cost of final two (2)-inch
surface course materials and installation, cleaning, tack coat installation,
and clean up. A fifteen (15) percent contingency amount shall be added to the
bond estimate. After the city approves the bond amount, the owner or
developer shall submit the bond surety to the City Clerk. Upon notification
that the construction bond and bond surety documents are complete and
acceptable, the city shall affix its signature to the bond and said action
shall constitute acceptance by the city. The initial bond shall be effective
for a two (2) year period. The owner or developer shall have a maximum of two
(2) years to complete the site improvements and final paving unless a time
extension is granted by the city. Approved forms of bond surety are limited
to the following: irrevocable letter of credit from any FDIC insured bank or
lending institution acceptable to the city; cash-in-escrow that is escrowed
at any FDIC insured bank or lending institution acceptable to the city; or
performance or surety bond from a bond provider acceptable to the city.



(Ord. 2018-11, passed 9-17-18)



§ 91.12  DRAINAGE.



   (A)   Drainage facilities shall be provided:



      (1)   To permit unimpeded flow of natural water-courses; and



      (2)   To ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line
of streets.



   (B)   Inlets, manhole covers, and frames shall conform to Kentucky
Department of Transportation standards.



   (C)   Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway and be designed
to carry expected flows.



(Ord. 2005-10, passed 6-20-05)



ROAD AND BRIDGE REPORTS



§ 91.15  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   Before the city expends state derived tax revenues on a municipal
highway, road, street, or bridge it shall hold a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter to take the sense of the public with regard
to the project and to priorities for use of tax moneys for road and bridge
purposes.



(KRS 174.100)



§ 91.16  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state derived tax
revenues on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall hold a public
hearing to take the sense of the public with regard to road and bridge
matters within the city.  Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than
seven (7) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days before the scheduled date
of the public hearing and before beginning work on any project covered by
this subchapter. 



(KRS 174.100 (1))



§ 91.17  PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.



   (A)   At the hearing any person may speak with regard to any
proposed project, any project which he feels should be built or done which
has not been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any other
matter related to road or bridge projects.



   (B)   The city shall not be bound by the testimony heard at the
hearing but shall give due consideration to it.



(KRS 174.100 (2), (3))



§ 91.18  HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.



   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project in
which state derived tax revenues are involved until the hearing as provided
in this section has been held. 



(KRS 174.100 (4))



§ 91.19  SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate hearing
for each project.  A single hearing encompassing the entire road and bridge
program, provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified
at the hearing, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.



(KRS 174.100 (5))



§ 91.20  EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency
repair or replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or
man-caused disasters nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to projects
which were under construction as of July 15, 1980, unless construction was
suspended after that date and the city desires to reactivate the project. 



(KRS 174.100 (6), (7))



OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 91.30  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.31  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any fence or
building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a
separate offense.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.32  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof.



Penalty, see § 91.99



Cross-reference:



   Littering on streets or sidewalks, See Ch. 94



§ 91.33  REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his premises free and clear of snow and ice to the extent
feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove therefrom all
snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions,
accumulated therein within a reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed
twelve (12) hours after the abatement of any storm during which the snow and
ice may have accumulated.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500).



CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Public nuisance



   92.03   Junked, wrecked or inoperative automobiles, vehicles or
machines



   92.04   Unsafe for human habitation



   92.05   Removal of refuse, weeds, trash, or waste



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED or DANGEROUS SIGN. A sign that advertises an activity,
service, or product no longer available on the premises on which the sign is
located or on the premises referred to in the off-premises business sign; a
temporary sign is deemed abandoned when the sign has not been removed within
ten (10) days after the event has taken place; this also refers to a sign
that has become insecure, unsafe, dilapidated, or in danger of falling or
collapsing, or when it constitutes a fire hazard or otherwise endangers human
life or the public welfare; or when it is deemed unsafe by reason of illegal
or improper use or maintenance.



   AUTOMOBILE COLLECTOR. A person who collects and restores motor vehicles.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under
the authority of KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A city police officer, safety officer,
citation officer, or other public law enforcement officer with the authority
to issue a citation.



   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



   INOPERABLE AUTOMOBILE. A motor vehicle that, for any reason, is not
able to be legally operated upon the roadways of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. A sight line within normal visual range by a
person on a public street or sidewalk adjacent to real property.



   OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership, or other legal
entity having a legal or equitable title in real property;



   PARTS CAR. An automobile that is not intended to be operated along
streets and roads, but is used to provide parts for the restoration of other
automobiles.



   PREMISES. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures upon
it.



(Ord. 2016-18, passed 8-15-16; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-18)



§ 92.02  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Except as provided in § 92.03 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for the owner, occupant, or person having control or management of any
premises within the city to permit a public nuisance, health hazard, or
source of filth to develop thereon through the following actions:



   (A)    Accumulation of junked, wrecked, or inoperable automobiles,
vehicles, machines, other similar scrap or salvage materials, excluding
inoperative farm equipment.



   (B)   One or more mobile or manufactured homes as defined in KRS
227.550 that are junked, wrecked, or inoperative and which are not inhabited;



   (C)   Accumulation of rubbish, trash, waste, debris, or abandoned
appliances;



   (D)   The keeping, placing, or storage outside of any building or
dwelling or the keeping, placing, or storage in any way accessible to
children of any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, ice chest, or
refrigerator;



   (E)   The growth of weeds, grass, or unhealthful plant growth to a
height of six (6) inches or higher excluding trees, bushes, crops, flowers,
or other ornamental plants;



   (F)   The keeping of any tree which is in danger of collapse or
which poses a danger of contamination because of disease, decay, injury,
infestation, or damage;



   (G)   The keeping of outbuildings that are, or hereafter become,
unsafe, unsanitary, dilapidated, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to the public welfare;



   (H)   The keeping of abandoned or dangerous signs;



   (I)   To cast, throw, sweep, sift, or to permit or acquiesce in the
depositing or scattering in any manner in or on any private property or place
in the city any ashes, rubbish, garbage, trash, refuse or waste of any kind,
or other noxious materials, whether liquid or solid, nor shall such items be
deposited in such a way that would allow them to be carried or deposited in
whole or in part by action of the sun, wind, rain, or snow so as to be
scattered on any of the aforementioned places.



(Ord. 2016-18, passed 8-15-16; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-18)



§ 92.03  JUNKED, WRECKED OR INOPERATIVE AUTOMOBILES, VEHICLES OR MACHINES.



   The provisions of § 92.02 of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Junked, wrecked, or inoperative automobiles, vehicles,
machines, or other similar scrap or salvage materials located on the business
premises of a:



      (1)   Licensed automotive recycling dealer as described in KRS
190.010(8);



      (2)   Used motor vehicle dealer as defined in KRS 190.010(6);
or



      (3)   Motor vehicle auction dealer as defined in KRS
190.010(11);



   (B)   Junked, wrecked, or inoperative motor vehicles, including
parts cars, stored on private premises by automobile collectors, whether as a
hobby or a profession, if these motor vehicles and parts cars are stored out
of ordinary public view by means of suitable fencing, trees, shrubbery, or
other means;



   (C)   Any motor vehicle as defined in KRS 281.010 that is owned,
controlled, operated, managed, or leased by a motor carrier; or



   (D)   Material deposited under a permit authorized by any ordinance
of the city or to goods, wares, or merchandise deposited on any public way or
any public place temporarily in the necessary course of trade and removed
therefore within two (2) hours after being so deposited.



(Ord. 2016-18, passed 8-15-16)



§ 92.04  UNSAFE FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   An owner shall not permit any structure upon his or her premises to
become unfit or unsafe for human habitation, occupancy, or use or to permit
conditions to exist on the structure or premises which are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of the structure, the
occupants of neighboring structures, or other residents of the city or that
cause a substantial diminution in the value of other property located in the
neighborhood in which the premises are located.



(Ord. 2016-18, passed 8-15-16)



§ 92.05  REMOVAL OF REFUSE, WEEDS, TRASH OR WASTE.



   It shall be the duty of all persons owning or occupying premises
abutting a public street or alley within the city to remove as soon as
practicable all refuse, weeds, trash, or waste from the sidewalks, curbing,
and to the center line of such streets or alleys as are adjacent to or about
the property. Both an owner and tenant must abide by this section and either
may be proceeded against for the violation thereof.



(Ord. 2016-18, passed 8-15-16)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
civil penalty, the fine for which shall be as stated in § 37.61 and shall be
governed by the Code Enforcement Board.



(Ord. 2016-18, passed 8-15-16)



CHAPTER 93:  FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION



Section



Fireworks



   93.01   Definitions; legality of items



   93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display



   93.03   Bond or liability insurance requirement



   93.04   Exempted sales or uses



   93.05   Destruction of fireworks



   93.06   Requirements for businesses engaging in the permanent and
temporary sale of fireworks



Fire Prevention



   93.20   Blasting permit



   93.21   Storage of flammables and other matter



 



   93.99   Penalty



FIREWORKS



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.



   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, FIREWORKS means any
composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the
definition of “consumer fireworks”as defined in division (B) or
“display” fireworks as defined in division (D) and as set forth in the
U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT) hazardous materials regulations.



      (1)   Exception number 1: Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance with
DOT regulations, and packed and shipped according to said regulations, are
not considered to be fireworks and shall be allowed to be used and sold at
all times.



      (2)   Exception number 2:  Model rockets and model rocket
motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable
aero models are not considered to be fireworks.



      (3)   Exception number 3: Propelling or expelling charges
consisting of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter are not considered
as being designed for producing audible effects.



(KRS 227.700)



   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, COMMON FIREWORKS means
fireworks that are suitable for use by the public, designed primarily to
produce visible effects by combustion, and comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission. The types, sizes, and amount of pyrotechnic contents of
these devices are limited as enumerated in this chapter.  Some small devices
designed to produce audible effects are included, such as whistling devices,
ground devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive composition, and
aerial devices containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive composition. 
CONSUMER FIREWORKS are further defined by the Consumer Product Safety
Commission in CPSC, 16 CPSC, 16 C.F.R. Pts 1500 and 1507, are classified as
division 1.4 explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation and include
the following:



      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.



         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler. These
devices consist a metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with
pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower
of sparks is produced.  Sparklers may contain up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition per item.  Those devices containing any perchlorate or chlorate
salts may not exceed five grams of pyrotechnic composition per item.  Wire
sparklers which contain no magnesium and which contain less than 100 grams of
composition per item are not included in this category, in accordance with
DOT regulations.



         (b)   Cylindrical fountain.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than 75 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition, a shower of colored sparks, and sometimes a whistling effect or
smoke, is produced.  This device may be provided with a spike for insertion
into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or plastic base for placing on the
ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard handle, if intended to be
hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one tube is mounted on a common
base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if
the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least
1/2 inch.



         (c)   Cone fountain.  Cardboard or heavy paper cone
containing up to 50 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  The effect is the
same as that of a cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is mounted on
a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or
500 grams of the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a
distance of at least 1/2 inch.



         (d)   Illuminating torch. Cylindrical tube containing up
to 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition, colored fire is
produced.  May be spike, base, or hand-held. When more than one tube is
mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed
200 grams, or 500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the
base by a distance of at least 1/2 inch.



         (e)   Wheel. A device attached to a post or tree by
means of a nail or string.  A wheel may have one or more drivers, each of
which may contain not more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  No
wheel contain more than 200 grams total pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition, the wheel revolves, producing a shower of color and sparks and,
sometimes, a whistling effect.



         (f)   Ground spinner.  Small device containing not more
than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a wheel but
intended to be placed on the ground and ignited.  A shower of sparks and
color is produced by the rapidly spinning device.



         (g)   Flitter sparkler. Narrow paper tube attached to a
stick or wire and filled with not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition. The paper at one
end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.



         (h)   Toy smoke device.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon
ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.



      (2)   Aerial devices.



         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Sky rockets
contain a wooden stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air upon
ignition.  A burst of color or noise or both is produced at the height of
flight.



         (b)   Missile-type rocket.  A device similar to a sky
rocket in size, composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a stick
for guidance and stability.



         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner. A tube containing up
to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  A propeller or blade is attached,
which, upon ignition, lifts the rapidly spinning device into the air.  A
visible or audible effect is produced at the height of flight.



         (d)   Roman candles.  Heavy paper or cardboard tube
containing up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition, up to
ten stars (pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright
color) are individually expelled at several second intervals.



         (e)   Mine, shell. Heavy cardboard or paper tube usually
attached to a wood or plastic base and containing up to 60 grams of total
chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible or audible
effect composition).  Upon ignition, “stars,” components producing
reports containing up to 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report,
or other devices are propelled into the air.  The term “mine” refers to
a device with no internal components containing a bursting charge, and the
term “shell” refers to a device that propels a component that
subsequently bursts open in the air.  A mine or shell device may contain
more than one tube provided the tubes fire in sequence upon ignition of one
external fuse.  The term “cake” refers to a dense-packed collection of
mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition including lift charges of any
multiple tube devices may not exceed 200 grams. The maximum quantity of lift
charge in any one tube of a mine or shell device shall not exceed 20 grams,
and the maximum quality of break or bursting charge in any component shall
not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical composition in the component.



         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube.  A package kit
containing a cardboard, high- density polyethylene (HDPE, or equivalent
launching tube with multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is limited
to a maximum of 60 grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, bust
charge, and visible or audible effect composition), and the maximum diameter
of each shell shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches. In addition, the maximum
quantity of lift charge in any shell shall not exceed 20 grams, and the
maximum quantity of break or bursting charge in any shell shall not exceed
25% of the total weight of chemical composition in the shell.  The total
chemical composition of all the shells in the kit, including lift charge,
shall not exceed 400 grams.  The user lower a shell into the launching tube,
at the time of firing, with the fusing extending out of the top of the
tube.  After the firing, the tube is then reloaded with another shell for
the next firing.  All launching tubes shall be capable of firing twice the
number of shells in the kit without failure of the tube.  Each package of
multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning label requirements
of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.



      (3)   Audible ground devices.



         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes.  Small paper-wrapped or
cardboard tube containing not more than 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic
composition.  Those used in aerial devices may contain not more than 130
milligrams of explosive composition per report.  Upon ignition, noise and a
flash of light is produced.



         (b)   Chaser.  Small paper or cardboard tube that
travels along the ground upon ignition.  A whistling effect, or other noise,
is often produced.  The explosive composition used to create the noise may
not exceed 50 milligrams.



(KRS 227.702)



   (C)   Items listed below are classified as NOVELTIES and TRICK
NOISEMAKERS and are not classified as consumer fireworks by the U.S.
Department of Transportation and their transportation, storage, retail sale,
possession, sale, and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all times.



      (1)   Snake, glow worm.  Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic
composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning.  The ash
expands in length as the pellet burns.  These devices may not contain
mercuric thiocyanate.



      (2)   Smoke device. Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the
primary effect.



      (3)   Wire sparkler.  Wire coated with pyrotechnic
composition that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition.  These items may
not contain magnesium and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per
item.  Devices containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed
five grams of composition per item.



      (4)   Trick noisemaker. Item that produces a small report
intended to surprise the user.  These devices include:



         (a)   Party popper. Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is
friction sensitive.  A string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite
it, expelling paper streamers and producing a small report.



         (b)   Booby trap.  Small tube with string protruding
from both ends, similar to a party popper in design.  The ends of the string
are pulled to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small
report.



         (c)   Snapper. Small, paper-wrapped item containing a
minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand.  When
dropped, the device explodes producing a small report.



         (d)   Trick match.  Kitchen or book match that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition of the match a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.



         (e)   Cigarette load. Small wooden peg that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive composition.  Upon ignition of a
cigarette containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced.



         (f)   Auto burglar alarm. Tube which contains
pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when
ignited.  A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams may
also be used to produce a small report.  A squib is used to ignite the
device.



(KRS 227.704)



   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, DISPLAY FIREWORKS
means pyrotechnic devices or large fireworks designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation.  This
term includes, but is not limited to, firecrackers containing more than two
grains (130 milligrams) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing
more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which
exceed the limits for classification as consumer fireworks.  Display
fireworks are defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16
C.F.R. Pts. 1500 and 1507, and are classified as class B explosives by the
U.S. Department of Transportation.



(KRS 227.706)



   (E)   Legality of items.



      (1)   Items described in division (B)(1) above are legal for
retail sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with
respect thereto are met.



      (2)   Items described in divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), and (D) are
not legal for retail sale but are legal under permits granted pursuant to
this chapter for the purposes specified in this chapter for public displays
and may be sold at wholesale as provided in this chapter.



      (3)   Items described in division (C) are legal for retail
sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect
thereto are met.



§ 93.02  SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.



   No person, firm, co-partnership or corporation shall offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell, possess, use, or
explode, any display fireworks, except as follows:



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized
city official may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks
by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or
groups of individuals. 



      (2)   Every display shall be handled by a competent display
operator to be approved by the public official by whom the permit is granted,
and shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the
opinion of the official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person. 



      (3)   COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR shall be defined as the
person with overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a
fireworks display.  The competent display operator shall have a Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) License and have
participated as an assistant in firing at least five public displays.  A
“competent display operator” is also an employee possessor.  A permit
under division (1) shall be issued only to a competent display operator
holding an ATF license.



      (4)   At least one competent display operator shall be on site
during display set-up and firing.  This complement display operator shall
maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by the local authority
having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site and at all times
the display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of the State Fire
Marshal or local Fire Chief.  All public displays that require issuance of a
permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of National Fire
Protection Association (NEPA) 1123 Code for Fireworks Display (adopted
edition).



      (5)   Permits shall be filed with the office of the State Fire
Marshal at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display. 
After this privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose
only.  No permit granted under this subsection shall be transferable.  For
the purpose of this section, “public display of fireworks” shall include
the use of pyrotechnic devices or pyrotechnic materials before a proximate
audience, whether indoors or outdoors.



      (6)   Any person remaining within the display area shall be
identified as licensed by the ATF, or an employee thereof, or be an assistant
in training to become a competent display operator.  All persons remaining
within the display area shall be at least 18 years of age.



      (7)   The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings
and Construction with recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall
promulgate administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 13A to
administer the provisions of this division. The regulations shall address the
process by which permits are issued and any other procedures that are
reasonably necessary to effectuate this division.



   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, and Explosives if the sale is to a person holding a display permit
as outlined in subsection (A) of this section.  The permit holder shall
present the permit along with other verifiable identification at the time of
sale.



   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license
issued by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.



   (D)   The sale, and use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic
signaling devices and distress signals for marine, aviation, and highway use.



   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads.



   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or
theater or for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports.



   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations.



   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the
direct supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent
or local agency.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm,
co-partnership, non-profit, or corporation from offering for sale, exposing
for sale, selling at retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using
consumer fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702 as permitted pursuant to KRS
227.715.



(KRS 227.710)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.



   No permit shall be issued under § 93.02 unless the applicant shall
give bond or evidence of liability insurance deemed adequate by the official
to whom application for the permit is made, in a sum not less than one
million dollars ( $1,000,000).  However, the appropriate city official or
the State Fire Marshal may require a larger amount if in their judgment the
situation requires it, conditioned for the payment of all damages which may
be caused thereby either to a person or to property by reason of the
permitted display, and arising from any acts of the licensee, his agents,
employees or subcontractors.



(KRS 227.720)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of
explosives or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or
industry, or gold star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or
chlorate, toy snakes which contain no mercury, smoke novelties and party
novelties, which contain less than twenty-five hundredths (25/100) of a grain
of explosive mixture, or shells or cartridges, used as ammunition in
firearms, or blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal or
ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military
organizations, or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to
be shipped by the seller directly out of the state.



(KRS 227.730)



§ 93.05  DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having
jurisdiction which has been deputized to act on behalf of the state fire
marshal, shall cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks which are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a
period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid
to a properly certified fireworks wholesaler.



   (B)   After a period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered
for sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer, distributor, or
wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class 1.3G or "Display"
designation shall require the notification of the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The state fire marshal shall
provide the owner or possessor a receipt containing the complete inventory of
any fireworks seized within five business days of the seizure.



   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:



      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the
state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall give notice by registered
mail or personal service to the owner of the state fire marshal's intention
to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the state
fire marshal's intent. The state fire marshal shall conduct an administrative
hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the disposal of
fireworks; or



      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is
not known to the state fire marshal, the state fire marshal shall cause to be
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
seizure was made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal's
intention to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once
each week for three consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of the
fireworks within ten days of the date of the last publication, the state fire
marshal may proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim
the fireworks within ten (10) days of the date of the last publication, a
hearing as set out in division (A) shall be held.



   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local
government from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks
within its jurisdiction.



(KRS 227.750)



§ 93.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESSES ENGAGING IN THE PERMANENT AND
TEMPORARY SALE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the term FIREWORKS is as
defined in KRS 227.702.



   (B)   Each individual or entity desiring to sell fireworks within
the city on a temporary basis, shall obtain a Temporary Business License from
the Hillview Government Center. Said individual or entity shall complete an
application and shall state thereon the dates of operation of the temporary
business. Temporary businesses selling fireworks may operate for up to
fourteen (14) days. Any structure erected for the sale or storage of
fireworks on a temporary basis must be removed within three (3) days of the
closure of the temporary business. A permanent business desiring to sell
fireworks shall apply for a regular business license.



   (C)   The fee for said temporary license shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000).



   (D)   No license shall be issued by the city until all necessary
inspections are complete and proof of compliance has been provided to the
city.



   (E)   No license shall be issued until proof of liability insurance
of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000) has been obtained and provided
to the city by all temporary businesses selling fireworks.



   (F)   Each permanent and temporary business selling fireworks shall
provide visibly marked parking, including handicapped accessible parking if
otherwise required by law. Said required parking shall comply with the
Bullitt County Planning and Zoning Regulations.



   (G)   Each permanent and temporary business selling fireworks shall
submit a site plan to the city with dimensions stated thereon showing parking
and proximity to other structures.



   (H)   Each permanent and temporary business selling fireworks shall
abide by the regulations of the current edition of the National Fire
Protection Association 1124 (NFPA 1124) in relation to distance between
fireworks location and other structures.



   (I)   All permanent and temporary businesses selling fireworks shall
at all times have posted signs prohibiting smoking on site and prohibiting
the discharge of any explosive or fireworks on site. At least one sign shall
be posted on each side of the structure or lot wherein hazardous materials
are stored.



   (J)   Temporary businesses selling fireworks shall be exempt from
remitting occupational tax to the city.



   (K)   All persons working at a permanent or temporary business
selling fireworks shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age or older
except that minors may work in said business if said minor is the child of
the owner or manager of the business and works under his/her direct
supervision.



   (L)   No fireworks may be sold to anyone under the age of eighteen
(18).



   (M)   Any electrical work done on the premises of a permanent or
temporary business selling fireworks shall be done to current code and must
comply with all state, federal, and local laws.



   (N)   No person shall sleep in a tent or in the open on the site of
a temporary business selling fireworks.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-18-16)



FIRE PREVENTION



§ 93.20  BLASTING PERMIT.



   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the authorized city
official.  The authorized city official, before granting such permit may
require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other
persons against injury or damages which might result from the proposed
blasting.



Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.21  STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.



   (A)   All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and
stored in a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.



   (B)   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any
material of a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar
or any other portion of any building of any kind.  Proper fireproof
receptacles shall be provided for such hazardous materials.



   (C)   No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which
impedes or prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.



Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 93.02 or 93.03,
the regulations issued thereunder or any order issued thereunder, or who
knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions
of those sections, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000), or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30)
days, or both.



(KRS 227.990 (4))



   (B)   Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500).



(Ord. 95-14, passed 9-18-95)



CHAPTER 94:  LITTERING



Section



   94.01   Throwing litter from vehicle



   94.02   Tracking foreign matter on streets



   94.03   Hauling loose material



   94.04   Sweeping litter into gutters



   94.05   Litter on private property



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.



   No person while a drive or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon
private property.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.



   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit upon any street, alley, or
other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter
of any kind.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.



   Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel,
cement, fill dirt, or loose material of any kind in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be
hauled in vehicles provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded
as to prevent any of the contents from falling or being thrown, blown, or
deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place.  Any
materials which fall from, or which are thrown, blown, or deposited from any
vehicle upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, shall be
removed immediately by the person in charge of the vehicle.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.



   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other
public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.  Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied
private property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
streets, sidewalks, or other public places, or upon any private property.



   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant
private property within the city whether owned by that person or not.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500).  Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 95:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Unlawful housing practices



   95.03   Exemptions



   95.04   Unlawful financial practices



   95.05   Blockbusting



   95.06   Agency is no defense to violation



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATION.   Any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion,
distinction, restrictions, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a
person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin,
disability, sex or age between forty (40) and sixty-five (65), or the aiding,
abetting, inciting, coercing or compelling thereof.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.   Bank, banking organization, mortgage company,
insurance company, or other lender to whom application is made for financial
assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or improvement of real property, or an
individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS.   Includes improved and unimproved property
and means a building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or
occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the
home or residence of one or more individuals.



   PERSON.   One or more individuals, labor unions, joint apprenticeship,
committees, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, jointstock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or other legal or commercial
entity; the state, any of its political or civil subdivisions or agencies.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER OR REAL ESTATE SALESMAN.   An individual, whether
licensed or not, who, on behalf of others, for a fee, commission, salary, or
other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of
receiving or collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents
or leases real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others such an activity; or
who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities; or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others a loan secured by
mortgage or other encumbrance upon a transfer of real estate or who is
engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for
collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to
promote the sale, purchase, exchange, rental, or lease of real estate through
its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an
individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.



   REAL ESTATE OPERATOR.   Any individual or combination of individuals,
labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, partnerships, associations,
corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock companies,
trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or
other legal or commercial entity, the county or any of its agencies, that is
engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting or
leasing real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or that
derives income, in whole or in part, from the sale, purchase, exchange,
rental or lease of real estate; or an individual employed by or acting on
behalf of any of these.



   REAL PROPERTY.   Buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments, corporeal and
incorporeal, or any interest in the above.



(Ord. 79-5, passed  -  -  )



§ 95.02  UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES.



   It is an unlawful practice for a real estate operator, or for a real
estate broker, real estate salesman, or an individual employed by or acting
on behalf of any of those:



   (A)   To refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny
to or withhold real property from an individual because of race, color,
religion, disability, or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against an individual because of his race,
sex, color, religion, disability or national origin in the terms, conditions,
or privileges of the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property or in
the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith:



   (C)   To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to
purchase, rent or lease real property from an individual because of his race,
color, religion, national origin, disability or sex:



   (D)   To refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of real
property to an individual because of his race, color, sex, religion,
disability or national origin:



   (F)   To print, circulate, post or mail or cause to be printed,
circulated, posted or mailed an advertisement or sign or to use a form of
application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property, or to make a
record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or
lease of real property, which indicates, directly or indirectly, a
limitation, specification, or discrimination as to race, color, religion,
disability or national origin or an intent to make such a limitation,
specification, or discrimination;



   (G)   To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real
property for sale, rental or lease with the understanding that an individual
may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real
property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith because of his race, color, religion, disability or national
origin; or



   (H)   To otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an
individual because of his race, color, religion, disability or national
origin or sex.



(Ord. 79-5 passed  -  -  )  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   Nothing in § 95.02 above shall apply:



   (A)   To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living
independently of each other, if the owner or a member of his family resides
in one of the housing accommodations;



   (B)   To the rental of a portion of a housing accommodation by the
occupant of the housing accommodation, or by the owner of the housing
accommodations if he or a member of his family resides therein;



   (C)   To a religious institution, or to an organization operated for
charitable or educational purposes, which is operated, supervised or
controlled by a religious corporation, association or society, to the extent
that the religious corporation, association, or society, limits, or gives
preferences in, the sale, lease, rental, assignment, or sublease of real
property to individuals of the same religion or makes a selection of buyers,
tenants, lessees, assignees or sublessees, that is calculated by such
religious corporation, association, or society to promote the religious
principles for which it is established or maintained.



   (D)   To the private sale by a private individual homeowner who
disposes of his property without the aid of any real estate operator, broker
or salesman and without advertising or public display.



   (E)   To a real estate operator to require him to negotiate with any
individual who has not shown evidence of financial ability to consummate the
purchase or rental of a housing accommodation.



(Ord. 79-5, passed  -  -  )



§ 95.04  UNLAWFUL FINANCIAL PRACTICES.



   It is unlawful practice for a financial institution or an individual
employed by or acting on behalf of a financial institution:



   (A)   To discriminate against an individual because of the race,
sex, color, religion, disability, or national origin of the individual or the
present or prospective owner, tenant or occupant of the real property of a
member, stockholder, director, officer, employee, or representative of any of
these, in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing the
rates, terms, conditions, privileges or other provisions of financial
assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith; or



   (B)   To use a form of application for financial assistance or to
make or keep a record of inquiry in connection with applications for
financial assistance which indicate directly or indirectly a limitation,
specification, or discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, disability
or national origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification, or
discrimination.



(Ord. 79-5, passed  -  -  )  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.05  BLOCKBUSTING.



   It is unlawful practice for a real estate operator, a real estate
broker, a real estate salesman, a financial institution, an employee of any
of these, or any other person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate
transaction from which he may benefit financially:



   (A)   To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur
in the composition with respect to race, color, religion, disability, or
national origin of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or
area in which the real property is located; or



   (B)   To represent that this change will or may result in the
lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior,
or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area in
which the  real property is located.



(Ord. 79-5, passed  -  -  )  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.06  AGENCY IS NO DEFENSE TO VIOLATION.



   It shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter by a real estate
operator, real estate broker, real estate salesman, financial institution or
other person subject to the provisions of this chapter that the violation was
requested, sought or otherwise procured by a person not subject to the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 79-5, passed  -  -  )



CHAPTER 96:  PARADES



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Permit required; exceptions



   96.03   Application for permit



   96.04   Conditions for issuance of permit



   96.05   Action by City Council



   96.06   Denial; alternate permit



   96.07   Content of permit



   96.08   Compliance required



   96.09   Conduct during parade



   96.10   Revocation of permit



   96.11   Appeal and review



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE.   Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street,
sidewalk, park or other public place in the city.



   PARADE PERMIT.   A permit required by this chapter.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



§ 96.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid,
form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained
from the City Council.



   (B)   Exceptions.  This chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the City Council on forms provided by such Council.



   (B)   Filing period.  An application for a parade permit shall be
filed with the City Council not less than one day or not more than sixty (60)
days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade, the
application to be taken up at the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting.



   (C)   The application for parade permit shall set forth the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the persons
seeking to conduct such parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals, if
any, and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals, if
any, and the description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for such
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
such parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the City Council a communication in writing from such person
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.



      (13)   Any additional information which the City Council shall
find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should issue.



   (D)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee of three  dollars and fifty cents ($3.50).



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



§ 96.04  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The City Council shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, they find:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of
so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;



   (D)   The concentration of person, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of fire-fighting equipment enroute to fire;



   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays
enroute:



   (G)   The parade will not be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designated to be held
purely for private profit.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



§ 96.05  ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall act upon the application for a parade permit at
the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting after the filing thereof. 
If the City Council disapproves the application, they shall mail to the
applicant within three (3) days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted,
the date upon which the application was rejected, a notice of their action,
stating the reason for their denial of the permit.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



§ 96.06  DENIAL; ALTERNATE PERMIT.



   The City Council, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall
be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or
over a route different than that named by the applicant.  An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three (3) days after
notice of the action of the City Council, file a written notice of his
acceptance with the City Council.  An alternate parade permit shall conform
to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under
this chapter.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



§ 96.07  CONTENT OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;



   (G)   Such other information as the City Council shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-16-76)



§ 96.08  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.



   (B)   The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such
activity, shall carry the parade permit on his person during the conduct of
the parade.



(Ord. 76-3. Passed 7-19-76)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.09  CONDUCT DURING PARADE.



   (A)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   No driver of a vehicle except a police car or other emergency
vehicle as defined by state statutes shall drive through the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or
other public thoroughfare of part thereof constituting a part of the route of
a parade.  The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof.  No person shall be liable for parking on a street or
other public thoroughfare unposted in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.10  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The City Council shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set
forth.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



§ 96.11  APPEAL AND REVIEW.



   In case any application has been denied a permit, of if his permit has
been revoked or suspended, the applicant or permittee as the case may be,
shall within three (3) business days have the right to appeal to the
legislative body for the denial, revocation, or suspension.  Notice of
appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk/Treasurer who shall fix
the time and place for a hearing which shall be held not later than one week
thereafter.  The City Clerk/Treasurer shall notify the Mayor and all members
of the legislative body of the time and place of the hearing not less than
twenty-four hours (24) in advance thereof.  A majority of the legislative
body members shall constitute a quorum to hear the appeal.  The appellant
may appear and be heard in person by counsel.  If, after hearing, a majority
of the members of the legislative body present at the meeting declare in
favor of the applicant, the permit shall be issued or fully reinstated as the
case may be; otherwise the order appealed from shall become final.



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined an amount
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100).



(Ord. 76-3, passed 7-19-76)



CHAPTER 97:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   97.01   Fences required



   97.02   Draining pools



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  FENCES REQUIRED.



   Every person, owning or controlling land on which there is situated a
swimming pool which constitutes an obvious hazard or contains twenty-four
(24) inches or more of water in depth at any point and has a surface area of
more than ten (10) square feet, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate
enclosure surrounding the pool area, sufficient to make the body of water
inaccessible to small children and animals.  The enclosure, including gates
therein, must be not less than five (5) feet above the underlying ground; all
gates must be self-latching with latches placed at least four (4) feet above
the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside.  The
enclosure may be a chain link fence, a solid wood fence or other protective
fencing constructed in such a manner that a small child or animal cannot gain
access through same, without gaining access through a gate.



(Ord. 94-02, passed 5-16-94)



§ 97.02  DRAINING POOLS.



   Any time the fluid which is retained in a swimming pool is drained it
must be drained into the drainage easements which are located at the rear of
each property.  Drainage of this fluid shall not be permitted into any
roadside ditch or roadside drainage easement.



(Ord. 94-02, passed 5-16-94)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



      Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter upon
conviction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.



(Ord. 94-02, passed 5-16-94)



CHAPTER 98:  CITY DUMPSTER



Section



   98.01   Purpose



   98.02   Rules



   98.03   Removal of objects



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  PURPOSE.



   All persons, who have residences within the corporate limits of the
city, shall be privileged to use the facilities of the city dumpster for the
depositing of wooden or paper boxes, crates, old metals or alloys, stone,
ashes, brick, and the like, originating in the city.  No person, firm or
corporation, other than those above designated shall use the city dumpster
for any purpose whatsoever and no refuse except refuse originating in the
city shall be placed in the city dumpster, and it shall be unlawful to
deposit any garbage, vegetable matter subject to decay, bodies of animals,
grease fats, oil explosive, poisonous, dangerous or corrosive chemicals, salt
water, feces, material impregnated with urine, or any material of any nature
which emits foul or noxious odors in the city disposal. 



(Ord. 97-07, passed 6-16-97)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.02  RULES.



   All persons having the right to use the facilities of the city dumpster
as herein provided, shall abide by and conform with all the regulations
provided, and/or with all instructions or orders of the person authorized by
the City Council to supervise this service operation, and with all signs and
notices posted at the city dumpster, particularly with the signs which
designate when dumping is permitted, or prohibited.



(Ord. 97-07, passed 6-16-97)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.03  REMOVAL OF OBJECTS.



   No person, firm or corporation, or their agents, shall, except by
permission, remove any article or object which has been deposited or dumped
and left at the city dumpster.



(Ord. 97-07, passed 6-16-97)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30)
days.



(Ord. 97-07, passed, 6-16-97)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL LICENSING; OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX





         111.   SOLICITORS





         112.   PAWNBROKERS





         113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         114.   PRIVATE DETECTIVES, INVESTIGATORS AND SECURITY
GUARDS





         115.   YARD SALES





         116.   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT
TAX





         117.   TAXICABS





         118.   MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS





         119.   STREET VENDING BUSINESSES





         120.   LICENSE FEE ON INSURANCE COMPANIES




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING; OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX



Section



General Licensing



   110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain trades, businesses,
or professions



   110.02   Application for license



   110.03   Standards; issuance of license



   110.04   Date and duration of license



   110.05   License not transferable



   110.06   License certificate to be displayed



   110.07   Revocation or suspension



   110.08   Appeal and review



   110.09   Exemptions



   110.10   License fee schedule



Occupational License Tax



   110.20   Definitions



   110.21   License application required



   110.22   Occupational license tax payment required



   110.23   Apportionment



   110.24   Employers to withhold



   110.25   Returns required



   110.26   Extensions



   110.27   Refunds



   110.28   Payment of estimated tax quarterly



   110.29   Federal audit provisions



   110.30   Administrative provisions



   110.31   Information to remain confidential



   110.32   Use of occupational license tax



Prohibition Against Operating a Business in a Residential Zone



   110.50   Definitions



   110.51   Allowance for home occupation



 



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL LICENSING



§ 110.01  LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TRADES, BUSINESSES, OR
PROFESSIONS.



   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses, or professions
for which licenses are required by any provision of this code or any other
ordinance of the city without first applying for and obtaining a license from
the City Clerk/Treasurer or other duly authorized issuing authority.



§ 110.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise
specifically provided, shall be made to the City Clerk/Treasurer in writing
upon forms to be furnished by him and shall contain:



      (1)   The name of the applicant and of each officer, partner,
or business associate;



      (2)   His present occupation and place of business;



      (3)   His place of residence for five (5) years next preceding
the date of application;



      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or
enterprise;



      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;



      (6)   A description of the merchandise to be sold, if for a
vendor;



      (7)   Such other information concerning the applicant and his
business as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the
license desired.



   (B)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in
good standing upon the original application, unless otherwise provided.



   (C)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall
deposit the fee required for the license requested.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful knowingly to make any false statement or
representation in the license application.



   (E)   Each person required by this subchapter to obtain a license
shall obtain same on or before the license tax as provided for herein becomes
due from the City Clerk/Treasurer and shall disclose at the time of
application for such license or licenses all occupations or businesses in
which he is or will be engaged in during the license year.



(Ord. 80-8, passed 5-19-80)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  STANDARDS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such application for a license, accompanied by
the proper fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required,
the City Clerk/Treasurer shall forthwith deposit the fee in the General Fund
of the city and issue to the applicant a proper license certificate signed by
the Clerk Treasurer and any other appropriate city official. If for any
reason the license is not issued, the license fee shall be returned to the
applicant.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the
applicant's business reputation and moral character shall be made.



   (C)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business
would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or
general welfare. In particular, tangible evidence that the applicant:



      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;



      (2)   Has made willful misstatement in the application;



      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining
to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;



      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts;



      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts; or



      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character will constitute
valid reasons for disapproval of an application.



§ 110.04  DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The license tax herein levied shall be due on the first day of
July in each year, unless otherwise stated, except that persons commencing or
desiring to operate for only part of a license year, a trade, business,
occupation or profession after July 1 of the license year shall pay a
prorated tax, except as otherwise specifically provided herein, equal to as
many twelfths of the annual license tax as there are calendar months
remaining in the license year including the month in which the license is
granted and with the exception that no license shall be issued for a period
of less than six (6) months. The license tax herein levied shall be deemed
delinquent if not paid thirty (30) days after same becomes due, and a penalty
of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto.



(Ord. 80-8, passed 5-19-80)



   (B)   In no event shall a license be granted to any business or any
person for a longer time than one year.



(KRS 92.310)



§ 110.05  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the
enterprise or business, and unless otherwise provided no license shall be
assigned or transferred.



Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.



   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep
posted in a prominent place upon the licensed premises, the license
certificate. Other licensees shall carry their license certificates at all
times and whenever requested by any officer or citizen, shall exhibit the
license.



Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.07  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Any license may be revoked by the legislative body at any time
for conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the time of
issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any
misrepresentation of a material fact in the application discovered after
issuance of the license; for violation of any provision of this subchapter or
other law or ordinance relating to the operation of the business or
enterprise for which the license has been issued; or upon conviction of a
licensee for any federal, state, or municipal law or ordinance involving
moral turpitude.



   (B)   The revocation shall become effective upon notice served upon
the licensee or posted upon the premises affected.



   (C)   As a preliminary to revocation, the legislative body may issue
an order suspending the license, which shall become effective immediately
upon service of written notice to the licensee. This notice shall specify the
reason for suspension, and may provide conditions under which reinstatement
of the license may be obtained. Upon compliance with these conditions within
the time specified, the license may be restored.



§ 110.08  APPEAL AND REVIEW.



   In case any applicant has been denied a license, or if his license has
been revoked or suspended, the applicant or licensee as the case may be,
shall within three (3) business days have the right to appeal to the
legislative body from the denial, revocation, or suspension. Notice of appeal
shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk/Treasurer who shall fix the
time and place for a hearing which shall be held not later than one week
thereafter. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall notify the Mayor and all members
of the legislative body of the time and place of the hearing not less than
twenty-four (24) hours in advance thereof. A majority of the legislative body
members shall constitute a quorum to hear the appeal. The appellant may
appear and be heard in person or by counsel. If, after hearing, a majority of
the members of the legislative body present at the meeting declare in favor
of the applicant, the license shall be issued or fully reinstated as the case
may be; otherwise the order appealed from shall become final.



§ 110.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any business,
occupation or profession which is exempt from municipal licensing and license
taxes pursuant to state or federal law.



§ 110.10  LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE.



   The following fees or tax shall be paid by a person conducting or
engaged in the following business, occupation, or profession.



   (A)   (1)   Alcoholic beverages, sale of:



         (a)   Liquor dealers holding a state retail package
liquor license   $600



         (b)   Alcoholic beverage dealer who holds a state
distributor's or wholesaler's or brewer's license making sales or deliveries
in the city   $200



         (c)   Malt beverage dealer holding a state retail
license   $200



      (2)   (The City Clerk/Treasurer shall not issue any malt
beverage or liquor licenses under division (A)(1) until the applicant
presents to the City Clerk/Treasurer proof of the issuance to the applicant
of a similar license by the State for the same period)



      (3)   There is hereby established by the City Council the
following alcoholic beverage license and annual fees as permitted by KRS
243.070:



         (a)   Distilled spirit licenses as set forth in KRS
243.030:



            1.   Distiller’s license, per annum   $500



            2.   Rectifier’s license, per annum   $500



            3.   Blender’s license, per annum      $500



            4.   Wholesaler’s distilled spirits and wine
license, per annum     $2,000



         (b)   Distilled spirits and wine motel drink license,
airport drink license, per annum   $600



         (c)   Distilled spirits and wine special temporary
liquor license, per event    $100



         (d)   Special temporary wine license, per event   $25



         (e)   Distilled spirits and wine special temporary
auction license, per event     $200



         (f)   Special private club license, per annum   $300



         (g)   Extended hours supplemental license, per
annum   $2,000



         (h)   Nonresident special agent or solicitor’s
license, per annum   $40



         (i)   Caterer’s license, per annum   $800



         (j)   Convention center or convention hotel complex
license, per annum     $2,000



         (k)   Bottling house distilled spirits license or wine
storage license, per annum    $1,000



         (l)   Automobile race track license, per
annum   $2,000



         (m)   Souvenir retail liquor license, per
annum   $1,000



         (n)   Limited restaurant license or limited golf course
license, per annum (includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages),
new applicants   $800



      (4)   Licenses in division (A)(3) shall be subject to any
additional requirements imposed by the Alcoholic Beverage Administrator of
the city, the Commonwealth of Kentucky, or the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission.



   (B)   Amusement:



      (1)   Billiard or pool rooms   $60



      (2)   Bowling alleys    $60



      (3)   Circus or menagerie conducting a show within the city
limits or within one-half mile thereof;



         (a)   Per day   $35



         (b)   Per week   $200



      (4)   Dance halls for general public where admission is
charged   $60



      (5)   Fortune tellers, soothsayers, and practitioners of
palmistry; not prorated     $250



      (6)   Skating rinks   $60



      (7)   Theatres or motion picture houses   $60



      (8)   Music hall for general public where admission is
charged   $60



   (C)   Merchandising, retail and wholesale sales and services:



   Persons engaged in merchandising, sales (both retail and wholesale) and
services except where otherwise specifically stated in this subchapter shall
pay a license fee in accordance with the number of square feet of the
premises occupied by such business and the following table shall govern the
license fee.



         (a)   Up to 500 square feet   $35



         (b)   501-1000 square feet   $45



         (c)   1001-1500 square feet   $50



         (d)   1501-2000 square feet   $55



         (e)   Over two-thousand (2000) square feet: fifty-five
dollars ($55) plus two dollars ($2) for each additional one thousand (1000)
square feet or portion thereof, up to an amount of sixty dollars ($60) per
year which shall be a maximum fee unless otherwise specifically provided
herein.



   (D)   Hucksters, peddlers and solicitors:



      (1)   Agents, representatives, solicitors, or dealers not
otherwise specifically provided for herein taking orders, soliciting business
or making sales at retail:



         (a)   Per day   $5



         (b)   Per year   $35



      (2)   Coffee or peanut roasters, ice cream wagons, or trucks,
or popcorn machines; per year; not prorated      $35



      (3)   Soft drink wholesalers, or persons delivering soft
drinks at wholesale or retail from trucks or other vehicles   $25



      (4)   Trucks operated within the city from which sales or
deliveries are made at wholesale or retail and for which no other license is
provided herein; Per truck   $25



   For the purposes of this division, any person, firm or corporation
making deliveries or unloading any item or items within the city on fifteen
(15) or more occasions within a calendar year shall be considered to be
operating within the city on a regular basis and shall be subject to the
requirements of this section.



      (5)   Weatherstripping or insulation or siding concerns
soliciting orders and installing their products within the city; not
prorated   $25



   (E)   Professions and occupations:



      (1)   Accountants, architects, lawyers or attorneys,
chiropractors, engravers, dentists, oculists, optometrist, osteopaths,
chiropodists, physicians, surgeons, veterinarians, and
surveyors:                  $40



   If more than one professional person is involved in a firm, the fee of
forty dollars ($40) shall be paid for each licensed professional.



      (2)   (a)   Plumbers, heaters, tinners, carpenters,
roofers, painters, wallpaper hangers, electricians, brick layers, or cement
workers, whether engaged in one or more of the above occupations, if engaged
in connection therewith in selling or supplying the equipment or supplies
used in such work but having no place of business or business house in the
city.  One job only   $10



         (b)   Persons engaged in one or more of the above
occupations and selling or supplying in connection therewith in the equipment
or supplies used in such work and operating a place of business or business
house separate and apart from his residence   $35



      (3)   Real estate agents or agencies engaged in buying,
selling, renting, or leasing real estate, or collecting rental from real
estate on commissions or for compensation   $35



      (4)   Insurance agencies or solicitors   $35



      (5)   Insurance adjusters   $35



      (6)   Insurance companies.



         (a)   The license fee imposed upon each insurance
company  for the privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within
the municipal boundaries of the city, for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
2012, and thereafter on a calendar year basis.



         (b)   The license fee imposed upon each insurance
company which issued any insurance policy which is not a life or health
insurance policy shall be 5% of the premium actually collected within each
calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies on the risk
located within the municipal boundaries of the city, on those classes of
business which such company is authorized tor transact, less all premiums
returned to policy holders, however, and license fee imposed upon premium
receipts shall not include premiums received for insuring employers against
liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death caused thereby,
under the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act and shall not include
premiums from policies of health insurance.



         (c)   All license fees imposed by this division shall be
due and payable to the city and shall be paid at the address indicated in the
insurance premiums license fee returned no later than 30 days after the end
of the calendar quarter.  License fees which are not paid to the city in the
manner prescribed on or before the due date shall bear interest at the rate
defined in KRS 131.010(6) and KRS 131.183.



         (d)   Every insurance company subject to the license fee
imposed by this division shall annually, by March 31, furnish to the city at
the address indicated in the insurance premiums license fee return a written
breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the following
categories of insurance:



            1.   Casualty;



            2.   Automobile;



            3.   Inland marine;



            4.   Fire and allied perils.



         (e)   All sums collected pursuant to the terms of this
division shall be deposited to the General Fund Account of the city to be
used for the purpose of paying salaries of officers and employees, for repair
and maintenance of streets, public ways, and public buildings in the city; to
pay for lighting city streets, and to pay all proper charges and legal
demands against the city.



   (F)   Miscellaneous:



      (1)   Coin-operated amusement machines.



         (a)   Definition.  COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINE. Any
lawful coin- or token operated machine or device which contains no element of
chance and which as a result of depositing a coin, token, or other object
automatically by or through some mechanical operation affords music or
amusement of some character with or without vending any merchandise, but in
addition to any such merchandise. Such coin-operated amusement machine shall
not include any bona fide merchandise vending machine in which there is
incorporated no amusement features.



(KRS 137.010)



         (b)   Pursuant to KRS 137.410 there is hereby
established a license fee of ten dollars ($10) per annum upon each
coin-operated amusement machine, and also any electrically operated machine
operated as a game or for pleasure and entertainment by the general public.



         (c)   There shall be a tax of ten dollars ($10) on each
coin-operated pinball machine operating within the city.



      (2)   Persons distributing or servicing vending machines other
than those specifically provided for in this section. Coin operated laundries
and coin operated vending machines dispensing laundry products are not
construed to fall within the provisions of this division.   $25



      (3)   Manufacturers conducting a plant or factory within the
city   $60



      (4)   Selling goods, merchandise, or produce in an open air
market, tent, temporary stand or from a vehicle except farmers selling their
own produce or as otherwise provided in this chapter;



         (a)   Per day   $6.50



         (b)   Per year    $60



Not prorated



      (5)   Any person licensed to sell merchandise of any character
or nature shall have the privilege of installing and servicing the same.



      (6)   Any trade, profession, or occupation not provided for
herein shall pay an annual license fee of         $35.



Not prorated.



   (G)   Any person required by this chapter to obtain more than one
license for any one business location or building, the fee for no one of said
licenses exceeding sixty dollars ($60) but the total of such fees exceeding
sixty dollars ($60) shall be permitted to obtain all of said licenses for a
fee of sixty dollars ($60); provided however that malt or alcoholic beverage
licenses and coin operated machine licenses shall not be included within the
meaning of this division, but shall in all instances be required in addition
to any other license and fee provided for same to be paid.



(Ord. 80-8, passed 5-19-80; Am. Ord. 2005-01, passed 2-21-05; Am. Ord.
2005-04, passed 4-18-05; Am Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-19-13)



Cross-reference:



   For restaurant wine license fees, see § 113.03



   For retail drink license fees, see § 113.12



OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX



§ 110.20  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, the following terms and their derivatives
shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a
different meaning is intended:



   BUSINESS.  Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit.  BUSINESS shall not
include the usual activities of board trade, chambers of commerce, trade
associations, or unions, or other associations performing services usually
performed by trade associations or unions.  BUSINESS shall not include
funds, foundations, corporations, or associations organized and operated for
the exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable, scientific,
literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where no part of the
earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group, or association, inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or other person.



   BUSINESS ENTITY.  Each separate corporation, limited liability
company, business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
sole proprietorship, association, joint stock company, receivership, trust,
professional service organization, or other legal entity through which
business is conducted.



   CITY.  The City of Hillview, Bullitt County, Kentucky.



   COMPENSATION.  Wages, salaries, commissions, or any other form of
remuneration paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an
employee, which are required to be reported for federal income tax purposes
and adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
retirement, profit sharing, or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred
for federal income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar
arrangement, including but not limited to salary reduction arrangements under
Internal Revenue Code section 401(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408,
414(h), or 457; and



      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
welfare benefit, fringe benefit, or other benefit plan made by salary
reduction or other payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce
federal taxable compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including but
not limited to Internal Revenue Code sections 125 and 132.



   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT.  The date that the adjustments made
by the Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business
entity's federal income tax return become final and unappealable.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person who renders services to another person or
business entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and
any officer, employee, or elected official of the United States, a state, or
any political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any
one (1) of more of the above. A person classified as an independent
contractor under the Internal Revenue Code shall not be considered an
employee.



   EMPLOYER.  Employer as defined in Internal Revenue Code section
3401(d):



      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or
performed the services does not have control of the payment of the wages for
such services, the term EMPLOYER means the person having control of the
payment of such wages; and



      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a
nonresident alien individual, foreign partnership, or foreign corporation,
not engaged in trade of business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER
means such person.



   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT.  The revenue agent's report
or other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by
the Internal Revenue Service.



   FISCAL YEAR.  Fiscal year as defined in Internal Revenue Code section
7701(a)(24).



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.  The Internal Revenue Code in effect on
December 31, 2004, exclusive of any amendments made subsequent to that date,
other than amendments that extend provisions in effect on December 31, 2005,
that would otherwise terminate.



   NET PROFIT.  Gross income as defined in Internal Revenue Code section
61 minus all the deductions from gross income allowed by Internal Revenue
Code Chapter 1, and adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax
or local tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or
net income and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States,
local taxing authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico, any territory or possession of the Untied States, or any
foreign country or political subdivision thereof;



      (2)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly
or indirectly is allocable to income which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;



      (3)   Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss
carryback or carryforward allowed under Internal Revenue Code section 172;



      (4)   Include any amount of income and expenses passed through
separately as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business
entity that is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and



      (5)   Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state
taxation by the Kentucky Constitution, or the Constitution and statutory laws
of the United States.



   PERSON.  Every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of
the city. Whenever the word "person" is used in a clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as
applied to a partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall
mean the officers and directors thereof.



   RETURN or REPORT.  Any properly completed and, if required, signed
form, statement, certification, declaration, or any other document permitted
or required to be submitted or filed with the city.



   SALES REVENUE.  Receipts from the sale, lease, or rental of goods,
services, or property.



   TAX DISTRICT.  Any city of the first to fifth class, county, urban
county, charter county, consolidated local government, school district,
special taxing district, or any other statutorily created entity with the
authority to levy net profits, gross receipts, or occupational license taxes.



   TAXABLE NET PROFIT.  In case of a business entity having payroll or
sales revenue only within the city means net profit as defined in this
section.



   TAXABLE NET PROFIT.  In case of a business entity having payroll or
sales revenue both within and without the city means net profit as defined in
this section, and as apportioned under §110.23.



   TAXABLE YEAR.  The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the
calendar year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)



§ 110.21  LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   Every person and business entity engaged in any business in the city
shall be required to apply for and obtain an occupational license from the
city before the commencement of business or in the event of a change of
business status.  Licensees are required to notify the city of any changes
in address, the cessation of business, or any other changes which render the
information supplied to the city in the license application inaccurate.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.22  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, every
person or business entity engaged in any business for profit and any person
or business entity that is required to make a filing with the Internal
Revenue Service or the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and
pay to the city an occupational license tax for the privilege of engaging in
such activities within the city. The occupational license tax shall be
measured by one and eight-tenths percent (1.8%) of:



      (1)   All wages and compensation paid or payable in the city
for work done or services performed or rendered in the city by every resident
and nonresident who is an employee;



      (2)   The net profits from business conducted in the city by a
resident or nonresident business entity that has no employees subject to
division (A) above.



   (B)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not
apply to the following persons or business entities:



      (1)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust
company, or trust, banking and title insurance company organized and doing
business in this state, any savings and loan association whether state or
federally chartered;



      (2)   Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky
National Guard for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual
filed training;



      (3)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for
election training or work at election booths in state, county, and local
primary, regular, or special elections;



      (4)   Public service corporations that pay an ad valorem tax
on property valued and assessed by the Kentucky Department of Revenue
pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are
predominantly non-public service who are also engaged in public service
activity are required to pay a license fee on their net profits derived from
the non-public service activities apportioned to the city;



      (5)   Persons or business entities that have been issued a
license under KRS Ch. 243 to engage in manufacturing or trafficking in
alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may
exclude the portion of their gross receipts derived from the manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages; or



      (6)   Life insurance companies incorporated under the laws of
and doing business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 5-2-16)  Penalty,
see § 110.99



§ 110.23  APPORTIONMENT.



   (A)   Except as provide in division (D) of this section, gross
receipts shall be apportioned as follows:



      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales
revenue in more than one (1) tax district, by multiplying the gross receipts
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in
division (B) of this section, plus the sales factor, described in division
(C) of this section, and the denominator of which is two (2); and



      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than
one (1) tax district, by multiplying the gross receipts by the sales factor
as set forth in division (C) of this section.



   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is
the total amount paid or payable in the city during the tax period by the
business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total
compensation paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax
period. Compensation is paid or payable in the city based on the time the
individual's service is performed within the city.



   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
total sales revenue of the business entity in the city during the tax period,
and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business
entity everywhere during the tax period.



      (1)   The sales, lease, or rental of tangible personal
property is in the city if:



         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a
purchaser, other than the United States government, or to the designee of the
purchaser within the city regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions
of the sale; or



         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store,
warehouse, factory, or other place of storage in the city and the purchaser
is the United States government.



      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenues from the sale, lease
or rental of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real
property, are apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of
which is the time spent in performing such income-producing activity within
the city and the denominator of which is the total time spent performing that
income-producing activity.



      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease, or rental of real
property is allocated to the tax district where the property is located.



   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity's activity in the city, the
business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect to
all or any part of the business entity's business activity, if reasonable:



      (1)   Separate accounting;



      (2)   The exclusion of any one (1) or more of the factors;



      (3)   The inclusion of one (1) or more additional factors
which will fairly represent the business entity's business activity in the
city; or



      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an
equitable allocation and apportionment of gross receipts.



   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the city, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or
payable as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the
city. The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the city bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the city to
verify the accuracy of a taxpayer's reported percentages under this division,
the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.



   (F)   All partnerships, S corporations, and all other entities where
income is "passed through" to the owners are subject to this subchapter. 
The occupational license tax imposed in this subchapter is assessed against
income before it is "passed through" these entities to the owners.



   (G)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate, or
withdraws from the city during any taxable year, or if any business entity in
any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the
dissolution, cessation of business withdrawal, or loss or surrender of
charter shall not defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and
collection of any occupational license tax for the period of that taxable
year during which the business entity had business activity in the city.



   (H)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal
income tax return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for the
purposes of this subchapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year
required by the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of
accounting required for federal income tax purposes.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.24  EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.



   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee
shall deduct and withhold from the compensation an occupational license tax
calculated under § 110.22.



   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter
ending thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of
each quarter, make a return and report to the city, and pay to the city, the
tax required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is
permitted or required to report within a reasonable time after some other
period as determined by the city.



   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any
sums required by this subchapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally
and individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required
to be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any
employer who fails to withhold or pay over to the city sums required to be
withheld under this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the
amounts withheld to the city, the lien shall commence as of the date the
amounts withheld were required to be paid to the city. If the employer fails
to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the
employer is assessed by the city.



   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and
file on a form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the
occupational license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to
employees.  Either copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage
and tax statements, or a detailed employee listing with the required
equivalent information, as determined by the city, shall be submitted.



   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or
before January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and
occupational license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid
to the employee for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.



   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld under this section.



   (H)   The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any
other person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity
subject to this section shall be personally and individually liable, both
jointly and severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation
paid or payable to one (1) or more employees of the business entity, and
neither the corporate dissolution or withdrawal of the business entity from
the city, nor the cessation of holding any corporate office, shall discharge
that liability; provided that the personal and individual liability shall
apply to each and every person holding the corporate office at the time the
tax becomes or became obligated. No person shall be personally and
individually liable under this division unless such person had authority to
collect, truthfully account for, or pay over the tax imposed by this
subchapter at the time that the taxes imposed by this subchapter become or
became due.



   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (G) and (H) of this section, every
employee receiving compensation in the city subject to the tax imposed under
division (C) of this section shall be personally liable for any amount due.
In all cases where the employer does not withhold the tax levied under this
subchapter from the employee, such employee or employees shall be responsible
for filing with the city each quarter in the same manner as if they were the
employer.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.25  RETURNS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year
shall be made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a
fiscal year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be
supplied by the city.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal
income tax return and all supporting statements and schedules at the time of
filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in the
opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return
of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel the
business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any statements and
schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. The city
may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal
government.



   (C)   Every business entity subject to an occupational license tax
governed by the provisions of this subchapter shall keep records, render
under oath statements, make returns, and comply with rules as the city from
time to time may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city
may require a business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to
make a return, render statements under oath, or keep records, as the city
deems sufficient to determine the tax liability the business entity.



   (D)   The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the
taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of
the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.



   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business
entity, as appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the city at
the time prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return,
determined without regard to any extension of time for filing the return.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.26  EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The city may grant any business entity an extension of not
more than six (6) months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the
Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city and the business entity,
for filing its return, if the business entity, on or before the date
prescribed for payment of the occupational license tax, requests the
extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its tax.



   (B)   If the time of filing a return is extended, the business shall
pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to twelve percent (12%) per annum
simple interest on the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously
paid, from the time the tax was due until the return is actually filed and
the tax paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)



§ 110.27  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under § 110.24, a
refund or credit shall be made to the employer to the extent of overpayment
only if a written application for refund or credit is received by the city
from the employer within two (2) years from the date the overpayment was made.



   (B)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities
performed outside the city, based on the time spent outside the city, whose
employer has withheld and remitted to this city, the occupational license tax
on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city,
may file for a refund within two (2) years of the date prescribed by law for
the filing of a return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation
sufficient to verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the
employer the percentage of time spent outside the city and the amount of
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to
approval of the refund.



   (C)   In the case where the tax computed under the provisions of
this subchapter is less than the amount which has been declared and paid as
estimated tax for the same taxable year, a refund or credit, if a credit is
requested, shall be made upon the filing of a return.



   (D)   (1)   Overpayment resulting from the payment of estimated
tax in excess of the amount determined to be due upon the filing of a return
for the same taxable year may be credited against the amount of estimated tax
determined to be due on any declaration filed for the next succeeding taxable
year or for any deficiency or nonpayment of tax for any previous taxable year;



      (2)   No refund shall be made of any estimated tax paid unless
a complete return is filed as required by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)



§ 110.28  PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED TAX QUARTERLY.



   (A)   Every business entity, other than a sole proprietorship,
subject to taxation under this subchapter, shall make quarterly estimated tax
payments on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth, sixth, ninth, and
twelfth month of each taxable year if the tax liability for the taxable year
exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000).



   (B)   The quarterly estimated tax payment required under division
(A) of this section shall be



based on the lessor of:



      (1)   Twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the current
taxable year tax liability;



      (2)   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the preceding full year
taxable year tax liability; or



      (3)   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the average tax liability
for the three (3) preceding full year taxable years' tax liabilities if the
tax liability for any of the three (3) preceding full taxable years exceeded
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000).



   (C)   Any business entity that fails to submit the minimum quarterly
payment required under division (B) of this section by the due date for the
quarterly payment shall pay an amount equal to twelve percent (12%) per annum
simple interest on the amount of the quarterly payment required under
division (B) of this section from the earlier of:



      (1)   The due date for the quarterly payment until the time
when the aggregate quarterly payments submitted for the taxable year equal
the minimum aggregate payments due under division (B) of this section; or



      (2)   The due date of the annual return.



      (3)   A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any business
entity's first full or partial taxable year of doing business in the city or
any first taxable year in which a business entity's tax liability exceeds
five thousand dollars ($5,000).



   (E)   At the election of the business entity, any installment of the
estimated tax may be paid prior to the date prescribed for its payment.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.29  FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   (1)   As soon as practicable after each return is received,
the city may examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by
the city is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the
additional tax shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the
business entity by the city within five (5) years from the date the return
was filed, except as otherwise provided in this division.



         (a)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a
fraudulent return the additional tax may be assessed at any time.



         (b)   In the case of a return where a business entity
understates net profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net
profits, or both, which understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of next profit stated in the return,
the additional tax may be assessed at any time within six (6) years after the
return was filed.



         (c)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax
relating directly to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a
federal audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of
the times provided in this division, or six (6) months from the date the city
receives the final determination of the federal audit from the business
entity, whichever is later.



      (2)   The times provided in this division may be extended by
agreement between the business entity and the city. For the purposes of this
division, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the
return shall be considered as filed on the last day. Any extension granted
for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last day
prescribed by law for filing the return.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final
determination of the federal audit within thirty (30) days of the conclusion
of the federal audit.



   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) of this section.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.30  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay
the collection or payment of the tax levied by this subchapter.



   (B)   (1)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter may be refunded or credited within two (2) years of the date
prescribed by law for the filing of a return or the date the money was paid
to the city, whichever is the later, except that:



         (a)   In any case where the assessment period contained
in § 110.28 has been extended by an agreement between the business entity
and the city, the limitation contained in this division shall be extended
accordingly.



         (b)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly
to adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file
a claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this section or
six (6) months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.



      (2)   For the purpose of division (A) of this section, a
return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the return
shall be considered as filed on the last day.



   (C)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes
collected pursuant to this subchapter is vested exclusively in the city.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)



§ 110.31  INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   No present or former employee of any tax district shall
intentionally and without authorization inspect or divulge any information
acquired by him or her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding
the tax schedules, returns, or reports required to be filed with the tax
district or other proper officer, or any information produced by a hearing or
investigation, insofar as the information may have to do with the affairs of
the person's business. This prohibition does not extend to information
required in prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or
any other infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public
record, nor does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer's
properly authorized agent with information respecting his or her own
return.  Further, this prohibition does not preclude any employee of the
city from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence returns or
reports filed with the city, in an action for violation of the city tax laws
or in any action challenging the city tax laws.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of
Revenue of the Commonwealth of Kentucky or his or her duly authorized agent
all such information and rights to inspect any of the books and records of
the city if the Commissioner of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
grants to the city the reciprocal right to obtain information from the files
and records of the Kentucky Department of Revenue and maintains the
privileged character of the information so furnished. Provided, further, that
the city may publish statistics based on such information in such a manner as
not to reveal data respecting net profits or compensation of any person.



   (C)   In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar
reciprocal agreements as described in division (B) of this section with any
other taxing entity, should there be a need for exchange of information in
order to effect diligent enforcement of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.32  USE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX.



   All money derived from the license taxes under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be paid to the city and placed to the credit of the city's
general revenue fund.



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07)



PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATING A BUSINESS IN A RESIDENTIAL ZONE



§ 110.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An enclosed space for the storage of not more than
four (4)  motor vehicles owned or operated by the principal building, and
provided that no business, occupation, or service is conducted for profit
therein.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or land operated for gain which is used for
storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, painting, servicing, or equipping
motor vehicles.



   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use carried on in a dwelling unit or
other structure accessory to a dwelling unit, but in no case occupying more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the building or
buildings, by a member or members of the bona fide residents of the dwelling;
and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit
for residential purposes, so that the character thereof is not changed and it
shall not have any exterior evidence of such secondary use except that a sign
two (2) feet by two (2) feet may be placed on the premises. HOME OCCUPATION
shall not be interpreted to include any of the following (this list is not
exhaustive): barber shop, commercial stables and kennels, animal hospitals,
restaurants or eating places, musical instructions to groups, convalescent
homes, mortuary establishments, public garages or premises for the repair of
motor vehicles on profit basis. A private garage as defined in this section
is not prohibited.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONE. R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential zones as defined
by Bullitt County Joint Planning Commission Zoning Regulations.



(Ord. 2016-27, passed 11-7-16)



§ 110.51  ALLOWANCE FOR HOME OCCUPATION.



   It is hereby prohibited that a business (for exchange of monetary funds
or anything of value), other than a home occupation as defined in § 110.50,
shall be conducted within the city limits on real property with a Residential
zoning designation.



(Ord. 2016-27, passed 11-7-16)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 110.01
through 110.10 shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50) for each offense; each day during which a violation
occurs or exists constituting a separate offense. Any person violating any of
provisions of §§ 110.01 through 110.10 as an agent or employee of another
shall be subject to this penalty.



(Ord. 80-8, passed 5-19-80)



   (B)   (1)   A business entity subject to tax on gross receipts
may be subject to a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the tax due for
each calendar month or fraction thereof if the business entity:



         (a)   Fails to file any return or report on or before
the due date prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or



         (b)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or
report on or before the due date prescribed for payment.



         (c)   The total penalty levied pursuant to this
subdivision shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due;
however, the penalty shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25).



      (2)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax
on or before the time prescribed under § 110.24 may be subject to a penalty
in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the tax due for each calendar
month or fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to this subject
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due; however, the
penalty shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25).



      (3)   In addition to the penalties in division (B) of this
section, any business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an
amount equal to twelve percent (12%) per annum simple interest on the tax
shown due, but not previously paid, from the time the tax was due until the
tax is paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.



      (4)   Every tax imposed by §§ 110.20 through 110.32, and all
increases, interest, and penalties thereon, shall become, from the time the
tax is due and payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.



      (5)   The city may enforce the collection of the occupational
tax due under § 110.22 and any fees, penalties, and interest as provided in
division (B)(1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section by civil action in a court
of appropriate jurisdiction. To the extent authorized by law, the city shall
be entitled to recover all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred
by it in enforcing any provision of §§ 110.20 through 110.32.



      (6)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (B)
of this section, any business entity or employer who willfully fails to make
a return or willfully makes a false return, or who willfully fails to pay
taxes owing or collected, with the intent to evade payment of the tax or
amount collected, or any thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



      (7)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or
procures, counsels, or advises the preparation or presentation under, or in
connection with, any matter arising under §§ 110.20 through 110.32 of a
return, affidavit, claim, or other document, which is fraudulent or is false
as to any material matter, whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the
knowledge or consent of the person authorized or required to present the
return, affidavit, claim, or document, shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



      (8)   A return for the purpose of division (B) of this section
shall mean and include any return, declaration, or from prescribed by the
city and required to be filed with the city by the provisions of §§ 110.20
through 110.32, or by the rules of the city or by written request for
information to the business entity by the city.



      (9)   Any person violating the provisions of § 110.31 by
intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer information without
authorization shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or
imprisoned for not longer than six (6) months, or both.



      (10)   Any person violating the provisions of § 110.31 by
divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1000) or imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or
both.



   (C)   (1)   Violation of §§ 110.50 through 110.51 shall have a
civil penalty and shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Board as set out
in §§ 37.50 through 37.65.



      (2)   Penalty for violation of §§ 110.50 through 110.51
shall for a first offense be one hundred dollars ($100), for a second offense
one hundred and fifty dollars ($150), and for a third or subsequent offense
two hundred dollars ($200). Should a hearing before the Code Enforcement
Board be requested by the person receiving citation for violation and the
violation is upheld by the Code Enforcement Board, the penalty for a first
offense shall be one hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175), for a second
offense two hundred and twenty-five dollars ($225), and for a third or
subsequent offense two hundred and seventy-five dollars ($275).



(Ord. 2007-04, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 2016-27, passed 11-7-16)



CHAPTER 111:  SOLICITORS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Certificate of registration



   111.03   Application for certificate of registration



   111.04   Revocation of certificate



   111.05   Notice regulating solicitation



   111.06   Duty of solicitors



   111.07   Uninvited soliciting prohibited



   111.08   Time limit on soliciting



   111.09   Exceptions



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   REGISTERED SOLICITOR.  Any person who has obtained a valid certificate
of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.



   RESIDENCE.  Every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.



   SOLICITING.  Any one (1) or more of the following activities:



      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or
description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or



      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application
or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or



      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or



      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money,
clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any
charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



§ 111.02  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from
persons in residences within the City of Hillview shall be required to make
written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter
provided. Such certificate shall be carried on the person of the solicitor.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be made
upon a form provided by the City of Hillview. The applicant shall truthfully
state in full the information requested on the application, to wit:



      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and
length of residence at such address; also business address if other than
present address;



      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three (3)
years if other than present address;



      (3)   Age of applicant;



      (4)   Physical description of the applicant;



      (5)    Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or
association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length
of time of such employment or representation;



      (6)   Name and address of employer or organization represented
during the past three (3) years, if other than the present employer or
organization represented;



      (7)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject
matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;



      (8)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;



      (9)   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous
application for certificate under this chapter, if any;



      (10)   Whether a certificate of registration issued to the
applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked;



      (11)   If the applicant has been convicted of a felony under
the laws of Kentucky or any other state or federal law of the United States.



   (B)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application, or
in connection therewith, shall be under oath.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall cause to be kept in the City Clerk's
office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon
together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all
certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter, and
of the denial of any application. Applications for certificates shall be
numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any
renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the
application upon which it was issued.



   (D)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person
who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of Kentucky or any other
state or federal law of the United States, within five (5) years of the date
of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose certificate
of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein
provided.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



§ 111.04  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be
revoked by the Mayor if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a false
material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for
the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this
chapter. Immediately upon such revocation written notice thereof shall be
given by the City Clerk to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set
forth in the application.



   (B)   Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.



   (C)   A certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



§ 111.05  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITATION.



   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions.



   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving
invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any
residence, shall be given in the manner following:



      (1)   A weatherproof card, approximately three (3) inches by
four (4) inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance
door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant,
containing the applicable words, as follows:



         "Only Solicitors Registered in the City of Hillview
Invited."



      (2)   If this card is not displayed, no solicitation shall be
permitted at that residence.



      (3)   The letters shall be at least one-third (1/3)-inch in
height. For the purpose of uniformity the cards shall be provided by the
Hillview Police Department to persons requesting, at the cost thereof.



      (4)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient
notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence
of the information contained thereon.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



§ 111.06  DUTY OF SOLICITORS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any
premises in the City of Hillview upon which a residence as herein defined is
located, to first examine for the notice provided for in this chapter, if any
is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on any notice. If the
notice states "Only Solicitors Registered in City of Hillview Invited," then
the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein
provided shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises, and if no
notice is visible then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.07  UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near
any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein
defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance
with the provisions of § 111.06.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door of a residence located
thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other
manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence
for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage
in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. of any
week day, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



§ 111.09  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to officers or employees
of the city, county, state or federal government, members of the local fire
departments, official school fund raising groups, or any charitable
organization that produces its 501(c)(3) tax exempt charitable organization
certificate.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500) for each offense.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 12-21-09)



CHAPTER 112:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Bond



   112.03   Register to be kept; daily reports



   112.04   Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article



   112.05   Maximum interest, resale price



   112.06   Receipt to be given for payment of loan



   112.07   Prohibited activities



   112.08   Enforcement



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PAWNBROKER.   Any person who loans money on deposit of personal
property; deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling
the property back again at a stipulated price; makes a public display at his
place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their
business; or who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on
personal property or deposit.



(KRS 226.010)



§ 112.02  BOND.



   Every person to whom a city license is granted to carry on the business
of a pawnbroker shall annually enter into bond to the city, with good and
sufficient surety to be approved by City Council, in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1000).  This bond shall be conditioned that he will
observe the provisions of this chapter and all ordinances and laws in force
in the city not inconsistent with this chapter.



(KRS 226.020)



§ 112.03  REGISTER TO BE KEPT; DAILY REPORTS.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and
purchases of all sections by the pawnbroker from the general public. The
register shall:



      (1)   Be reported to an online, internet-based transaction
recording service accessible to law enforcement agencies;



      (2)   Show the dates and the amounts of all loans or purchases
by the pawnbroker from the general public, and the names and:



         (a)   A driver's license number;



         (b)   Another state or federally issued picture
identification card number; or



         (c)   If the identification specified in division (a) or
(b) of this division is not available, a Social Security number may be
accepted; of all persons who have left any property that has been pawned or
sold;



      (3)   At all times be available to the inspection of any law
enforcement officer of this state when in the discharge of his or her
official duty; and



      (4)   Contain a full description of all property purchased by
the pawnbroker from the general public or received on deposit as collateral
or security. When requested by law enforcement and pertaining to an
investigation, a photograph of the merchandise shall be made available to law
enforcement if the property is still in the possession of the pawnbroker. For
purposes of this division, "full description" includes but is not limited to:



         (a)   Make;



         (b)   Model;



         (c)   Color;



         (d)   Size;



         (e)   Manufacturer;



         (f)   Vintage; and



         (g)   Distinguishing marks or characteristics.



   (B)   When secondhand merchandise is sold to a pawnbroker, the
merchandise shall be held for a minimum of twelve (12) days before being
resold.



   (C)   Prior to the release of property to a representative of law
enforcement, the law enforcement representative shall provide to the
pawnbroker a case report or other documentation that the item has been
reported as stolen.



(KRS 226.040)



   (D)   Every pawnbroker shall, by 11:00 a.m. each day, make available
to the Chief of Police a true and correct written report of all goods
received by him, whether by pawn or purchase, during the 24 hours preceding
each report.  The report shall describe the goods as accurately as
practicable.  The Chief of Police shall furnish blanks for these reports.



(KRS 226.070)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR EACH ARTICLE; SALE OF ARTICLE.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall give a plain written or printed ticket
for the loan to the person negotiating or selling, and a plain written or
printed receipt of the articles that have been purchased or upon which money
is loaned, having on each a copy of the entries required by § 112.03(A) to
be kept in his register.  He shall not make any charge for the ticket or
receipt.



   (B)   A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration
of sixty (60) days from the maturity of the loan.  However, not less than
ten (10) days before making the sale, the pawnbroker shall give notice to the
person by whom the article was pawned by mail addressed to the post office
address of that person as shown on the pawnbroker's register, notifying such
person that, unless he redeems the article within ten (10) days from the date
of mailing of the notice, the article will be sold.



(KRS 226.050)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  MAXIMUM INTEREST, RESALE PRICE.



   Any pawnbroker as defined in § 112.01, may, in loaning money on
deposit of personal property, charge, contract for, or receive interest at a
rate not exceeding two percent (2%) per month on the unpaid principal balance
of the loan, and may charge, contract for, and receive a reasonable fee, not
to exceed one-fifth (1/5)  of the value of the loan per month, for
investigating the title, storing and insuring the property, closing the loan,
making daily reports to local law enforcement officers if required by §
112.03, and for other expenses, losses, and incidental costs associated with
servicing such loans.  Further, this fee, when made and collected, shall not
be deemed as interest for any purpose of law.  No pawnbroker shall directly
or indirectly charge, receive, or contract for any interest or consideration
greater than that allowed by this section.



(KRS 226.080)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR PAYMENT OF LOAN.



   Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payment of money from a borrower,
shall give to that person a plain and complete receipt for such payment,
specifying separately the amount applied to principal and the amount applied
to interest.  In a case where the pawnbroker has purchased personal property
under an agreement to sell it back at a stipulated price, the pawnbroker
shall, on receiving any payment of money from the person from whom the
property was purchased, give that person a receipt stating the original
purchase price, the stipulated resale price, and the amount received.



(KRS 226.090)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of either pledge or pawn, any
article whatever from a minor at any time nor from any person between 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(KRS 226.030)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
unless otherwise provided by KRS 226.100.  However, county police, for the
purpose of locating stolen goods, may carry out the provisions of KRS 226.060
within the city.



(KRS 226.100)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any pawnbroker or pawnbroker's clerk who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500), and his
license may be forfeited to the city.



(KRS 226.990 (1))



   (B)   Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of § 112.03
(B) (B) shall be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100).



(KRS 226.990 (3))



CHAPTER 113:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



Restaurant Wine License



   113.01   Established



   113.02   Applicant qualifications



   113.03   Fees



   113.04   License subject to additional requirements



Retail Drink License



   113.10   Established



   113.11   Applicant qualifications



   113.12   Fees



   113.13   License subject to additional requirements



Nude and Nearly Nude Appearances and Activities



   113.20   Nude or nearly nude appearances and activities prohibited
on licensed premises



   113.21   Licensee of premises



Sale of Alcoholic Beverages



   113.30   Definitions



   113.31   State law adopted



   113.32   Classification of licenses; fee schedule



   113.33   Form, content of city license



   113.34   Application; issuance



   113.35   Approval of application



   113.36   Denial of application



   113.37   Transfer of license



   113.38   Premises selling groceries, gasoline, and the like
prohibited from obtaining license



   113.39   “Treating” prohibited; exceptions; sampling



   113.40   Hours of sale



   113.41   Compliance with regulations and prohibitions



   113.42   Maintenance of state license



   113.43   Display of required licenses and certain signs



   113.44   Criminal conduct on premises prohibited



   113.45   Conducting business with minor



   113.46   Business to be conducted continuously; exceptions



Administration and Enforcement



   113.60   Alcoholic beverage control vested in the Mayor



   113.61   Right of entry; search and seizure



   113.62   Suspension, revocation of license



 



   113.99   Penalty



RESTAURANT WINE LICENSE



§ 113.01  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established by the City Council a restaurant wine
license as authorized pursuant to state statute.



(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-21-85)



§ 113.02  APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS.



   Before a restaurant wine license is issued, the applicant must be:



   (A)   The owner or lessee of a restaurant which receives fifty
percent (50%) or more of its gross annual income from the sale of food,



   (B)  Has a minimum seating capacity of fifty (50) people at tables.



(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-21-85)



§ 113.03  FEES.



   The annual fee for the issuance of a restaurant wine license shall be:



   (A)   New applications      $300



   (B)   Renewals         $200



(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-21-85)



Cross-reference:



   For alcoholic beverage taxes, licenses, and fees, see § 110.10



§ 113.04  LICENSE SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   This license shall be subject to any additional requirements imposed by
the Alcoholic Beverage Administrator of the city, the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.



(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-21-85)



RETAIL DRINK LICENSE



§ 113.10  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established by the City Council a retail drink license
as authorized pursuant to KRS 243.070.



(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-19-96)



§ 113.11  APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS.



   Before a retail drink license is issued:



   (A)   The applicant must hold a valid existing state license for the
retail sale of liquor by the drink.



   (B)   The premises licensed shall contain facilities for the service
of food to no less than ten (10) patrons seated at tables or counters.



   (C)   The premises shall contain adequate kitchen and storage
facilities for the preparation of food to be served upon the premises and
said kitchen facilities shall be separated from the serving area.



   (D)   The applicant shall have employed on the premises no less than
one (1) person whose responsibility shall include the preparation of food for
the purpose of sale upon the premises.



(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-19-96)



§ 113.12  FEES.



   The annual fee for the issuance of a retail drink license shall be:



   (A)   New applications -   $600.00



   (B)   Renewals -      $600.00



(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-19-96)



Cross-reference:



   For alcoholic beverage taxes, licenses, and fees, see § 110.10



§ 113.13  LICENSE SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   This license shall be subject to any additional requirements imposed by
the Alcoholic Beverage Administrator of the city, the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, and shall not be
transferable.



(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-19-96)



NUDE AND NEARLY NUDE APPEARANCES AND ACTIVITIES



§ 113.20  NUDE OR NEARLY NUDE APPEARANCES AND ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED ON
LICENSED PREMISES.



   No person shall perform or appear on the premises of any establishment
licensed to sell wine, distilled spirits or malt beverages (hereafter,
"licensed premises") in such a manner or attire as to expose to public view
of the patrons of the establishment at any time the bare female breast below
a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region
or buttocks, or make genitals in a discernible turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered, or employ any device or covering intended to
give the appearance of, or to simulate male or female genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast immediately above the top of the areola.



(Ord. 91-10, passed 12-16-91)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.21  LICENSEE OF PREMISES.



   No licensee holding a license for the sale of wine, distilled spirits
or malt beverages and no employee or agent of said licensee shall permit any
person to perform or appear on its licensed premises in such manner or attire
as to expose to public view of the patrons of the establishment at any time
the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola,
human genitals, pubic region or buttocks, or human or simulated male genitals
in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered, or
permit any person to employ any device or covering intended to give the
appearance of, or to simulate male or female genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.



(Ord. 91-10, passed 12-16-91)  Penalty, see § 113.99



SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 113.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter all definitions found in KRS 241.010
and any amendment thereto, shall apply as written, unless context indicates
or requires a different meaning.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 10-16-17)



§ 113.31  STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   The provisions of KRS Chapters 241 through 244, and all amendments
thereto, relating to the manufacture, sale, transportation, possession, or
other disposition of spirituous, vinous, or intoxicating malt liquor for
medicinal, sacramental, scientific, or mechanical purposes are adopted as a
portion of this chapter as far as applicable, except as otherwise lawfully
provided by a city ordinances.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 9-15-14)



§ 113.32  CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   For the privilege of causing, permitting, arid engaging in the
actions, business, and transactions authorized thereby in regard to traffic
in alcoholic beverages in the city and pursuant to the authority of KRS
243.070, there is hereby established a corresponding city license for each of
the state licenses described in the following schedule. The actions,
business, and transactions authorized and permitted thereby shall be and are
the same as those of the state licenses to which the city licenses correspond
and which are indicated and described in the sections of state law indicated
in the following schedule. The fees for such city licenses shall be the
maximum allowed by law as indicated in the following schedule.



   (B)   No person shall cause, permit, or engage in any of the
actions, business, or transactions authorized by such city and state licenses
within the city without both a valid city licenses and a valid state license
therefor:



 


License Description

 

Statutory Authorization
(KRS §)

 

Statutory Description of Authorized Business and Transactions (KRS §)

 

Annual Expiration Date
(KRS § 243.090)

 

Fee (Per Annum)





Distiller's license
 
243.070 for all permitted licenses
 
243.120

243.130
 

June 30

 

$500



Rectifier's license: Class A
 
 
 
243.120

243.130
 

June 30

 

$3,000



Rectifier's license: Class B (craft rectifier)
 
 
 
243.120

243.130
 

June 30

 

$960



Wholesaler's distilled spirits and wine license
 
 
 
243.160

243.170
 

June 30

 

$3,000



Quota retail package license
 
 
 
243.240
 

June 30

 

$1,000



Quota retail drink license
 
 
 
243.250
 

June 30

 

$1,000



Special temporary license, per event
 
 
 
243.260
 

Expiration date not to exceed dates of the event

 

$166.66



Nonquota type 1
retail drink license
 
 
 
243.082
 

June 30

 

$2,000



Nonquota type 2
retail drink license
 
 
 
243.084
 

June 30

 

$1,000



Nonquota type 3
retail drink license
 
 
 
243.086
 

June 30

 

$300



Special temporary alcoholic beverage auction license, per event
 
 
 
243.036
 

Expiration date not to exceed dates of the event

 

$100



Special Sunday retail drink license
 
 
 
243.050
 

June 30

 

$300



Extended hours supplemental license
 
 
 
243.050
 

June 30

 

$2,000



Caterer's license
 
 
 
243.033
 

June 30

 

$800



Bottling house or bottling house storage license
 
 
 
243.035
 

June 30

 

$1,000



Brewer's license
 
 
 
243.150
 

June 30

 

$500



Microbrewery license
 
 
 
243.157
 

June 30

 

$500



Malt beverage distributor's license
 
 
 
243.180
 

June 30

 

$400



Nonquota retail malt beverage package license
 
 
 
243.280
 

June 30

 

$200



Nonquota type 4 retail malt beverage drink license
 
 
 
243.088
 

June 30

 

$200



Limited restaurant license
 
 
 
243.034
 

June 30

 

$1,200



Limited golf course license
 
 
 
243.039
 

June 30

 

$1,200



Authorized public consumption license
 
 
 
243.089
 

June 30

 

$250



Qualified historic site license
 
 
 
243.042
 

June 30

 

$1,030



*   The holder of a nonquota retail malt beverage package license may
obtain a Nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license for a fee of $50. The
holder of a Nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license may obtain a nonquota
retail malt beverage package license for a fee of $50.




 



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 10-16-17)



§ 113.33  FORM, CONTENT OF CITY LICENSE.



   (A)   The city licenses authorized and established hereby shall each
be evidenced by a document, the form and content of which shall be prescribed
by regulation of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator.



   (B)   However, the documents must be of the same color and
designation as those of the state licenses to which the city licenses
correspond and must:



      (1)   Comply with all of the provisions for state licenses
required by KRS 243.440; and



      (2)   Contain a declaration that the license authorizes the
search of the licensed premises by any peace officer at any time for any
purpose; the removal therefrom of any evidence of any crime or other
violation of any law; and the use thereof in any trial or hearing in regard
thereto.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.34  APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   Subject to the limitations and restrictions described herein; city
licenses shall be originally issued by the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator and renewed by him or her upon the expiration thereof upon
receipt of the following documents and fees more than 30 days prior to the
effective date of an original license and more than 15 days prior to the
expiration date of any license to be renewed:



   (A)   A written application therefor with the truth of the
information, statements, and  representations therein attested by the
signature and the oath or affirmation of the applicant. The form and content
of such application shall be prescribed by regulation of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator; however, provision for the following
information, statements, and representations shall and must be included
therein:



      (1)   All information required by KRS 243.390 to be contained
in the application for state licenses.



      (2)   A consent by the applicant to the search of the licensed
premises by any peace officer at any time for any purpose, the removal
therefrom of any evidence of any crime or other violation of any law; and the
use thereof in any trial or hearing in regard thereto.



      (3)   The names and addresses of the applicant and all
shareholders.



   (B)   The approval of the applicant, the application, and the
premises described therein by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator.



   (C)   Documentary evidence of a valid state license which
corresponds to the city license for which the application is being made.



   (D)   The applicable fee, paid in cash or by certified or cashier's
check, for the city license which is the subject of the application.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.35  APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.



   Within 30 days of the date of the application for an original city
license and 15 days of the date of an application for renewal of city
license, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall, by mail or
personal delivery thereof, notify the applicant, in writing, of either the
approval thereof or the disapproval thereof and a hearing in regard thereto.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.36  DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   As is similarly set forth in KRS 243.450, the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator shall not approve any application for a city license if:



   (A)   The applicant, the application, or the premises described
therein do not fully comply with the provisions of this subchapter and all
laws in regard to alcoholic beverages;



   (B)   The applicant and/or any shareholder, officer, agent, servant,
or employee thereof has caused, permitted, or engaged in any act for which
the revocation of a state or city license is authorized;



   (C)   The applicant and/or any shareholder, officer, agent, servant,
or employee thereof had a state license or city license which was revoked
within two years of the date of the application, or the premises described
therein were the premises or any portion thereof described in a state license
or city license revoked during such time;



   (D)   Any statement or representation in the application is false; or



   (E)   In the exercise of sound discretion, the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator determines any cause or reasons for refusing to approve
an application reasonably related to the purpose and objective of this
chapter and the state laws and regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board. ,Among those factors that the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator shall consider in the exercise of his discretion are: public
sentiment in the area; number of license outlets in the area; potential for
future growth; type of area involved; type of transportation involved; and
financial potential of the area.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.37  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A city licensee shall not assign or transfer any city license to any
other person or premises unless that person and/or premises complies with all
of the provisions of this chapter; the transfer of the license is approved by
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator; and the transfer of the state
license to which the city license corresponds is approved by the state. A
transfer of $ 10 shall be paid to the city of the transfer of the city
license.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.38  PREMISES SELLING GROCERIES, GASOLINE, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED
FROM OBTAINING LICENSE.



   (A)   As prohibited in KRS 243.280, no city license shall be issued
to sell malt beverages at retail within or upon any premises from which
gasoline and lubricating oil are sold for from which the servicing and repair
of motor vehicles is conducted unless there is continuously maintained an
inventory on the premises for sale at retail of not less than $5,000 of food,
groceries, and related products valued at cost.



   (B)   No city license shall be issued to sell distilled spirits or
wine at retail by the drink or package from any premises used as or in
connection with the operation of any business in which a substantial part of
the commercial transaction consists of selling at retail staple groceries, or
gasoline or lubricating oil.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.39  "TREATING" PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS: SAMPLING.



   (A)   No retail licensee shall give away any alcoholic beverage in
any quantity or deliver it in any quantity for less than a full monetary
consideration, except as provided by division (B) of this section.



   (B)   A retailer licensed to sell distilled spirits and wine or a
retailer licensed to sell packaged distilled spirits and wine may, after
acquiring a license, allow customers to sample distilled spirits and wine
under the following conditions:



      (1)   Sampling shall be permitted only on licensed premises
and during regular business hours.



      (2)   A licensee shall not charge for the samples provided to
customers.



      (3)   Sample sizes shall not exceed:



         (a)   One ounce for wine; and



         (b)   One-half ounce for distilled spirits; and



      (4)   A licensee shall limit a customer to:



         (a)   Two distilled spirits samples per day; and



         (b)   Six wine samples per day.



   (C)   Retailers licensed shall:



      (1)   Notify the office of the City Alcoholic Beverage
Administrator at City Hall at least seven days in advance of conducting a
sampling event; and



      (2)   Limit a sampling event to a period not to exceed four
hour consecutive hours between 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.40  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, no
premises for which there has been granted a license for the sale of distilled
spirits or wine at retail shall be permitted to remain open for any purpose
between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., or at any time during the 24 hours of a
Sunday after 1:00 a.m. However, if a licensee provides a separate department
within his licensed premises capable of being locked and closed off, within
which is kept all stocks of distilled spirits and wine, and all fixtures and
apparatus connected with his business as a licensee, and the department is
kept locked during the times mentioned above, he shall be deemed to have
complied with this section.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, no brewer
or distributor shall deliver any malt beverages on Sunday or between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any other day of the week. No retailer
shall sell, give away, or deliver any malt beverages between 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. or at any time during the 23 hours of a Sunday after 1:00 a.m.



   (C)   In all places wherein spirituous, vinous, or intoxicating
liquors or malt beverages are sold by the drink for consumption on the
premises in the city, no spirituous and/or vinous and/or intoxicating liquors
and/or malt beverages shall be served to patrons after 2:00 a.m., prevailing
time. In addition,  all patrons shall vacate the establishment selling
spirituous and/or vinous and/or intoxicating liquors and/or malt beverages no
later than 2:15 a.m., prevailing time.



   (D)   Facilities receiving a minimum of 70% of its income from the
sale of food and meeting the requirements of KRS 244.290(4) shall be eligible
to receive a Sunday retail drink license. The hours of operation for a
facility holding a Sunday retail drink license shall be the hours of 1:00
p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Sundays. This division does not exempt retailers from
observing all other conditions and requirements under any other ordinance or
laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky. A premises which has been granted a
souvenir package Sunday sale license shall be eligible to operate between the
hours of 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight on Sunday. Convenience stores, grocery
stores and packaged liquor stores which have been granted a retail beer
license and/or a distilled spirits and wine retail package license shall be
eligible to operate between the hours of 1:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   (E)   Private clubs which meet the requirements below shall be
eligible to receive a Sunday retail drink license. The hours of operation for
a facility holding a Sunday retail drink license shall be the hours of 1:00
p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Sunday. This division does not exempt retailers from
observing all other conditions and requirement sunder any other ordinance or
laws of the state. Eligible private clubs are those which have been granted
all appropriate licenses for the sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt
beverages which:



      (1)   Having dining facilities with a minimum seating capacity
of 100 people at tables;



      (2)   Are non-profit, eleemosynary organizations with a
membership of at least 200; and



      (3)   Have been in existence for a period of at least two
years.



   (F)   Per KRS 244.290, in years where December 31, (New Years Eve)
falls on a Sunday, the hours of operation, on December 31, for any facility
holding a valid distilled spirits and wine retail drink license, or a malt
beverage retail drink license, shall be from 1:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. Monday
morning January 1. This division does not exempt retailers from observing all
other conditions and requirements under any other ordinance or laws of the
state.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 9-15-14)



Statutory reference:



   Sales of distilled spirits or wine, see KRS 244.209



   Sales of malt beverages, see KRS 244.480



§ 113.41  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   At all times during which any person has a valid city license
issued pursuant to the provisions hereof, that person shall fully comply with
all of the rules, regulations, requirements, and prohibitions set forth in
this chapter and any other city ordinance.



   (B)   A city licensee shall comply fully with all of the provisions
hereof and all of the rules and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator in regard thereto; all provisions of the state statutes and the
rules and regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in regard
to the licensed premises, and the actions, business, and transactions
conducted thereon subsequent to the issuance of a state license therefor, and
prior to the expiration, revocation, or suspension thereof, which are hereby
incorporated herein and made applicable to all city licenses corresponding
thereto, the premises described therein, and the actions, business, and
transactions conducted thereon; and the city licensee shall comply fully
therewith.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 9-15-14)  Penalty,
see § 113.99



§ 113.42  MAINTENANCE OF STATE LICENSE.



   A city licensee shall maintain the state license to which the city
license corresponds, and fully comply with all state statutes and the rules
and regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in regard
thereto.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 9-15-14)



§ 113.43  DISPLAY OF REQUIRED LICENSES AND CERTAIN SIGNS.



   As required by KRS 244.083, a city licensee who has a valid city retail
distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverage license shall cause to be displayed
in a conspicuous, prominent place on the license premises each of the
following documents so that they may be seen and observed by all persons
entering the licensed premises:



   (A)   A sign or placard at least eight inches by 11 inches in size
with the following message printed on or displayed thereon in 30 point or
larger type;



      "Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years are subject to a
fine up to One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars if they:



      a.   Enter license premises to buy or have served or delivered
to them any alcoholic beverages; or



      b.   Possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic
beverages; or



      c.   Misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic beverages."



   (B)   All valid city licenses issued therefor and the state license
to which they correspond. The failure to so display such licenses shall be
prima facie evidence that no such valid licenses have been issued or exist
and all actions, business, and transactions authorized thereby conducted on
such premises are illegal and in violation of the provisions hereof and the
state statutes and regulations of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board
in regard thereto.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.44  CRIMINAL CONDUCT ON PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   A city licensee shall not cause, permit, or engage in any conduct upon
the licensed premises by either the commission of a prohibited act o the
omission of a required act which is a crime or other violation of any
governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof or any officer or agency
thereof.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.45  CONDUCTING BUSINESS WITH MINOR.



   As prohibited by KRS 244.080 and 244.085, no person shall cause,
permit, encourage, or engage in any of the following actions in the city:



   (A)   The possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverages by
any person under 21 years of age in or upon any licensed premises or public
place; and



   (B)   The misrepresentation of the name, address, age, or other
identification of any person under 21 years of age for the purpose of
obtaining alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.46  BUSINESS TO BE CONDUCTED CONTINUOUSLY; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A city licensee who has a valid city wholesale or retain
distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverage license must conduct the actions,
business, and transaction authorized thereby upon the licensed premises.



   (B)   When no such actions, business, or transactions are conducted
thereon for a period of 90 consecutive calendar days, the city license
therefor shall become null and void and revoked by the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator unless:



      (1)   The city licensee is unable to continue in business at
the premises for which a license is issued due to an act of God; casualty,
the acquisition of the premises by any federal, state, city, or other
governmentally agency under power of eminent domain; acquisition of any
private corporation through its power of eminent domain granted to it,
whether such acquisition is voluntary or involuntary; or loss of lease
through failure of the landlord to renew the existing lease; and



      (2)   Prior to the discontinuance of business at the licensed
premises or immediately thereupon if such is due to an act of God, the city
licensee delivers to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator a written
statement signed by the city licensee and verified by the oath or affirmation
thereof indicating the discontinuance of business at the licensed premises
for any of the causes or reasons described herein.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 113.60  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL VESTED IN THE MAYOR.



   The powers of alcohol beverage control shall be vested in the office of
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator pursuant to KRS 241.160.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.61  RIGHT OF ENTRY: SEARCH AND SEIZURE.



   A city licensee shall permit the entry and search of the licensed
premises by any peace officer at any time for any purpose, and the seizure
and removal therefrom of any evidence of any crime or other violation of law
and the use thereof in any trial or hearing in regard thereto.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.62  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the procedure set forth in KRS 243.480 through
243.590, city licenses may be either revoked or suspended by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator upon the occurrence of:



      (1)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
other alcoholic beverage control ordinance of the city;



      (2)   Any violation of any provision of state law in regard to
alcoholic beverages or the rules and regulations of the State Alcoholic
Control board in regard thereto; or



      (3)   Any other cause, reason, or circumstance for which a
state license may be revoked or suspended by the Board.



   (B)   However, city licenses must be revoked by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator upon the occurrence of any cause of
circumstance which requires revocation of state licenses pursuant to KRS
243.500 or the revocation of a state license to which a city license
corresponds. Further, with the approval of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator, a license may, as an alternative and in lieu of part of all of
the days of any suspension period, pay the following sums to the city as set
forth in KRS 243.480.



 


Type of Licensee

 

Fee (per day)





Distillers, rectifiers, vintners, brewers and blenders
 
   $1,000


Wholesale liquor
 
   $400


Wholesale beer
 
   $400


Retail drink liquor
 
   $50


Retail package liquor
 
   $50


Retail beer
 
   $50


All remaining licensees
 
   $50




 



   (C)   The procedure for the revocation or suspension of a city
license shall consist of a written notice signed by the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator and mailed to the licensee at the address of the
licensed premises by certified mail, describing the case, circumstance, or
occurrence and the time and date thereof for which the city license may be
revoked and indicating the time and place of a healing in regard thereto at
least five days thereafter at which, the licensee and the representatives
thereof shall be heard thereon. The hearing thereon shall be conducted by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator according to the procedure
prescribed by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board for hearings by the
Board as supplemented by the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator. The Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall control and
make all decisions in regard to the introduction of evidence and shall hear
all arguments in regard thereto. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall issue a written decision in
regard thereto and mail a certified copy thereof to the licensee at the
address of the license premises by certified or registered mail.



(Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500).  Each day's violation shall be a
separate offense.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §§ 113.20 or 113.21 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250) and no more than five hundred dollars ($500), imprisoned not
more than thirty (30) days, or both.



      (2)   The fines and imprisonment which may be imposed for §§
113.20 and 113.21 shall be in addition to and independent of any action which
may be taken by the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator and/or the
Kentucky Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.



   (C)   Any person who, by himself or herself or acting through
another, directly or indirectly, violates any of the provisions of KRS
243.020 to 243.670, for which no other penalty is provided, shall, for the
first offense, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor; and for the second and
each subsequent violation, he or she shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor. The penalties provided for in this division shall be in addition
to the revocation of the offender's license.



   (D)   Any person who, by himself or herself or through another,
directly or indirectly, violates subsection (1) of KRS 243.020 shall, for the
first offense, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor; for the second offense, he
or she shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor; and for the third and each
subsequent offense, he or she shall be guilty of a Class D felony.



   (E)   Any person who violates subsection (3) of KRS 243.020 shall be
guilty of a violation.



   (F)   Any person who violates KRS 243.620 with respect to a license
issued under KRS 243.050 or 243.082 shall be guilty of a violation.



   (G)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of KRS 243.720
or 243.730 or any regulation issued thereunder shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



   (H)   Any person who violates any provision of KRS 243.710 to
243.850 shall be subject to the uniform civil penalties imposed pursuant to
KRS 131.180.



   (I)   In every case, any tax imposed by KRS 243.710 to 243.720 which
is not paid on or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest
rate as defined in KRS 131.010(6) from the due date until the date of payment.



   (J)   Any person who, by himself or herself or acting through
another, directly or indirectly, violates KRS 243.502(1) shall, for the first
offense, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and for the second and each
subsequent violation, he or she shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. The
penalties provided for in this division shall be in addition to the
suspension or revocation of the offender's license.



   (K)   Any person who violates the provisions of KRS 243.897 shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.



(Ord. 91-10, passed 12-16-91; Am. Ord. 2013-08, passed 8-19-13)



CHAPTER 114:  PRIVATE DETECTIVES, INVESTIGATORS AND SECURITY GUARDS



Section



   114.01   Application for license



   114.02   Convicted felons prohibited



   114.03   Permit required to carry weapon



   114.04   Activities to be reported to Police Department



   114.05   Cases open or pending by law enforcement agency



   114.06   Identification card to be carried; contents



   114.07   Revocation of license



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   An application for a city license shall be obtained from the Police
Department of the city; and after completion shall be filed in duplicate with
the City Clerk/Treasurer.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)



§ 114.02  CONVICTED FELONS PROHBITED.



   No employee, owner, or agent, shall have been convicted of any felony.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)



§ 114.03  PERMIT REQUIRED TO CARRY WEAPON.



   No employee, owner, or agent shall be allowed to carry a concealed
deadly weapon, without a valid state permit.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  ACTIVITIES TO BE REPORTED TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   Any activities conducted by any private detective, investigator or
security guard shall be reported to the Police Department of the city prior
to the conducting of any business within the city, and all involved
individuals shall have their identity reported to the City Clerk/Treasurer
prior to the conducting of any business within the city.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.05  CASES OPEN OR PENDING BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.



   No private detective, investigator or security guard shall perform any
duties involving any case which is currently open or pending by any law
enforcement agency without prior written approval.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.06  IDENTIFICATION CARD TO BE CARRIED; CONTENTS.



   Each person performing any duties as a private detective, investigator
or security guard shall be required to carry upon their person, while
working, a personal identification card which shall contain:



   (A)   Name;



   (B)   Address;



   (C)   Date of birth;



   (D)   Company name;



   (E)   Company position;



   (F)   Recent photo and right thumb print;



   (G)   Issued date of identification card and expiration date; and



   (H)   Signature of owner or president of company.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A license required herein may be revoked by the City Council any time a
violation of any state, federal, county or city law or ordinance occurs or
upon failure of the license holder to comply with any terms of the license.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association who shall
violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to revocation of its
license and/or a civil fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense.  This fine shall be
payable to the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 84-18, passed 12-17-84)



CHAPTER 115:  YARD SALES



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Sales



   115.03   Parking



   115.04   Signs



   115.05   Hours of operation



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   YARD SALES.  Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sales,
lawn sale, attic sale, rummage sale, or yard sale," or any similar casual
sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means where the
public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.



   GOODS.  Are meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other
property capable of being the object of the sale regulated hereunder.



   PERSON.  Shall mean and include individuals, partnerships, voluntary
associations, and corporations.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-18-10)



§ 115.02  SALES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale
within the city without first filing with the City Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from the city a permit to do so, to be
known as a Yard Sale Permit to be issued without charge.



   (B)   Such permit shall be issued to any one location no more than
one (1) time per month not exceeding three (3) consecutive days from Thursday
to Sunday. Each permit issued under this section must be prominently
displayed on the premises upon which the yard sale is conducted through the
entire period of the permitted sale.



   (C)   The information to be filed with the City Clerk pursuant to
this section shall be:



      (1)   Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting the yard sale.



      (2)    Name of owner of the property on which said yard sale
is to be conducted, and consent of owner, if applicant is not the owner.



      (3)   Street address at which yard sale is to be conducted.



      (4)   Number of days of sale.



      (5)   Date of any prior yard sales within preceding twelve
(12) calendar months at the requested address.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect
the following persons or sales:



      (1)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of
a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and
duties as public officials.



      (3)   Any person selling, advertising, or advertising for
sale, no more than five (5) items of personal property which are specifically
named and/or described in the advertisement.



   (E)   Any item(s) which are not sold on the date of sale specified
in the permit required by this chapter, shall be removed from the sale
location immediately after dusk on the sale date.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-18-10)



§ 115.03  PARKING.



   (A)   All persons conducting such yard sales shall be responsible
for informing all customers that parking only on the side of the street where
the yard sale is located is permitted and not to block any driveway.



   (B)   All person conducting such yard sales shall be responsible for
informing potential customers to move their vehicle, if such vehicle is
impeding the flow of traffic on the street.



   (C)   No more than two (2) vehicles at any one time may park on the
street directly in front of the yard sale. Any vehicle parked in front of the
yard sale shall be parked only on the same side of the street as the yard
sale.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-18-10)



§ 115.04  SIGNS.



   (A)   Small free standing yard sale signs, banners and cloth signs.
Temporary yard sale signs and/or banners shall not be erected more than
twenty-four (24) hours before the yard sale being advertised and must be
removed no more than twenty-four (24) hours after the yard sale date.



   (B)   No sign shall be attached to any public utility pole and/or
traffic control sign post.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-18-10)



§ 115.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Yard sales shall only be conducted between dawn and dusk of any day. No
sales shall be conducted after dusk.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-18-10)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision
of this chapter, after citation, shall be subject to a fine established by
the Code Enforcement Board in an amount not less than five dollars ($5) nor
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each offense.



   (B)   Each day's violation or each noncompliance shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (C)   The city may in addition to any fine also obtain injunctions
or abatement orders from a court of competent jurisdiction to insure
compliance with the terms of this chapter or pursue administrative remedies
when appropriate.



   (D)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this chapter may be
towed, at the owner's expense, and in addition the owner or driver of the
vehicle shall be subject to the same fine provisions as hereinbefore
established.



(Ord. 2005-06, passed 5-16-05; Am. Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-18-10)



CHAPTER 116:  FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX



Section



   116.01   Imposition of tax



   116.02   Tax due



   116.03   Lien



   116.04   Use of tax



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed on all "financial institutions" as defined in
KRS Chapter 136, located within the corporate limits of the city for the 1996
tax year and all subsequent years, a franchise tax at the rate of 0.025% on
all deposits, as defined in KRS Chapter 136.575 (1), maintained in such
financial institutions.



(Ord. 96-21, passed 12-16-96)



§ 116.02  TAX DUE.



   (A)   For transition purposes, the 1996 tax year will be treated
differently in terms of collection of taxes than for all subsequent years. 
For the 1996 tax year, the following timetable is hereby established:  The
city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than May 1,
1997.  Payment of the tax shall be due with a two percent (2%) discount by
May 31, 1997, or without the discount by June 30, 1997.



   (B)   For all tax years subsequent to the 1996 tax year, the
following timetable is hereby established:  The city will issue tax bills to
financial institutions no later than December 1 of each year.  Payment of
the tax shall be due with a two percent (2%) discount by December 31 of each
year or without the discount by January 31 of the subsequent year.



(Ord. 96-21, passed 12-16-96)



§ 116.03  LIEN.



   The city shall have a lien for taxes not paid prior to June 30, 1997,
for the tax year 1996 and January 31, 1998, for all tax years 1997 and
thereafter upon any and all property of the financial institution which lien
shall be superior to all encumbrances subsequent to said dates herein.



(Ord. 96-21, passed 12-16-96)



§ 116.04  USE OF TAX.



   Said tax is levied for the purpose of raising revenue to pay salaries
of officers and employees; for the repair and maintenance of street, public
ways, and public buildings in said city; to pay for lighting city streets;
and to pay all proper charges and legal demands against the city.



(Ord. 96-21, passed 12-16-96)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not paid
before June 30, 1997, for tax year 1996, or which are not paid before January
31, for all subsequent tax years, shall be deemed delinquent and shall be
subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%) and shall bear interest at the rate
of six percent (6%) per annum.



(Ord. 96-21, passed 12-16-96)



CHAPTER 117:  TAXICABS



Section



General Provisions



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Administration; rules; regulations



   117.03   Unlawful conduct



Permits



   117.10   Application for driver's permit



   117.11   Consideration; standards for issuance



   117.12   Driver training program



   117.13   Issuance of annual driver's permit



   117.14   Display of driver's permit



   117.15   Suspension; revocation



Inspections and Insurance



   117.20   Sticker required



   117.21   Issuance of sticker



   117.22   Taxicab inspection



   117.23   Suspension; revocation of sticker



   117.24   Insurance; indemnity bond



Rates and Charges



   117.30   Fare rates



   117.31   Receipts



Conditions of Use



   117.40   Clean and safe conditions; driver's appearance



   117.41   Cash carried by driver



   117.42   Designation of taxicabs



   117.43   Use of taximeter



   117.44   Solicitation; acceptance; discharge of passengers



   117.45   Service location



   117.46   Trip card



   117.47   Records; reports



   117.48   Advertising



   117.49   Taxicab stands



 



   117.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFICATE HOLDER. A person who owns or controls a taxicab certificate
issued by the state.



   CRUISE.   To drive a taxicab on the streets of the city in search of
or for the purposes of soliciting prospective passengers for hire.



   LICENSED.   To have a current business license issued pursuant to
applicable City Ordinance.



   PERSON.   Includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association, or joint stock association, and includes any trustee,
assignee, or personal representative thereof.



   RATE CARD.   A card approved by the Mayor or his designee for display
in each taxicab which contains the  rates of fare, fees, and other charges
then in force.



   STREETS.   Every public road, avenue, alley, boulevard, way, bridge,
viaduct, or trestle and the approaches to them, includes off-street parking
facilities and accessways offered for public use whether public or privately
owned, except for-hire parking facilities described in KRS 189.700.



   TAXICAB.   A motor vehicle which is required by state law to be
operated under one or more taxicab certificates and is designated or
constructed to transport not more than fifteen (15) passengers exclusive of
the driver.



   TAXICAB CERTIFICATE.   A certificate issued by the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, Transportation Cabinet, granting authority for the operation of a
given number of motor vehicles transporting passengers for hire at or from
the corporate limits of the city and its suburban area, and not operating
over any regular route, and the destination of the motor vehicles being
designated by the passengers at the time of such transportation.



   TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT.   The permit issued pursuant to this chapter
by the City Clerk/Treasurer to a person to operate or drive a taxicab on the
streets of the city.



   TAXICAB INSPECTION STICKER.   A sticker or emblem issued pursuant to
this chapter by the Mayor to the certificate holder or driver of a taxicab
evidencing that the taxicab has been inspected as provided by this chapter
and is authorized to operated on the streets of the city.



   TAXIMETER.   A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
electronically or mechanically measures the distance driven and the waiting
time on which the fare is based.



   TRIP CARD.   A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips
made by the driver showing the time and place of origin, destination, number
of passengers, and the amount of fare and any fees for each trip.



   WAITING TIME.   The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time
of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does
not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause,
other than the request, act, or fault of passenger or passengers, or traffic
condition.



   WHEELCHAIR SERVICE.   The transportation by a taxicab regulated under
this chapter of a person or persons confined to a wheelchair without
requiring that a person to be removed from the wheelchair.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.02  ADMINISTRATION: RULES; REGULATIONS.



   The Mayor of his designee shall exercise all administrative functions
of the city in relation to the operation of taxicabs regulated under this
chapter.  The Mayor or his designee shall have the authority to promulgate
such rules and regulations as are necessary for the orderly and complete
administration of this chapter.  A copy of all rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall, for a nominal fee, be provided to
all persons requesting a copy.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.03  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall operate a taxicab for hire on the streets of
the city, no person who holds a certificate for or controls a taxicab shall
permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the taxicab has
obtained and has then in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter. 



   (B)   No person shall operate or permit a taxicab for which he holds
the certificate to be operated as a vehicle for hire on the streets of the
city unless such taxicab has a current vehicle license.



   (C)   The provisions of paragraphs (A) and (B) above shall not apply
to any taxicab, or certificate holder, operator, or driver thereof, when the
taxicab is being used for, or such certificate holder or driver thereof is
engaged in, the transportation for hire of passengers from a point outside
the city to a point within the corporate limits of the city.  However, the
taxicab shall not be used nor shall the certificate holders or drivers
thereof be authorized to pick up passengers within the city unless the
taxicab, the certificate holder, and driver thereof are qualified to and do
apply for and receive the permits and license required by this chapter.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



PERMITS



§ 117.10  APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S PERMIT.



   (A)   A driver's permit may be requested from the City
Clerk/Treasurer by submitting an application on the form prescribed by the
Mayor or his designee and in accordance with regulations promulgated under
this chapter.  The application shall be verified under oath and shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   Applicant's name, address, social security number, and
telephone number, if any.



      (2)   Applicant's place and date of birth.



      (3)   Applicant's age, sex, weight, color of eyes and hair,
race, and nationality.



      (4)   Applicant's residence for two (2) years preceding the
date of application.



      (5)   Applicant's operator's license number.



      (6)   Applicant's chauffeur's license number.



      (7)   Whether the applicant has ever been licensed as a
chauffeur or as a taxicab driver, and if so, where and when.



      (8)   Whether any such license has ever been suspended or
revoked, and if so, why.



      (9)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, a sexual offense, a prostitution-related offense, and any state or
local motor vehicle or traffic moving violation, any offense relating to
intoxication by alcohol or controlled substance, or any offense relating to
the trafficking in controlled substances.



      (10)   The names and addresses of three (3) residents of the
city who have known the applicant for a period of one (1) year next preceding
the date of the application and who will attest to the applicant's sobriety,
honesty, and general good character.



   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by an "intent to hire"
form signed by the certificate holder and by any other information deemed
necessary by the Mayor.  A new intent to hire form must accompany any change
in holder or cab company affiliation.



   (C)   Each applicant and, when licensed, each driver, shall inform
the City Clerk/Treasurer within seventy-two (72) hours whenever the
information required by this section changes.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.11  CONSIDERATION; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall, on consideration of the
application and the information required to be submitted with it, approve the
application whenever the following finding are made:



      (1)   The applicant has provided all information requires by
this chapter.



      (2)   All information provided by the applicant is true.



      (3)   The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.



      (4)   The applicant possesses a valid state operator's license
and state chauffeur's license.



      (5)   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony
involving the use or threatened use of violence, force, or deadly instrument,
or a sexual offense, or a prostitution related offense, or an offense
involving intoxication by alcohol or drugs or of an offense involving the
trafficking in controlled substances.



      (6)   The applicant has paid a license fee of fifteen dollars
($15.00).



   (B)   The Mayor may waive the findings required by paragraph (A) (5)
above on a showing of good cause by the applicant.  The waiver shall be in
writing and include the specific reasons for the waiver and shall be attached
to the applicant's file maintained by the City Clerk/Treasurer.  It is a
legislative finding that good cause may be shown either by person's
compliance with or participation in a rehabilitation program for ex-offenders
or by the fact that a convictions for an offense described in paragraph (A)
(5) has not occurred within five (5) years last preceding the date of
application.



   (C)   The permit shall be in effect for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.12  DRIVER TRAINING PROGRAM.



   The Mayor will establish, with consultation of the taxicab industry, a
driver training program to enhance each driver's qualification to operate a
taxicab within the city.  This training program will, at a minimum, include
instruction on the location of accommodations and attractions within the city
and surrounding area, the history of the city area, customer relations, and
the content of city taxicab regulations.  Upon satisfactory completion of
the program, a certificate will be issued to the driver.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.13  ISSUANCE OF ANNUAL DRIVER'S PERMIT.



   (A)   Upon satisfactory completion of the driver training course
established herein, an annual permit shall be issued to replace the temporary
permit.  The annual permit shall be in effect until the end of the calendar
year through the last day of the month of birth of the permit holder unless
suspended or revoked by the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   An annual renewal permit for each subsequent year shall be
issued upon a finding that the information required by the original
application is currently valid and correct, payment of a ten dollar ($10.00)
fee, and certification of satisfactory attendance at a refresher training
class.



   (C)   A new permit and the accompanying ten dollars ($10.00) fee is
required each time a taxi driver changes affiliation from one holder or
taxicab company to another.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.14  DISPLAY OF DRIVER'S PERMIT.



   Every driver under this chapter shall post his temporary or annual
taxicab driver's permit in such a place as to be in full view of all
passengers while the driver is operating a taxicab and in such manner as is
otherwise prescribed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.15  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S PERMIT.



   The City Clerk/Treasurer is authorized to suspend or revoke a driver's
permit, whether temporary or annual:



   (A)   For violation of any federal, state, or local law which would
constitute grounds for denial of a permit.



   (B)   For a driver's failure or refusal to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or any regulations promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, or refusal to cooperate with reasonable requests made by an
inspector investigating complaints or conducting periodic random inspections
pursuant to the instruction  of the Mayor.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



INSPECTIONS AND INSURANCE



§ 117.20  INSPECTIONS AND INSURANCE STICKER REQUIRED.



   (A)   The certificate holder is responsible to obtain a taxicab
inspection sticker.  The sticker must be displayed on the taxicab as
prescribed by the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   An application for a taxicab inspection sticker shall be filed
with the City Clerk/Treasurer on forms provided by the city, shall be
verified by the certificate holder of the taxicab to be covered by the
inspection sticker, and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The legal name, including the registered trade name, of
the certificate holder of the taxicab or taxicabs.



      (2)   The business address of the certificate holder.



      (3)   If a corporation, the name and address of the designated
agent for service of process.



      (4)   The designation of the taxicab as required herein.



      (5)   The amount of coverage provided by an indemnity bond,
liability insurance policy, or approved plan of self-insurance required by
this chapter for each taxicab for which application is made.



      (6)   The number of taxicabs for which the certificate holder
is making application.



      (7)   The make, type, year of manufacture, and passenger
seating capacity of each taxicab for which application is made.



      (8)   The company number, vehicle identification number, and
license plate number of each taxicab for which application is made.



      (9)   Any other information required by the Mayor.



   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A copy of the taxicab certificate or certificates or a
letter issued by the State Transportation Cabinet authorizing the applicant
to operate taxicabs at or from the city and its suburban area.



      (2)   For each taxicab for which application is made a
certificate of insurance, copy of an indemnity bond, or in the case of a
self-insured company, a copy of the plan of self-insurance approved by the
State Department of Insurance and the State Transportation Cabinet.



      (3)   Any other information required by the Mayor.



   (D)   Each applicant and certificate holder shall inform the City
Clerk/Treasurer immediately whenever the information required by this section
changes.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.21  ISSUANCE OF STICKER.



   (A)   The Mayor or his designee shall, on consideration of the
application and the items attached thereto, approve the application for a
taxicab inspection sticker whenever the following findings are made:



      (1)   The applicant has provided the information and items
established herein.



      (2)   The statements made or information provided by the
applicant are true and correct.



      (3)   The applicant has been granted a taxicab certificate or
certificates or issued a letter by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Bureau of
Vehicle Regulation, authorizing the applicant to operate the designated
number of taxicabs at, from, or within the city and its suburban area.



      (4)   There is full force and effect an indemnity bond or
liability insurance policy as required by this subchapter for each taxicab
for which application is made.



      (5)   Each taxicab for which application is made has been
inspected and met the requirements of this chapter and any regulations
promulgated thereunder.



   (B)   On approval of an application for a taxicab inspection sticker
the City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the sticker to the applicant.  The
license shall be in effect for a six (6)month period designated by the City
Clerk/Treasurer.



   (C)   A renewal inspection sticker for each six (6) month period
thereafter shall be issued on compliance by the holder with the requirements
of this chapter and the regulation promulgated thereunder.



   (D)   The Mayor or his designee shall prescribe the size, form, and
content of each inspection sticker or renewal sticker issued and shall
prescribe the manner in which the sticker shall be displayed.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.22  TAXICAB INSPECTION.



   (A)   Each taxicab for which application for a taxicab inspection
sticker is made shall be inspected by the City Police Department before the
inspection sticker is issued.  The inspection shall verify that each taxicab
conforms to the following requirements including, but not limited to:



      (1)   A cash box securely installed in interior of the vehicle
within normal view of all passengers which cash box shall be the repository
for such cash as may be received by the drive during his operation of the
vehicle.  The type construction, operation, placement, installation, and
securing of the cash box shall comply with such reasonable regulations as may
be prescribed by the Mayor.



      (2)   Conspicuous notice viable on both sides of the vehicle
and to passengers inside the vehicle to the effect that the driver cannot
carry more than twenty ($20) dollars for the purpose of making change.



      (3)   For taxicabs providing wheelchair service, a lift device
to provide easy access for those confined to wheelchairs, and with clamps or
other similar devices to keep wheelchairs in place while the taxicab is in
motion and such equipment necessary to provide two-way radio communication.



      (4)   The proper designation as provided herein.



      (5)   A taximeter fastened so that it shall be visible to the
passengers at all times of day and night which taximeter is operated
electronically or mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and
construction drive either from the transmission or from one of the front
wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism.  Each
taximeter shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording.  Each
taximeter shall have thereon a flag or light to denote when the vehicle is
employed and when it is not employed.



   (B)   Reinspection.  Every vehicle operating under an inspection
sticker issued pursuant to this chapter shall be reinspected at six (6) month
intervals or at such shorter interval as may be prescribed by the Mayor. 
The timing and requirements for shorter intervals deemed necessary may be
based on a regular lapse of time or miles driven between reinspection or the
occurrence of certain incidents.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Mayor, or any city
police officer from inspecting a taxicab at any time with or without a
complaint filed by an person.



   (D)   Each taxicab for which application for a taxicab inspection
sticker is made shall submit proof that a mechanical safety inspection has
been conducted by a qualified mechanic.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.23  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF STICKER.



   (A)   Violation of this chapter or the regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of
the inspection sticker or driver's permit.  Upon learning of a violation for
which the Mayor proposes to suspend or revoke a sticker or permit, the Mayor
will give written notification of the alleged violation to the drive and the
certificate holder, and of the manner in which a hearing on the manner may be
requested.



   (B)   The Mayor may immediately suspend an inspection sticker or
drive's permit for serious violations of applicable ordinances or regulations
when such action is deemed warranted by the Mayor for reasons of public
health and safety.  At the time of such action, the driver and the
certificate holder against whom such action is taken shall be notified in
writing of the manner in which a hearing on the matter may be requested.



   (C)   Upon notice of suspension or intended suspension or revocation
of sticker or permits, the driver or certificate holder shall be provided an
opportunity for a hearing before the Mayor.  A request for a hearing shall
be made in writing and within five (5) days of the notice of suspension.  If
a hearing is requested, it shall be provided within ten (10) days of the
Mayor's receipt of the request.  The driver or certificate holder may be
represented by counsel and may call witnesses to testify on his behalf.  The
City Attorney shall prescribe by regulation fair and reasonable hearing
procedures, a copy of which shall be provided to any person against whom such
action is taken.



   (D)   An order of revocation or suspension in excess of ten (10)
days shall be approved and signed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.24  INSURANCE; INDEMNITY BOND.



   (A)   Each taxicab operating under this chapter shall have in full
forces and effect an approved indemnifying bond, liability insurance policy,
or plan of self-insurance which has been approved by both the Kentucky
Department of Insurance and the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet in accordance
with KRS 281.655. The types and minimum amounts of insurance to be carried on
each vehicle shall be as follows:



      (1)   Death or injury to any one person:  $25,000.



      (2)   Total liability for death or injury to person:  $50,000.



      (3)   Property damage:  $10,000.



   (B)   Each taxicab operating under this chapter shall have in full
force and effect basic reparation benefits in accordance with KRS Chapter
404, Subtitle 39.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 117.30  RATES AND CHARGES.



   The following maximum rates of fare and fees may be charged for the use
of a taxicab and must be posted in each taxicab in a prominent place as
required by regulations promulgated by the Mayor:



   (A)   Hourly rate:  $18.00 per hour for one (1) or more passengers.



   (B)   (1)   Mileage rate:  $1.50 for the first mile.  Each
taximeter shall be calibrated to measure mileage in distance less than or
equal to one fifth of a mile.  The mileage rate shall be equally apportioned
over the distances measured by the meter, except than an initial drop fee may
be assessed for the first mile so that the meter reflects the authorized rate.



      (2)   Waiting time:  $.30 for each one (1) minute of waiting
time or fraction thereof.



      (3)   Any charges, tolls, or fees levied to enter or leave any
other passenger terminals, or to use or cross roads or bridges or pick up or
discharge passengers at public facilities, shall be borne by the passenger in
addition to the metered fare.



   (C)   Nothing contained herein shall constitute a minimum rate of
fare, nor prelude the holder of charging a rate of fare less than the metered
rate of fare would have been had the taximeter been activated.



   (D)   Rates of fare for this section shall not be increased before
December 31, 1998.



§ 117.31  RECEIPTS.



   The driver of any taxicab shall, on request by the passenger, render to
the passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name
of the owner of the taxicab, the taxicab number, the amount of meter reading
and all charges, the date of transaction, the points of origination and
destination, and the name of driver.  This receipt shall be signed by the
driver before being rendered to the passenger.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



CONDITIONS OF USE



§ 117.40  CLEAN AND SAFE CONDITIONS;  DRIVER'S APPEARANCE.



   (A)   Every driver shall maintain a clean and safe taxicab according
to the regulations promulgated by the Mayor.



   (B)   Every driver or operator shall maintain a clean and
presentable appearance according to the regulations promulgated by the Mayor.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.41  CASH CARRIED BY DRIVER.



   No driver shall carry more than twenty dollars ($20) cash on his person
while operating a taxicab.  Notwithstanding the above, no driver shall
operate a taxicab unless that driver has in his possession cash in the amount
of twenty dollars ($20) suitably denominated to make change for passengers.



§ 117.42  DESIGNATION OF TAXICABS.



   (A)   All taxicabs operated by the same cab company or under the
same registered trade name shall be painted with the identical color scheme
and identifying design.  The color scheme and identifying design must be
approved by the Mayor or his designee.  No company will be permitted to use
a color scheme or design which, in the judgement of the Mayor, is similar to
that of an existing cab company that such similarity is likely to mislead or
confuse the public.  Violation of this requirement is punishable by
suspension or revocation of the inspection sticker.



   (B)   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each side and the
rear, in painted letters at least five (5) inches in height the name of the
certificate holder or the registered trade name, if any, of the taxicab.  In
addition, each taxicab may bear an identifying design approved by the Mayor.



   (C)   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each side and the
rear, in painted letters at least five (5) inches in height, a number issued
by the certificate holder.  However, no two (2) taxicabs having the same
color scheme shall posses the same number.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle marked with the
identifying design of a taxicab company when there is no affiliation between
the driver or certificate holder and that company.  Vehicles formerly
operated in affiliation with a taxicab company must be unmarked within three
(3) days of the date of the termination of the affiliation.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.43  USE OF TAXIMETER.



   It shall be the duty of the driver or operator of a taxicab to
deactivate the taximeter into a cleared position at the termination of each
trip and to keep it deactivated until such time as the taxicab has been
engaged for hire or the driver requested by an inspector to engage it for
testing purposes.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.44  SOLICITATION; ACCEPTANCE; DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS.



   (A)   No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when
sitting in the driver's compartment of the taxicab or while standing
immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof.  The driver of any taxicab
shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his
vehicle at all times when the vehicle is on the street, except that, the
driver of any taxicab may park and leave the taxicab on the streets for up to
ten (10) consecutive minutes.  A taxicab driver may otherwise park and leave
his taxicab longer than ten (10) consecutive minutes, other than at a
designated taxi stand, so long as he parks his taxicab in compliance with the
traffic code of the city.  Nothing herein contained shall be held to
prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose
of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicles.



   (B)   No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone
of voice or by a sign or in any manner annoying any person or obstruct the
movement of any person, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting
patronage.



   (C)   Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers
in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand side of the road and there
receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets, where passengers
may be discharged at either the right or left-hand sidewalk, or side of the
roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.



   (D)   No driver shall cruise in search of passengers in such areas
and at such times as would congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and
other vehicles.



   (E)   No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in
the taxicab, unless the person or persons first employing the taxicab shall
consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers.



   (F)   No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab
as passengers than the rate seating capacity of his taxicab as stated in the
taxicab permit issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Transportation Cabinet.



   (G)   No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person
or persons on request, unless:



      (1)   Previously engaged;



      (2)   Unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to
do so;



      (3)   The driver has reason to believe that the person is
engaged in a violation of federal, state or local law, or



      (4)   The driver has just cause to fear injury to himself, his
property, or his taxicab.



   (H)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any driver of a
taxicab to solicit business for any hotel, or to attempt to divert patronage
from one hotel to another.  No driver shall engage in selling intoxicating
liquors, solicit, or advance any prostitution-related conduct or engage in
the trafficking of controlled substances.



   (I)   No driver of any taxicab shall permit any person to ride on
any part of the vehicle except the inside.



   (J)   No driver shall interfere in any way with another driver's
lawful use of a taxicab stand.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.45  SERVICE LOCATION.



   (A)   Certificate holders shall maintain a central place of business
within the corporate limits of the city.  That place of business must comply
with all city ordinances and regulations, specifically including those
pertaining to zoning and city building and safety codes.



   (B)   All certificate holders or drivers of taxicabs shall answer
all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the
city as soon as they can do so and if such services cannot be rendered within
a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it
will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor.



   (C)   No certificate holder or driver may refuse to accept a call in
an area in which the taxicab is permitted to operate pursuant to the taxicab
certificate issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Transportation Cabinet. 
To do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the taxicab
inspection sticker and taxicab driver's  permit  issued  to  such 
holder  or  driver  may  be  revoked  or suspended.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.46  TRIP CARD.



   (A)   Every driver shall maintain a daily trip card in his own
handwriting on which are recorded all trips made each day, showing the time
and place of origin, the destination of each trip, the number of passengers,
and the amount of fare and charges.  All completed trip cards shall be
returned to the certificate holder by the driver at the conclusion of his
tour of duty.  The forms for each trip card shall be furnished to the driver
by the certificate holder and shall be in a format approved by the Mayor.



   (B)   Every certificate holder shall retain and preserve all
driver's trip cards in a safe place for at least one (1) calendar year, and
these trip cards shall be available to the City  Clerk/Treasurer.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.47  RECORDS; REPORTS.



   (A)   Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from
operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures, and other
such operating information as may be required by the City Clerk/Treasurer. 
Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other
date required by this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination
by the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation
of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to
any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of three
hundred dollars ($300) shall be reported by the certificate holder or driver
within five (5) days from the time of occurrence to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.48  ADVERTISING.



   Subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the City Council, a
person, certificate holder, or driver of a taxicab licensed under this
chapter may affix or install advertising matter in or on the taxicab.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.49  TAXICAB STANDS.



   Taxicabs stands shall be used on a first-come first-served basis.  The
driver shall pull onto the stand from the rear and shall advance forward as
the taxicabs ahead pull off.  Drivers shall stay within five (5) feet of
their cabs and shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous
talk while at the stand.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his choice that is parked at
a taxicab stand.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more  than 
one hundred dollars ($100).  Each day the violation continues shall be a
separate offense.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 11-17-97)



CHAPTER 118:  MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS



Section



   118.01   Temporary sale or display of motor vehicles



§ 118.01  TEMPORARY SALE OR DISPLAY OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   A motor vehicle dealer, new, used or auction motor vehicle
dealer, motor vehicle leasing dealer, restricted motor vehicle dealer,
motorcycle dealer, motorcyle broker, wholesaler, automotive recycling dealer,
or a salesman of motor vehicles is permitted after obtaining any necessary
state permit to conduct the temporary sale and/or display of motor vehicles
within the municipal boundaries of the city.



   (B)   A City of Hillview license must be obtained prior to the
conducting of a temporary sale and/or display of motor vehicles within the
municipal boundaries of the city.



(Ord. 2003-25, passed 11-17-03)



CHAPTER 119:  STREET VENDING BUSINESSES



Section



   119.01   Permit; fee



   119.02   Regulations



 



   119.99   Penalty



§ 119.01  PERMIT; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell any
commodity by means of vending such commodity upon any street in the city,
without first securing a permit and paying the fee therefor. The permit fee
shall be as established in the City License Ordinance.



(Ord. 2005-12, passed 8-15-05)



§ 119.02  REGULATIONS.



   The following rules and regulations shall be complied with by each
person using a vehicle for street vending:



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any street vendor to sell or attempt
to sell any commodity:



      (1)   By means of any outcry, sound, speaker or amplifier, or
any instrument, or device which can be heard for a distance greater than
three hundred (300) feet, or when passing a hospital, or a church or other
place of worship during the hours when services are being held.



      (2)   Within five hundred (500) feet of any school during the
school year.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any such vendor to use, play or
employ the use of, any sound, outcry, amplifier, loud speaker, radio,
phonograph with a loud speaker or amplifier or any other instrument or device
when the vehicle such vendor is using is stopped for the purpose of making a
sale.



   (C)   The use by any such vendor of any outcry, sound, amplifier,
loud speaker, radio, phonograph with a loud speaker or amplifier or any
instrument or device which emits a loud sound shall be prohibited before the
hours of 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays, or after 7:00 p.m.
on any day.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any such vendor to:



      (1)   Exceed a speed of twelve (12) miles per hour when
cruising neighborhoods seeking sales or when attempting to make a sale;



      (2)   Make more than two (2) stops in any one block to make
any sale;



      (3)   Stop anywhere within twenty-five (25) feet of an
intersection when making a sale or attempting to make a sale;



      (4)   Make a U-turn on any block;



      (5)   Drive vendor's vehicle backwards to make or attempt any
sale;



      (6)   Sell to any person who is standing in the street;



      (7)   Permit any person to hang on the vehicle or permit any
person to ride in or on the vehicle except a bona fide assistant or
assistants;



      (8)   Remain standing or stopped at any place for a period of
time exceeding five (5) minutes;



      (9)   Sell or attempt to sell along any particular route more
than one time during a six (6) hour period.



(Ord. 2005-12, passed 8-15-05)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine established by the Code Enforcement
Board of not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500) for each offense.



   (B)   Any fine which is assessed by reason of violation of this
chapter shall be payable to the City Clerk-Treasurer. These fines shall be
payable to the General Fund of the city and be expended for general city
purposes.



(Ord. 2005-12, passed 8-15-05)



CHAPTER 120: LICENSE FEE ON INSURANCE COMPANIES



Section



   120.01   Imposition of license fee



   120.02   Amount of license fee



   120.03   Payment of license fee



   120.04   Breakdown of collections



   120.05   General Fund Account



   120.06   Direction of payment



§ 120.01  IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.



   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the municipal
boundaries of the city, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2016, and
thereafter on a calendar year basis.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 3-21-16)



§ 120.02  AMOUNT OF LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any
insurance policy which is not a life or health insurance policy shall be
seven percent (7%) of the premium actually collected within each calendar
quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies on the risk located within
the municipal boundaries of the city, on those classes of business which such
company is authorized to transact, less all premiums returned to policy
holders; however, any license fee imposed upon premium receipts shall not
include premiums received for insuring employers against liability for
personal injuries to their employees, or death caused thereby, under the
provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act and shall not include premiums
from policies of health insurance.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 3-21-16)



§ 120.03  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.



   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable to
the city and shall be paid at the address indicated in the insurance premiums
license fee returned no later than thirty (30) days after the end of the
calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid to the city in the manner
prescribed on or before the due date shall bear interest at the rate defined
in KRS 131.010(6) and KRS 131.183.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 3-21-16)



§ 120.04  BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.



   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this
chapter shall annually, by March 31, furnish to the city at the address
indicated in the insurance premiums license fee return a written breakdown of
all collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories
of insurance:



   (A)   Casualty;



   (B)   Automobile;



   (C)   Inland marine; and



   (D)   Fire and allied perils.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 3-21-16)



§ 120.05  GENERAL FUND ACCOUNT.



   All sums collected pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
deposited to the General Fund Account of said city to be used for the purpose
of paying salaries of officers and employees, for repair and maintenance of
streets, public ways, and public buildings in said city; to pay for lighting
city streets; and to pay all proper charges and legal demands against the
city.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 3-21-16)



§ 120.06  DIRECTION OF PAYMENT.



   All payments of taxes provided for herein shall be made to the City
Clerk/Treasurer at the business offices of the city, 283 Crestwood Lane,
Louisville Kentucky 40229.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 3-21-16)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS





         131.   NOISE POLLUTION




CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS



Section



   130.01   Curfew for minors



   130.02   Damaging public property



   130.03   Limited use of firearms



   130.04   Discharge of dangerous instrumentality



   130.05   Hunting prohibited on property owned by the city



Concealed Deadly Weapons



   130.15   Definitions



   130.16   Prohibitions



   130.17   Exemptions



   130.18   Posting of signs



   130.19   Violations



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALLOW.  Either permit or neglect to prevent. It requires actual
or constructive knowledge on the part of the parent or guardian, that is, the
parent or guardian must actually know about the minor violating this section,
or the circumstances must be such that a reasonably prudent parent or
guardian should have known the minor was violating this subchapter.



      MINOR.  Any person under the age of 18, or as may be otherwise
phrased, any person of the age of 17 or under.



      PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a minor:



         (a)   As a natural or adoptive parent;



         (b)   As a legal guardian;



         (c)   As a person who stands in loco parentis; or



         (d)   As a person whom legal custody has been given by
order of court.



      REMAIN.  To stay behind, tarry, linger, congregate, move about,
wander, stroll, or stay unnecessarily upon or in any public assembly,
building, place, street, or highway.



   (B)   Hours of curfew.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
to be or remain in or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or
highway within the City of Hillview at night during the following periods:



         (a)   12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



         (b)   12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Sunday;



         (c)   11:00 p.m. Sunday to 6:00 a.m. Monday;



         (d)   11:00 p.m. Monday to 6:00 a.m. Tuesday;



         (e)   11:00 p.m. Tuesday to 6:00 a.m. Wednesday;



         (f)   11:00 p.m. Wednesday to 6:00 a.m. Thursday; and



         (g)   11:00 p.m. Thursday to 6:00 a.m. Friday.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having
legal custody of a minor to allow such minor to be or remain in or upon a
public assembly, building, place, street, or highway in the City of Hillview
under circumstances not constituting an exception as enumerated in division
(C) of this section during the time periods contained in division (B)(1) of
this section.



   (C)   Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases a minor in or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway in the City of
Hillview during the nocturnal hours provided for in division (B) of this
section shall not be considered in violation of this section.



      (1)   When the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian;



      (2)   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or
guardian of such minor;



      (3)   When exercising first amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly, provided that written notice signed by the
minor and countersigned by a parent is in the possession of such minor
specifying when, where, and in what manner said minor will be exercising such
First Amendment rights;



      (4)   In case of reasonable necessity but only after such
minor's parent has communicated to the division of police the facts
establishing such reasonable necessity;



      (5)   When the minor is on the sidewalk contiguous to the
place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk contiguous to a next-door
neighbor who has not communicated an objection to a police officer or the
division of police;



      (6)   When returning home, by a direct route from, and within
one hour of the termination of, a school activity, or any activity of a
religious or other voluntary association, provided that justification
indicating the place and time of termination of said event can be given to
any investigating officer of the division of police;



      (7)   When authorized by regulation issued by the Mayor in
cases of reasonable necessity involving more minors than may reasonably be
dealt with on an individual basis. Such regulation shall be issued
sufficiently in advance to permit publicity through news media and through
other agencies such as the schools. The regulation shall define the activity,
the scope of the use of the public assembly, building, place, street, or
highway permitted, and the period of time involved not to extend more than
one hour beyond the time for termination of the activity, and the reason for
finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary. The Mayor shall notify
the division of police of the information;



      (8)   When engaged in a business or occupation which the laws
of Kentucky authorize a person under 18 years of age to perform;



      (9)   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor
vehicle with a lawfully authorized driver;



      (10)   When the minor, who is a duly authorized and licensed
driver, is operating a motor vehicle within the City of Hillview for the
purpose of passing through, by direct route, from one location to another
either within or out of the County, including all minors that may also be
within the vehicle;



      (11)   When the minor is married in accordance with law or had
disability of nonage removed by a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   A police officer upon finding or being notified of any
minor in or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway
whose parent is believed to be in violation of division (B) of this section
may stop and question such minor and request such information as his or her
name and age and the name and address of his or her parent, guardian, or
person having legal custody.



      (2)   If the police officer determines or has reasonable cause
to believe that a curfew violation has occurred, the police officer may
obtain from the minor the information necessary to issue a citation to the
minor's parent, guardian, or person having legal custody.



      (3)   Any minor found in violation of division (B) of this
section shall be:



         (a)   Directed to proceed immediately to his or her
home; or



         (b)   Under the authority of KRS 630.030, may be taken
into custody by any peace officer:



            1.   Pursuant to an order of the court for failure
to appear before the Court for a previous status offense; or



            2.   If there are reasonable grounds to believe
that the child has been an habitual runaway from his parent or person
exercising custodial control or supervision of the child.



         (c)   With permission of the minor's parent, may be
returned by the police officer to the parent. Permission to return a minor
subsequent to a violation of division (B) of this section may be given
telephonically to the police officer by a minor's parent. A parent may also
grant prior permission to a law enforcement agency to return that parent's
minor child or children to said parent, in the event the minor child or
children are found in violation of section (B) of this section, by providing
written authorization on a form to be provided by the City of Hillview. The
City of Hillview shall endeavor to make such authorization forms available to
all parents residing in the City of Hillview.



(Ord. 2012-16, passed 1-21-13)



§ 130.02  DAMAGING PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall mar, injure, destroy, or deface, or aid in injuring,
destroying, or defacing in the city, any public property, including, but not
limited to, traffic signs and street signs.



(Ord. 81-7, passed 2-16-81)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  LIMITED USE OF FIREARMS.



   (A)   Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      FIREARM means a rifle of any caliber, air rifle, shotgun of any
gauge, pistol, or revolver of any caliber.



   (B)   Discharge near subdivision. No person shall discharge any
firearm in any recorded subdivision in the city or within 100 yards thereof.



   (C)   Discharge near residence. No person shall discharge any
firearm within 100 yards of any residence, building or public highway in the
city.



   (D)   Rifle prohibition. No person shall discharge or cause the
discharge of any rifle firearm larger than 22 caliber, whether pistol or
shoulder stock, within the municipal limits of the city. A rifle firearm
shall be construed as any firearm having a grooved barrel and upon discharge
projecting a solid missile. A shotgun of ten-gauge, 12-gauge or 20-gauge, or
410-gauge having a rifled barrel for the discharge of shotgun slugs is not
considered a rifle under this section.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Unless otherwise indicated, the prohibitions of this
section shall not pertain to:



         (a)   Law officers duly designated and authorized by the
city, county, state or federal authority.



         (b)   Activities upon any bona fide target range,
provided that the Bullitt County Joint Planning Commission or city must first
issue, upon written application and within its discretionary power, a permit
labeling such area as approved target range.



         (c)   Any property owner or occupant of a parcel of real
estate fifty (50) acres or larger within the city may use and discharge any
rifle, air rifle, shotgun, pistol or revolver upon the premises owned or
occupied as aforesaid, even though such use and discharge is prohibited in
subsection (C) of this section.



         (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B)
of this section, an adult owner or adult occupant of any land within the city
may, while on their own property and subject to all applicable state
restrictions and regulations, discharge an air rifle or shotgun:



            1.   For the sole purpose of controlling rodents
that are not protected species; or



            2.   For the purpose of controlling skunks,
opossum and/or raccoons that:



               a.   Are causing damage; or



               b.   Are about to cause damage; or



               c.   May constitute a health hazard or other
nuisance.



      (2)   No shotgun may be discharged by any person under this
section while loaded with any slug or with any shot with a larger diameter
than #6. The adult owner or adult occupant shall be responsible to ensure
that the discharge from any air rifle or shotgun cannot end up onto any
adjacent property.



   (F)   No hunting without permission. Hunting on lands within the
city not listed in subsection (B) of this section is permitted by the owner
or occupant of the land upon which he/she is hunting, provided such hunting
is by use of shotgun or devices not prohibited in subsection (C) of this
section, and further that the projection of shot shall not be above or into
another's land or a traveled roadway.



   (G)   Parental responsibility. If a minor shall violate this
section, his parent or guardian may be held responsible for such violation in
the same manner as if such parent or guardian had violated this section, and
ignorance of such violation shall not be a defense; prosecution of such
parent or guardian shall not be a bar to prosecution of such minor.



(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Hunting prohibited on property owned by the city, see § 130.05



§ 130.04  DISCHARGE OF DANGEROUS INSTRUMENTALITY.



   No person shall cast, throw, propel or discharge any missile, arrow,
spear, or any other item which may cause injury to a person or animal on any
street, alley, other public place, or across property boundary lines within
the city limits.



(Ord. 79-6, passed 4-16-79)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  HUNTING PROHIBITED ON PROPERTY OWNED BY THE CITY.



   Hunting of any form or nature is hereby prohibited on any property
owned by the City of Hillview.



(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



CONCEALED DEADLY WEAPONS



§ 130.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following definition:



   DEADLY WEAPON.



      (1)   Any weapon from which a projectile, readily capable of
producing death or other



         serious physical injury, may be discharged or propelled.



      (2)   Any knife other than an ordinary pocket knife or hunting
knife.



      (3)   Billy, night stick or club;



      (4)   Black jack or slap jack;



      (5)   Nunchaku karate sticks;



      (6)   Shuriken or death star; or



      (7)   Artificial knuckles made from metal, or other similar
hard material.



   FIREARM .  Any weapon which will expel a projectile by the action of
an explosive.



   BUILDING.  Any structure, vehicle, water craft or air craft where city
citizens are permitted to assemble for purposes of business, government,
education, religion, entertainment or public transportation.



(Ord. 96-20, passed 12-16-96)



§ 130.16  PROHIBITIONS.



   No person, including employees of the city, shall carry a concealed
firearm or other deadly weapon into or on any building or portion of a
building owned, leased or controlled by the city, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 96-20, passed 12-16-96)



§ 130.17  EXEMPTIONS.



   Any building used for public housing by private persons, highway rest
areas, firing ranges and private dwellings owned, leased or controlled by the
city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.  This chapter
shall not apply to sworn officers of the Hillview City Police Department, the
Bullitt County Jailer's office, the Bullitt County Sheriff's office, or any
other duly sworn law enforcement officers authorized to carry concealed
deadly weapons pursuant to KRS 527.020.



(Ord. 96-20, passed 12-16-96)



§ 130.18  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The Hillview Public Works Department shall post signs at the entrance
to all restricted buildings and areas covered by this chapter which shall
read as follows:



CONCEALED DEADLY WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON THESE PREMISES



BY CITY OF HILLVIEW ORDINANCE.



(Ord. 96-20, passed 12-16-96)



§ 130.19  VIOLATIONS.



   Violation of this subchapter may result in denial of entry into a
restricted building or portion of a building.  If an employee of the City of
Hillview carries a concealed firearm or other deadly weapon into or on any
restricted building or restricted portion of a building, disciplinary
measures, up to and including dismissal from employment, may be imposed.



(Ord. 96-20, passed 12-16-96)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) for
each offense.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with
any of the provisions of § 130.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit or
pay a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10), nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200), together with court cost, and in default of payment thereof,
shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not the exceed 30 days.



   (C)   Any person violating the terms of § 130.05 shall be subject
to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100) for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offense
the minimum fine shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500).



(Ord. 2015-01, passed 3-16-15)



CHAPTER 131:  NOISE POLLUTION



Section



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Unlawful conduct defined



   131.03   Standards for noise pollution



   131.04   Exemptions



   131.05   Enforcement



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BONA FIDE.  Made in good faith, without fraud or deceit, a state of
mind consisting in (1) honesty in belief or purpose, (2) faithfulness to
one’s duty or obligation, (3) observance of reasonable commercial standards
of fair dealing in a given trade or business, or (4) absence of intent to
defraud or to seek unconscionable advantage.



   CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION ACTIVITY.  The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, structure or
roadway, or any utility related construction, for which all necessary and
proper governmental permits have been obtained.



   HIGHWAY.  Any road, street, avenue, alley, boulevard, lane, court,
bridge, viaduct, or trestle, and the approaches to them.



   NOISE.  The intensity, frequency, duration, and character of sound or
sounds from a source or sources.



   PARKING LOT.  Any off-street parking facility for public use, and the
approaches to same, whether publicly or privately owned, and shall include,
but not be limited to:  parks, shopping centers, restaurants, entertainment
centers, taverns, car washes, banking or financial institutions, whether
publicly or privately owned, operated or controlled.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or any private entity of any nature.



   PLAINLY AUDIBLE.  Capable of being distinctly heard by a person with
normal hearing.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of the highway designed for ordinary use for
vehicular travel, including the berm, shoulder or any public property
adjacent thereto.



   UNREASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME.  A period of time in excess of that
necessary to accomplish:  (1) a danger warning with a horn or other audible
signaling device, or, (2) the preservation or protection of property or the
life, safety or welfare of a person or persons by use of an audible signaling
device.



   UNREASONABLY LOUD, HARSH, OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.  Any noise plainly
audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from its point of origination or
emanation.



   VEHICLE.  Any machine or device in, on, or by which, any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn on any highway, roadway or parking
lot.



(Ord. 93-07, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-20-06)



§ 131.02  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make,
continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive, loud, unnecessary,
or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others unless the making and
continuing of the noise is necessary for the protection or preservation of
property or the life, health, or safety of a person or persons.



   (B)   The following acts are hereby declared to be loud, disturbing,
and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but the enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   The sounding of any horn or other such audible signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any highway,
roadway, parking lot or other public place, except as a danger warning, for
an unreasonable period of time;



      (2)   The use or operation of any radio, stereo, or other
machine or device for the producing, reproducing or amplification of sound in
any vehicle in such a manner as to create an unreasonably loud, harsh, or
excessive noise, that disturbs the peace, quiet, or comfort of others;



      (3)   The use or operation of, or allowing the use or
operation of, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of others by creating or
allowing a louder volume than is necessary for the convenient hearing of the
person or persons who are voluntarily in the room, chamber, or vehicle in
which any above described machine, device, or musical instrument between the
hour of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in
which it is located, shall be a prima facia evidence of a violation of this
section;



      (4)   Use or operation of any vehicle on any highway, roadway,
or parking lot in such a manner as to produce any unreasonably loud, harsh,
or excessive noise, or to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;



      (5)   Creation of any unreasonably loud, harsh, or excessive
noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, or by the
operation of any such vehicle;



      (6)   Use of any mechanical loud speaker, amplifier, sound
system, stereo, or radio on any moving or standing vehicle for advertising,
entertainment or any other purpose, in such a manner as to create an
unreasonable loud, harsh, or excessive noise.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause fireworks to be
set off or to allow fireworks to be set off on property in which said person
has an interest either by ownership or rental between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
to 8:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday.



(Ord. 93-07, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-20-06; Am. Ord.
2016-19, passed 8-15-16)



§ 131.03  STANDARDS FOR NOISE POLLUTION.



   The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a
violation of § 131.02 exists shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:



   (A)   The volume of the noise;



   (B)   The intensity of the noise;



   (C)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



   (D)   The volume and intensity of background noise, if any;



   (E)   The proximity of the noise to a residential area or place of
public accommodation such as a hotel, motel, inn, campground and the like;



   (F)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



   (G)   The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;



   (H)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



   (I)   The duration of the noise;



   (J)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.



(Ord. 93-07, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-20-06)



§ 131.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from § 131.02:



   (A)   Noises originating or emanating from safety signals, warning
devices and emergency pressure relief valves;



   (B)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle or law
enforcement training facilities;



   (C)   Noises resulting from construction or demolition activity;



   (D)   Noises resulting from the use of farm machinery, lawn mowers
or other machinery utilized for agricultural or landscaping purposes;



   (E)   Noises originating or emanating from public recreational
facilities;



   (F)   The operation of any aircraft in conformity with, or pursuant
to, federal law, federal air  regulations and/or air traffic control
instructions;



   (G)   Noises originating or emanating from bona fide recreational
facilities, bona fide school grounds, bona fide civic organizations, bona
fide charitable organizations, or bona fide religious organizations.



(Ord. 93-07, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-20-06)



§ 131.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any individual who hears “noise” as defined in this chapter may
report said violation to the city code enforcement officer or by making such
report to the city Police Department.



(Ord. 93-07, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-20-06; Am. Ord.
2016-19, passed 8-15-16)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to a
civil penalty as set forth in §§ 37.50 through 37.65 and governed by the
Code Enforcement Board.



(Ord. 93-07, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-20-06; Am. Ord.
2016-19, passed 8-15-16)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS





         151.   STREET AND HOUSE NUMBERING





         152.   MAINTENANCE OF OPEN DRAINAGE AREAS





         153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION




         154.   JOINT EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
ORDINANCE




         155.   JOINT POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF
ORDINANCE




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code



   150.02   Appeals



Electric Code



   150.10   National Electric Code adopted



   150.11   Permit required; application



   150.12   Fees



   150.13   Inspection of electrical work



   150.14   Qualifications of Electrical Inspector



Building Permits



   150.20   Definitions



   150.21   Permit required



   150.22   Application



   150.23   Material variations unlawful



   150.24   Fees



   150.25   Permit for fence, driveway, driveway drain tile



Signs



   150.30   Intent



   150.31   Scope



   150.32   Exempt signs



   150.33   Permit requirements



   150.34   Signs that require a permit but are exempt from paying a fee



   150.35   Nonconforming signs



   150.36   Illegal signs



   150.37   General requirements



   150.38   Prohibited signs in all zones



   150.39   Signs requiring a conditional use permit in all zones



   150.40   Signs permitted by specific zone



   150.41   Advertising on interstate highways



   150.42   Maintenance standards



   150.43   Definitions



 



   150.99   Penalty



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE; STANDARDS OF SAFETY.



   (A)   The Uniform State Building Code is hereby adopted by reference
as if fully set out herein.  A copy of the code along with any amendments
thereto shall be placed on file in the City Clerk/Treasurer's office.



   (B)   The City Building Official/Inspector shall be responsible for
the examination and approval or disapproval of plans and specifications for
churches having a capacity of four-hundred (400) or less persons, and six
thousand (6,000) or less square feet of total floor area, and buildings of no
more than three (3) stories in height, exclusive of attic and basement, which
do not contain more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area,
and are not intended for educational, institutional, or high hazard
occupancy; or assembly, business, or industrial occupancy in excess of one
hundred (100) persons, except churches as stated in this section, or for use
as a frozen food locker plant as defined in KRS 221.010, or any other
structure as specified by the Uniform State Building Code, excluding single
family residential structures.



(Ord. 92-24, passed 11-16-92)



Statutory Reference:



   Local Enforcement of UBC, see KRS 198B.060(1)



§ 150.02  APPEALS.



   Appeals from decisions made by the City Building Official under this
chapter may be taken to the State Board of Housing, Buildings, and
Construction unless and/or until a local board of housing appeals, as set
forth in KRS Chapter 198B, is established to hear such appeals.



Statutory Reference:



   Appeals procedure, see KRS 198B.070



ELECTRIC CODE



§ 150.10  NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The City Council hereby adopts as the safe and practical
standards for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment in
the city the rules and regulations of the National Board of Fire Protection
Association as contained in the code known as the 1978 National Electric Code.



   (B)   The National Electric Code is adopted by reference as if the
1978 National Electric Code was copied herein in full.  A copy of said 1978
National Electric Code containing such rules and regulations is now on file
in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer and the provisions of said Code and
said rules and regulations are hereby made a part of this chapter as if
copied herein in full.



(Ord. 79-9, passed 7-16-79)



§ 150.11  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   All persons, firms, companies or corporations shall, before
beginning any installation, alteration or change of electrical wiring or
equipment in the city, obtain a permit for such work.  Permits for
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, shall issue upon
the receipt of an application thereof made out on a printed form furnished by
the Electrical Inspector, his designee or the City Clerk/Treasurer.  The fee
is to be paid before final inspection as herein provided for.  Permits shall
be posted in plain view, inside the building near the entrance switch or
inside the service switch when installed.



   (B)   The application for each such permit shall contain the name of
the owner or user of the electrical equipment to be installed, altered or
changed, and the location of such work by correct address, street and number,
also, name and address of person, firm or corporation or company making the
installation.



(Ord. 79-9, passed 7-16-79)



§ 150.12  FEES.



   The following inspection shall be paid to the Electrical Inspector for
the inspection of all electrical equipment installed or altered within the
city:



   (A)   Branch circuit wiring (rough).



      Two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per circuit for each of the
first three circuits; plus two dollars ($2) per circuit for each of the next
two (2) circuits; plus one dollar ($1) for each additional circuit.



   (B)   Fixture Work.



      Fixture outlets                     $  .15
ea.



      First twenty (20) sockets or less               
5.00



      For each additional socket over twenty (20), add       
.15 ea.



      Receptacles                          .15
ea.



   (C)   Motors and Generators.



      First machine                     $ 5.00



      Each additional machine                   2.00



      Heating devices (space heaters)                1.00



      Furnace and air conditioning, each three dollars ($3.00),



      combination                         5.00



   (D)   Switch Boards or Panel Boards.



      For each panel board                  $7.50



(Ord. 79-9, passed 7-16-79)



§ 150.13  INSPECTION OF ELECTRICAL WORK.



   (A)   The provisions for inspections of work authorized by permits
by the city shall not be construed as prohibiting the inspection of any
electrical wiring or apparatus now or whenever installed, whenever the
Electrical Inspector shall determine that public safety requires.  No
inspection fee shall be charged for this inspection but in case it is
determined necessary to replace any wrong or defective wiring or apparatus
upon such inspection a permit in like manner as the original shall be
obtained.



   (B)   Wherever the Electrical Inspector shall find any electrical
wires or apparatus not conforming to the rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter or any electrical ordinance, said Electrical Inspector is hereby
empowered to stop work on any installation being made by any person, firm or
corporation to whom or which a license or a permit has not been granted or
who or which has not paid the final inspection fees or who or which does not
otherwise comply to the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 79-9, passed 7-16-79)



§ 150.14  QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   The Electrical Inspector employed by the city, or in the event an
independent contract is entered into for electrical inspections, such
inspector shall possess the qualifications required by the state and shall
only be permitted to charge the fees set out herein for his services.



(Ord. 79-9, passed 7-16-79)



BUILDING PERMITS



§ 150.20  DEFINITIONS.



   CONSTRUCTION.   The delivery to the site of materials which are to be
incorporated into subsequent improvements which are located on the site. 
This may include but is not limited to concrete, lumber, brick, steel,
block/brick or other similar material.



(Ord. 94-24, passed 10-26-94)



§ 150.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any building or structure in
the city, excepting fences, when the cost of such construction exceeds one
hundred dollars ($100) or where the effect of such construction or alteration
is to enlarge the capacity or affect the bearing walls of any building or the
roof thereof, without having first secured a permit therefor.



(Ord. 81-14, passed 1-18-82)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.22  APPLICATION.



   Application for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk/Treasurer,
and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the work to be
done; such plans shall be verified by the signature of either the owner of
the premises or by the architect or contractor in charge of the operations.



(Ord. 81-14, passed 1-18-82)



§ 150.23  MATERIAL VARIATIONS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted plans and
specifications unless such variations are submitted in an amended plan to the
City Clerk/Treasurer.



(Ord. 81-14, passed 1-18-82)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.24  FEES.



   (A)   Each permit application for construction filed with the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall be accompanied by a fee as follows:



      Construction Cost               Fee



      $100 to 1,500               $  5



       1,501 to 5,000                 10



       5,001 to 10,000                 15



       10,001 to 20,000                 25



       20,001 to 35,000                 50



       35,001 to 50,000                 75



       50,001 to 65,000                100



       65,001 to 80,000                125



       80,001 to 100,000                150



       100,001 to 150,000                175



       150,001 to 200,000                200



       200,001 to 300,000                225



       300,001 to 400,000                250



       400,001 to 500,000                300



       500,001 to 1,000,000             500



Any and each multiple of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) over one million
dollars ($1,000,000) shall be assessed ten dollars ($10) per multiple in
addition to the five hundred dollars ($500).



   (B)   In addition to the regular building permit fee established
above, there shall be a late fee assessed by the Administrative Official, for
obtaining a building permit or compliance permit after construction has
commenced, of one hundred dollars ($100.00) minimum plus an additional
penalty fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day, after the
first day construction has commenced, on which additional construction
activity occurs without a building permit or compliance permit being issued
with the total sum of these late fees and penalty fees not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).



(Ord. 81-14, passed 1-18-82; Am. Ord. 94-24, passed 10-26-94)



§ 150.25  PERMIT FOR FENCE, DRIVEWAY, DRIVEWAY DRAIN TILE.



   (A)   Before erection of a fence of any height or placement of a
driveway or driveway drain tile, a permit must be obtained from the city.



   (B)   Said permit will be free of charge.



   (C)   To obtain said permit, the applicant must inform the city of
the location and dimensions of the fence, driveway, or tile.



   (D)   The city shall decline to issue the permit in the event said
project would violate any city ordinance, code, or regulation.



   (E)   This section does not relieve the property owner from
obtaining all other permits and approvals required by federal, state, or
local law or regulation.



   (F)   Should any fence, driveway, drain tile, or any structure be
installed in violation of this section, the city shall have the right to
remove same at the property owner’s expense.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-16)



SIGNS



§ 150.30  INTENT.



   This subchapter provides content-neutral sign standards that allow
legitimate signage for agricultural, residential, professional office,
business, and industrial activities while promoting signs that:



   (A)   Reduce intrusions and protect property values;



   (B)   Minimize undue distractions to the motoring public;



   (C)   Protect the tourist industry by promoting a pleasing community
image; and



   (D)   Enhance and strengthen economic stability.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.31  SCOPE.



   These provisions apply to the display, construction, erection,
alteration, location, and maintenance of all new and existing signs within
the municipal boundaries of the City of Hillview.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.32  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter and
are, therefore, exempt from the requirement to obtain a sign permit or pay a
fee:



   (A)   Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the property upon
which they are located.



   (B)   Government signs that are placed by government officers in the
performance of their professional/elected duties.



   (C)   Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility
companies or construction companies in the performance of their professional
duties.



   (D)   Vehicle signage when painted directly on a vehicle or attached
magnetically.



   (E)   Temporary signage placed on or after April 15 and removed by
the last day of May. Temporary signage placed on or after the first day of
October and removed by November 15.



   (F)   Signage placed by realtors in the performance of their
professional duties.



   (G)   Window signage.



   (H)   Incidental signs



   (I)   Historic markers



   (J)   Change of copy on any sign where the framework or other
structural elements are not altered.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.33  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No sign regulated by this subchapter (except those
specifically exempted in § 150.33 below) shall be displayed, erected,
relocated, or altered unless all necessary permits have been issued by the
city. Applicants shall submit an application form to the city before any
permit may be issued. The fee for said permit per business, individual, or
event shall be $25. The yearly renewal fee shall be $25.



   (B)   Signs shall only be erected or constructed in compliance with
the approved permit.



   (C)   Applicants shall obtain a building permit for the footer of
freestanding and monument signs.  Applicants shall also obtain an electrical
permit for signs that require electrical service. 



   (D)   Signs permitted as an accessory to a legal, nonconforming use
shall be subject to the regulations of the zone in which the nonconforming
use is located.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.34  SIGNS THAT REQUIRE A PERMIT BUT ARE EXEMPT FROM PAYING FEE.



   The following signs shall require a permit but shall not require the
payment of a fee:



   (A)   Temporary signs for a new business for up to 30 consecutive
days from the first day of business. Exempt signage shall only be displayed
on the property where the new business is located.



   (B)   Temporary signage placed for four weeks or less. To be exempt
pursuant to this provision, the owner of the signs, or the owner's
representative, must advise the city of the dates said signs will be erected.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.35  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   A legal, nonconforming sign may continue in existence as long
as it is properly maintained in good condition. 



   (B)   These provisions shall not prevent the repair or restoration
to a safe condition of any sign, but a nonconforming sign shall not be:



      (1)   Changed to another nonconforming sign except where only
the face or copy is changed;



      (2)   Structurally altered so as to increase the degree of
nonconformity of the sign;



      (3)   Expanded or enlarged;



      (4)   Reestablished after its removal; or



      (5)   Moved to a new location on the building or lot.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.36  ILLEGAL SIGNS.



   All illegal signs shall be subject to citation by the City of Hillview
Code Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.37  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All signs in all zones shall meet the following requirements:



   (A)   Illuminated signs shall be located in a fashion which prevents
all direct rays of light from shining beyond the property lines of the lot on
which the sign is located.



   (B)   No light, sign, or other advertising device shall be designed
or erected to imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal, or
device or use any words, phrases, symbols, or characters implying the
existence of danger, or the need to stop or maneuver the vehicle.



   (C)   No sign shall be attached to or painted on the surface of any
tree, utility pole, or street light.



   (D)   Projecting signs shall have at least seven of clearance above
a road or sidewalk.



   (E)   Neon or other lighted tubing signs shall not be permitted
except where such lighting is used behind solid lettering to produce a
“halo” effect, or where it is used indirectly. Neon lighting shall not be
used to outline buildings, structures, or ornamental features.



   (F)   No sign, except for government signs, shall be located within
the sight triangle of any intersection. 



   (G)   No sign shall be placed in or project into the public or
private street right-of-way, except as specifically permitted herein.



   (H)   Freestanding, monument, and projecting face sign area shall be
computed as follows:



      (1)   Double-faced signs shall have only one face counted in
calculating the area.



      (2)   Sign with more than two faces shall have the area
calculated by summing the area of all sign faces and dividing by two.



      (3)   The area enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet shall
be calculated to determine the area.



      (4)   The perimeter of the measurable area shall not include
embellishments (e.g., pole covers, framing, or decorative roofing) provided
there is no written copy on such embellishments.



      (5)   Maximum height shall be measured from the finished grade
at the center of the sign and shall include the sign's base.



   (I)   Every sign, including those for which a permit is not
required, shall be maintained in good condition at all times.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.38  PROHIBITED SIGNS IN ALL ZONES.



   The following signs and/or sign features shall be prohibited in all
zones:



   (A)   Mobile signs;



   (B)   Roof signs that extend higher than the top of the roof;



   (C)   Rotating or moving signs;   



   (D)   Abandoned signs;



   (E)   Streamers, pennants, and tag signs or similar signs or devices
except when attached to a permitted temporary sign;



   (F)   Any sign which emits any noise or odor;



   (G)   Freestanding signs which overhang any part of a building;



   (H)   Flashing or blinking signs;



   (I)   Billboards with an electronic message display system;



   (J)   Signs in a public right-of-way; and



   (K)   Handbills.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.39  SIGNS REQUIRING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT IN ALL ZONES.



   (A)   Signs painted directly on a building.



   (B)   Only the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall have the authority
to approve sign variances or conditional use permits for signs unless the
request is made to the Planning Commission in conjunction with a Development
Plan.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.40  SIGNS PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC ZONE.



   Any sign not specifically permitted shall be prohibited.



   (A)   Agricultural Zone: A-1.



      (1)   Residence.



         (a)   One wall sign not exceeding one square foot in
area.



         (b)   Every parcel shall be entitled to one sign not
exceeding 36 square inches in area to be placed in any of the following
locations:



            1.   On the front of every building, residence or
structure;



            2.   On each side of an authorized U.S. Postal
Service mailbox; and



            3.   On one post which measures no more than 48
inches in height and four inches in width.



      (2)   Farm.



         (a)   Two signs per entrance if incorporated into a
fence or wall feature, or one freestanding sign per entrance. Signs shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area each.



         (b)   Incidental signs. Which shall not exceed two
square feet in area nor require sign permits.



      (3)   Buildings used for religious or educational activities.



         (a)   One freestanding sign not exceeding 32 square feet
in area and eight feet in height.



         (b)   One bulletin board, not exceeding 12 square feet
in area and eight feet in height.



         (c)   One wall sign per building not exceeding 32 square
feet in area.



         (d)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square
feet in area and do not require sign permits.



      (4)   All other conditional uses.



         (a)   One freestanding sign for any other permitted or
conditional use not noted herein; signage shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height.



         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet
in area, and eight feet in height.



   (B)   Residential Zones and Conservation Zone: R-1, R-2, R-3, AND
R-4.



      (1)   Residence. One nameplate wall sign not exceeding one
square foot in area.



         (a)   One wall sign not exceeding one square foot in
area.



         (b)   Every parcel shall be entitled to one sign not
exceeding 36 square inches in area to be placed in any of the following
locations:



            1.   On the front of every building, residence or
structure;



            2.   One each side of an authorized U.S. Postal
Service mailbox; and



            3.   On one post which measures no more than 48
inches in height and four inches in width.



      (2)   Home occupation. One wall sign not exceeding six square
feet in area.



      (3)   Subdivision and mobile home park. One freestanding sign
per entrance into the subdivision or park not to exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height.



      (4)   Multi-family residence. Multi-family residential
buildings and conditional uses may have:



         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32
square feet in area and eight feet in height and shall have a front yard
setback of 20 feet;



         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet
in area; and



         (c)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square
feet in area nor require sign permits.



      (5)   Buildings used for religious or educational activities.



         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32
square feet in area and eight feet in height;



         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet
in area;



         (c)   One bulletin board that shall not exceed 12 square
feet in area and eight feet in height; and



         (d)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square
feet in area nor require sign permits.



      (6)   All other conditional uses.



         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32
square feet in area and eight feet in height;



         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet
in area; and



         (c)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square
feet in area nor require sign permits.



   (C)   Standard signage permitted in all Professional, Commercial and
Industrial Zones: B-1, B-2, I-L, I-G, EP.



      (1)   One freestanding or monument sign per street frontage
with a maximum of two signs per lot.



         (a)   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 75 square feet
in area, 25 feet in height, and shall have a minimum setback of ten feet.
When street frontage permits two signs, the two freestanding signs may be
combined into one freestanding sign that shall not exceed 110 square feet in
area.  For buildings with more than one occupying business this freestanding
sign may list all businesses within the building. 



         (b)   Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet in
area, eight feet in height, and shall have a minimum setback of ten feet.



      (2)   One wall sign, canopy sign or awning sign per street
frontage with a maximum of two signs per building.  The maximum allowed area
for all signage in this category is 32 square feet or 15% of the wall area to
which the sign, canopy or awning is attached, whichever is greater.  Awnings
shall have at least seven feet of clearance when fully extended.  When a
building contains two or more separate businesses, these requirements shall
be applied separately to the wall area of the portion of the building
occupied by the individual business.



      (3)   One wall sign per tenant or lessee not exceeding two
square feet in area.



      (4)   One attraction board either attached to the wall or
attached to the permitted freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height.



      (5)   One menu board for every property that includes a
drive-thru lane, walk-up window or drive-up curbside.  Menu boards shall not
exceed 55 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of eight feet.



      (6)   Temporary signs. Shall include banners, streamers,
tethered balloons, and inflatable signs and objects.  One temporary sign per
street frontage shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Shall not exceed 50 square feet per sign where
non-rigid materials are used.



         (b)   Shall not exceed 32 square feet per sign where
rigid materials, such as wallboard or plywood, are used.



         (c)   Shall comply with the applicable regulations for
the zone in which they are located.



         (d)   Shall not remain in place for a period of more
than 14 continuous days.



         (e)   Shall not be displayed for more than a total of
eight times in any calendar year.



         (f)   Shall not be placed within the public right-of-way
or the sight triangle at intersections.



      (7)   One marquee per theatre. A marquee shall not exceed 32
square feet in area, shall not project more than eight feet from the building
face to which it is attached, and shall have a minimum clearance of eight
feet. 



      (8)   Incidental signs. Which shall not exceed two square feet
in area nor require sign permits.



      (9)   Buildings used for religious or educational activities.



         (a)   In addition to signage permitted above, one
bulletin board, not exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.



         (b)   Electronic message display systems may be
incorporated into one freestanding or wall sign for each property.



   (D)   Additional signage permitted in specific Commercial and
Industrial Zones.



      (1)   Business, B-2. In addition to the signage permitted in
§ 150.42 above, the following signs shall be permitted:



         (a)   Permanent sidewalk sign. Where a building is
located adjacent to the public right-of-way, one non-illuminated,
freestanding sign may be permanently placed on the public sidewalk with the
following restrictions:



            1.   Sign shall not exceed 5.5 square feet in area.



            2.   The edge of the sign shall not extend beyond
the curb line.



            3.   The maximum dimensions of the support frame
shall not exceed eight square feet in area (maximum 48 inches wide or 36
inches high).



            4.   The bottom of such support shall be seven
feet above the sidewalk and the vertical support shall be 24 inches from the
curb.



         (b)   Portable sign. One shall be permitted for each
business entrance subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   Maximum surface area of the sign shall be six
square feet per face, maximum height of the sign shall be three feet, and
maximum width of the sign shall be two feet.



            2.   A minimum 36 inches wide pedestrian
travel-way shall be maintained on the sidewalk.  Signs may be designed with
a changeable face and shall be removed from the public sidewalk when the
business is closed.



      (2)   Highway Business, B-1. In addition to the signage
permitted in § 150.42, the following signs shall be permitted:



         (a)   Shopping center malls larger than 100,000 square
feet may have one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 250
square feet per sign face and a maximum height of 30 feet. All other shopping
malls may have one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 75
square feet per sign face and a maximum height of 25 feet.



         (b)   One interstate sign for those businesses which lie
within a 2,500-foot radius of the center point of an interstate interchange
overpass. This interstate sign shall take the place of either the permitted
freestanding or wall sign outlined in § 150.42 above. These businesses may
have a combination of any two of these signs: interstate sign, freestanding
sign, or wall sign.  Interstate signs shall be subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   Shall not have an electronic message display
system.



            2.   Individual signs shall not exceed 250 square
feet in area.



            3.   Height (from the base to the top of the sign)
shall not exceed 90 feet.



            4.   The sign's base shall be at least 90 feet
from any residential zoned property.



            5.   In addition to a sign permit, a building
permit shall be obtained prior to installation.



      (3)   Industrial zones. In addition to the signage permitted
in § 150.42, the following signs shall be permitted:



         (a)   Shopping Center Malls larger than 100,000 square
feet may have one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 250
square feet per sign face and a maximum height of 30 feet. All other shopping
malls may have one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 75
square feet per sign face and a maximum height of 25 feet.



         (b)   One interstate sign for those businesses which lie
within a 2,500-foot radius of the center point of an interstate interchange
overpass. This interstate sign shall take the place of either the permitted
freestanding or wall sign outlined in 11.10.5 above. These businesses may
have a combination of any two of these signs: interstate sign, freestanding
sign, or wall sign.  Interstate signs shall be subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   Shall not have an electronic message display
system.



            2.   Individual signs shall not exceed 250 square
feet in area.



            3.   Height (from the base to the top of the sign)
shall not exceed 90 feet.



            4.   The sign's base shall be at least 90 feet
from any residential zoned property.



            5.   In addition to a sign permit, a building
permit shall be obtained prior to installation.



         (c)   One billboard shall be permitted subject to the
following restrictions:



            1.   The sign shall not have an electronic message
display system.



            2.   The property on which the billboard is
located shall abut a federal or state highway.



            3.   The sign shall be the principal use; there
shall be no other buildings, freestanding signs, etc., on the lot.



            4.   Signage face shall not exceed 720 square feet
in area.



            5.   The sign shall be located no closer than 300
feet to any other structure.



            6.   The sign shall be at least 150 feet away from
any residential zone or residential use.



            7.   There shall be a 40-foot setback requirement
from any right-of-way.



            8.   Maximum height shall be 35 feet.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.41  ADVERTISING ON INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS.



   No billboard shall be permitted adjacent to interstate or
limited-access highways except in conformance with the setback requirements
established by the Federal Bureau of Public Roads, the Kentucky
Transportation Cabinet, and the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance with
respect to the zoning district involved.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.42  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   Every sign, including those signs for which a permit is not required,
shall be maintained in good condition at all times.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.43  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions contained in this section shall be applied in the
interpretation of all sections within this subchapter, except where the
context clearly indicates otherwise.  Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense, singular number shall include the plural, and
plural include the singular.



   ABANDONED SIGN. Signage that has been neglected and fallen into
disrepair.



   ATTRACTION BOARD. Copy is changed manually or electronically on a
regular basis.



   AWNING SIGN. Applied directly to the surface of an awning; defined as a
shelter supported entirely on a wall and made of non-rigid material supported
by a frame.



   BANNER SIGN Made of non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.



   BILLBOARD. Signage intended for lease to a variety of businesses,
organizations, and/or individuals.  In such case, the sign itself shall be
the income generator and the primary commercial use of the property. 



   BULLETIN BOARD. Allows the manual or electronic change of copy and is
used to notify the public of noncommercial events or occurrences such as
church services, political rallies, civic meetings, or similar events.



   CANOPY SIGN. Applied directly to the surface of a canopy; defined as a
permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway, or similar area.
Canopies may be supported by a building, columns, poles, braces, or a
combination of both.



   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. Two faces either set parallel or up to a 45 degree
angle.  Any two sign faces set at an angle greater than 45 degrees shall be
considered two separate signs.



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY SYSTEM. Copy which uses rotating reflective
discs, direct illumination, rotating veins, light emitting diodes (LEDs),
liquid crystal diodes (LCDs), or other digital devices and is changed by a
central computer.



   FARM. A tract of at least ten contiguous acres used for the production
of agricultural or horticultural crops.  Agricultural and horticultural
crops shall be defined as, but not limited to, livestock, livestock products,
poultry, poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber,
orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers, ornamental plants, vineyards, and
wineries.



   FLASHING OR BLINKING. Intermittent or sequential illumination for the
purpose of attracting attention to the sign.



   FREESTANDING SIGN. Attached to the ground by columns, poles, braces, or
other means and not attached to any building.



   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Temporary or permanent, erected by government
employees or officers in the performance of their professional/elected duties.



   HANDBILL. Printed or written material, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, or
booklet designed for distribution on vehicles or other property, excluding
postal distribution, which advertises merchandise, commodities, or services.



   ILLEGAL SIGN. Does not meet the requirements of this zoning ordinance
and has not been identified as a legal, nonconforming sign.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Emits or reflects artificial light from any source.



      (1)   DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. Lighted by an unshielded light
source (including neon tubing) which is visible as a part of the sign and
where light travels directly from the source to the viewer's eye.



      (2)   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. Light source projects light onto
the exterior of the sign surface or onto the building where the sign is
located.



      (3)   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. Light source is within the sign,
with a transparent or translucent background or cover which silhouettes
letters or designs.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN. Not exceeding two square feet in area. 



   INTERSTATE SIGN. Sign that is designed to be seen from an interstate
highway.



   MARQUEE SIGN. Used in conjunction with a theatre, is attached to the
building, and projects from the building.



   MENU BOARD. Freestanding signs placed at properties where there is a
drive-thru lane, walk-up window or drive-up curbside.



   MOBILE SIGN. Affixed to a frame having wheels or capable of being
moved. Mobile signs do not have a permanent foundation and cannot withstand
the wind-load stress requirements of the adopted building code as they are
designed to stand free from a building. The removal of wheels from such a
sign or temporarily securing a sign of this type shall not prevent it from
being classified as a mobile sign within this definition. This includes
signage placed in a truck bed or on a trailer designed to be pulled behind a
vehicle.



   MONUMENT SIGN. Attached to a permanent foundation or decorative base
and not attached to or dependent for support from any building, pole, post,
or similar upright.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Legally erected but does not comply with the
current regulations for the zone in which it is located.



   NON-ILLUMINATED SIGN. Does not emit or reflect artificial light from
any source.



   PORTABLE SIGN. Small sign, easily transported by hand, placed outside
during business hours and brought into the business after hours, usually tent
style or A-frame.



   PROJECTING SIGN. Attached to a building, extends more than 24 inches.



   ROOF SIGN. Projects above the cornice of a flat roof or the ridgeline
of a gabled or hipped roof.  In determining the top edge of the roof,
calculation shall not include cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or other projections
above the roofline.



   ROTATING OR MOVING SIGN. Any portion of which moves by mechanical means
or the wind; does not refer to changing copy with an electronic message
display system.



   SIGN. Any copy, including material used to differentiate the copy from
the background, which is applied to a surface as a means of identifying,
advertising, announcing, or illustrating products, services, and/or events.



   SIGN CLEARANCE. The vertical distance between the lowest point of any
sign and the grade at the base of the sign.



   SIGN COPY. Any word, figure, number, symbol, or emblem affixed to a
sign.



   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of
the sign, including the frame and any embellishments, to the bottom of the
base of the sign.



   SIGN SETBACK. The horizontal distance between any street right-of-way
and a sign.  The measurement shall be taken at the closest point between the
right-of-way and any part of the sign.



   SIGN SURFACE. That part of the sign on which the message is displayed.



   SQUARE FOOT. A unit of area equal to one foot by one foot square.



   STREET FRONTAGE. Property line that lies adjacent to street
right-of-way.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A banner, pennant, poster, or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood, or other like materials and that appears to be intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time.  They are intended to be displayed
for not more than 14 continuous days or more than eight times per calendar
year.



   VEHICLE SIGNAGE. Signage painted directly on a vehicle or attached
magnetically.



   WALL SIGN. Attached directly to a building; includes mansards,
canopies, awnings, and signs attached to a roof which do not project above
the roofline.



   WINDOW DISPLAY. Merchandise or other objects placed inside a building
to be viewed from outside the building.



   WINDOW SIGN. Attached to or located within three feet of the interior
of a window and which can be seen through the window from the exterior of the
structure.



(Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of the state codes
adopted in § 150.01 shall be subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   Violators of the Uniform State Building Code and the
Uniform State Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1000)
for each offense.



(KRS 198B.990(1))



      (2)   Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1000), imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, for each
offense.



(KRS 227.990(1))



      (3)   Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100), imprisonment for not more than ninety (90)
days, or both, for each offense.



(KRS 318.990)



   (B)   Any person violating §§ 150.20 through 150.24 shall be fined
an amount equal to the amount of the cost of the permit required for their
building or construction.  Each day they do not have a permit shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 81-14, passed 1-18-82)



   (C)   Violation of the provisions of these sign regulations, found
in §§ 150.30 et seq. shall constitute a civil offense subject to citation
by the City of Hillview Code Enforcement Officer. The fine for a first
offense shall be $25, for a second offense $50, for all subsequent offenses
$100. Should the citation be contested and be upheld by the City of Hillview
Code Enforcement Board, the fine shall increase by $75.



(Ord. 97-14, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-6-17)



CHAPTER 151:  STREET AND HOUSE NUMBERING



Section



Tract Numbering



   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Tract number required



   151.03   Grid system adopted



   151.04   Method of numbering



   151.05   Chart of tracts



   151.06   Approval of road names



   151.07   Number to be displayed



   151.08   Administration



   151.09   Appeals



   151.10   Enforcement



Property Numbering



   151.20   Houses, buildings and structures required to be numbered



   151.21   Chart of street numbers



   151.22   Changes in street names



   151.23   Display of numbers required



   151.24   Administration



   151.25   Enforcement



 



   151.99   Penalty



TRACT NUMBERING



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.   The person duly appointed by Fiscal Court to
administer the Bullitt County Planning and Zoning Regulations under KRS
Chapter 100 or any other person designated by order of the Fiscal Court to
administer this chapter.



   BASE LINES.   A general north and south line and a general east and
west line which pass through a reference point located at the center of the
intersection of Kentucky State Highway 61 and Kentucky State Highway 44 as
located within the city limits of the City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky, on
October 1, 1995.



   CITY COUNCIL.   The governing body possessing legislative authority in
a city in Bullitt County, Kentucky.



   COMMISSION.   The Bullitt County Planning Commission.



   FISCAL COURT.   The Bullitt Fiscal Court.



   GRID SYSTEM.   That system of tract location employing parallel lines
running generally east and west and north and south dividing the whole of
Bullitt County into points of common reference from base lines.  Number
lines designated by compass location and hundreds are assigned to the
parallel grid lines.  Grid lines are related to base lines and are generally
located parallel thereto.  The system is designed to assign whole numbers to
each fifty (50) foot in width tract in Bullitt County but may assign whole
numbers to larger or smaller tracts.



   IMPROVEMENT.   Any building requiring a number by this chapter.



   NUMBER.   The identifying number assigned to each tract of land by the
Administrator.  When displayed, the component numbers shall each be at least
eleven and one-fourth (11 ¼) inches wide and two (2) inches high.



   ROAD.   Street or road.



   TRACT.   Each platted and recorded lot, building used for residential,
business, commercial, industrial or governmental purpose or lot of land
otherwise identifiable upon sight.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.02  TRACT NUMBER REQUIRED.



   All tracts located in Bullitt County, Kentucky, including those located
within the municipal boundaries of the present cities or any new city created
within Bullitt County, shall be numbered and identified in accordance with
the grid system using the base lines.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.03  GRID SYSTEM ADOPTED.



   The grid system with base lines is hereby adopted as the tract locating
system in Bullitt County.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.04  METHOD OF NUMBERING.



   All tracts shall be consistently and consecutively numbered from the
appropriate base line.  Each tract located on or having an access  road or
driveway intersecting a road shall be assigned a north or south number with
reference to its distance north or south and east or west of the base line. 
Each tract located on or having an access road or driveway intersecting a
road designated as an east-west road shall be assigned an east or west number
with reference to its distance east or west and north or south of the base
line.  Even numbers shall be assigned to tracts located on the north side of
an east-west road or the east side of a north-south road.  Odd numbers shall
be assigned to tracts located on the south side of an east-west road or on
the west side of a north-south road.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.05  CHART OF TRACTS.



   The Administrator shall keep a chart showing the proper street number
of every tract in the county or city and an alphabetical index of road names
shall be permitted for new developments or roads.  The index shall locate
the street at its beginning and ending point by reference to the grid system.
The beginning of a street shall be that point nearest the base line
intersection.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.06  APPROVAL OF ROAD NAMES.



   The Fiscal Court shall have final authority for the approval of any
name or name change for county roads.  The City Council of each city where a
street or road is located shall have final authority for the approval of any
name or name change in city roads.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.07  NUMBER TO BE DISPLAYED.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of numbered improved tracts to have
the number displayed thereon in a place visible from the road.  If the
improvement is two hundred (200) feet or more from a road, the assigned
number shall be displayed at the entrance to the access road or driveway to
such buildings.  Unimproved tracts are not required to display numbers.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.08  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall be responsible for assigning numbers to
tracts in accordance with the grid system.  The Administrator is delegated
authority to administer this chapter and shall begin when the grid system is
in place having been accepted by the Fiscal Court.  Thereafter, at the time
of the issuance of a building permit the person requesting the permit shall
provide to the Administrator a site plan for such building indicating:



      (1)   The exact location of the improvement;



      (2)   The exact location of the access road or driveway
serving the improvement; and



      (3)   The distance in feet from the front of each building to
the nearest county road serving the tract access road or driveway.



   (B)   Upon being informed of the exact existing or proposed location
of an improvement, the Administrator shall designate in writing to the owner
the correct number and record that information in the Commission records. 
He shall designate in writing any refusal to issue a number or accept a road
name and shall state in full his reason for refusal.  The Administrator
shall maintain  current set of reproducible maps covering all of Bullitt
County showing the numbers assigned to all tracts and a current index of road
names.  Copies of such maps and road index may be purchased by persons at a
cost fixed by Fiscal Court.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.09  APPEALS.



   Any decision of the Administrator concerning his administrative action
in assigning or refusing to assign street names or number may be appealed to
the Commission.  Any person aggrieved by the Administrator's decision may
appeal by filing written notice of his appeal with the Commission.  Such
notice shall state in full the reason for the appeal, may not be enlarged
thereafter and shall be filed within ten (10) days of the Administrator's
written action.  The Commission, Fiscal Court or City Council shall have no
jurisdiction to hear any appeal not timely filed.  The Commission shall have
full authority to reverse the Administrator's decision and to grant
appropriate relief.  Any person aggrieved by the Commission decision may
appeal to the Fiscal Court or City Council by filing written notice of his
appeal with the Fiscal Court or City Council.  Such notice shall state in
full the reason for the appeal, not be enlarged from the first appeal and
shall be filed within ten (10) days of the Commission action. The Fiscal
Court or City Council shall have no jurisdiction to hear any appeal not
timely filed.  The Fiscal Court or City Council shall have full authority to
reverse the Administrator's or Commission's decision and to grant appropriate
relief.  The decision of Fiscal Court or City Council shall be final.



(Ord. 85-13,.passed 12-16-85)



§ 151.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Administrator shall by citation or complaint to the Bullitt
District Court institute an action against any person who shall fail to
comply with this chapter.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 12-16-85)



PROPERTY NUMBERING



§ 151.20  HOUSES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES REQUIRED TO BE NUMBERED.



   All lots, buildings, structures and properties in Bullitt Cuonty,
Kentucky, including all properties located within the municipal boundaries of
the present cities or any new city created within Bullitt County, shall be
numbered in accordance with the following plan:



   (A)   There is hereby adopted a grid system as follows:  The county
wide numbering grid system shall consist of a series of parallel lines
running generally east and west and north and south.  Said system is founded
upon base lines from which number lines designated by hundreds are assigned
to parallel grid lines.



   (B)   The two (2) base lines to be used in locating said parallel
lines and said grid system shall be a line running north and south and a line
running east and west of which shall pass through a reference point, said
point being the physical intersection point of Kentucky Highway #61 (Preston
Highway) and Kentucky #44 located within the city limits of the City of
Shepherdsville, Bullitt County, Kentucky as of January 1, 1985.  All
buildings, lots, structures and properties shall be consistently and
consecutively numbered from the appropriate base line in the manner described
below.



   (C)   Each building, lot, structure or property located on or having
an access road or driveway intersecting a road designated as a north-south
road shall be assigned a north or south number with reference to its
distance, north or south, of a base line described above, running east and
west. Each building located on or having an access road or driveway
intersecting a road designated an east-west road shall be assigned an east or
west number with reference to its distance, east or west, of the base line
described above, running north or south.  Even numbers shall be assigned to
buildings, lots or properties located on or having an access road or driveway
intersecting the south side of an east-west road or the east side of a
north-south road.



(Ord. 85-6, passed 5-20-85)



§ 151.21  CHART OF STREET NUMBERS.



   The Bullitt County Planning and Zoning Administrator and the City
Clerk/Treasurer for each city shall keep a chart showing the proper street
number of every building, lot or property in the county or city which shall
be open to inspection by anyone interested.



(Ord. 85-6, passed 5-20-85)



§ 151.22  CHANGES IN STREET NAMES.



   The Fiscal Court shall have final authority for the approval of any
recommended change in county street or road names.  The respective City
Council of each city shall have the final authority for the approval of any
recommended change in city street or road names located within the boundaries
of that municipal corporation.



(Ord. 85-6, passed 5-20-85)



§ 151.23  DISPLAY OF NUMBERS REQUIRED.



   It shall be the duty of the owner and occupants to every lot, building,
structure or property in Bullitt County, Kentucky, to have placed thereon in
a place visible from the street, or if a building is two hundred (200) feet
or more from a street or road, the assigned number shall be displayed at the
entrance to the access road or driveway to such building, lot, structure or
property by means of a separate marker, figures at least one and one-fourth
(1 ¼) inch by two (2) inches high, showing the number of the building, lot,
property or structure.



(Ord. 85-6, passed 5-20-85)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.24  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Bullitt County Zoning Administrator or his representative
shall be responsible for assigning numbers to buildings in accordance with
the building numbering system set forth in this chapter.  At the time of the
issuance of a building permit or at such time thereafter as the Planning
Commission shall deem appropriate, the person, firm or corporation requesting
such building permit shall provide to the Zoning Administrator a certified
site plan for such building or structure indicating:



      (1)   The exact location of the building or buildings;



      (2)   The exact location of an access road or driveway serving
said building or buildings; and



      (3)   The distance in feet from the center of each building to
the nearest county road.



   (B)   Upon being informed of the exact existing or proposed location
of a building or structure, the Zoning Administrator shall designate and
verify to the owner, occupant or builder of any existing or proposed building
or structure the proper number of such building or structure.  Any decision
of the Zoning Administrator concerning the numbering of a building or
structure may be appealed to the Bullitt County Fiscal Court or respective
City Council for review.  In order for any such appeal to be considered by
that body, the person, firm or corporation seeking such review shall submit a
written statement setting forth in appropriate detail the reasons for such
appeal.  The approving body shall have the authority to overturn and change
any decision of the Zoning Administrator concerning the number of a lot,
building, structure or property.  No owner or occupant of a building may
change the number of such building without first obtaining the approval of
the Zoning Administrator.  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a current
set of reproducible maps covering all of Bullitt County showing the numbers
assigned to all lots, buildings, structures and properties.  Copies of such
maps may be made available to persons, firms, or corporations requesting such
copies at a reasonable cost.



(Ord. 85-6, passed 5-20-85)



§ 151.25  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any police authority within Bullitt County may, by citation or
complaint to the Bullitt District Court, institute an action against any
person, firm, corporation or other owner of property who shall fail to comply
with this chapter, remove said numbers, alter, deface, or destroy or conceal
any number, or who shall place or substitute or permit to be placed or
substituted upon any property an erroneous or improper number not in
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 85-6, passed 5-20-85)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100) for each offense.  Each day the condition exists shall constitute a
separate offense.



CHAPTER 152:  MAINTENANCE OF OPEN DRAINAGE AREAS



Section



   152.01   Natural drainage not to be impeded



   152.02   Driveway construction; size of drainage tile



 



   152.99   Penalty



§ 152.01  NATURAL DRAINAGE NOT TO BE IMPEDED.



   No person shall at any time impede the natural drainage existing on the
property of constructing inadequate culverts, installing inadequate drain
tiles, or the filling of a drainage area with any material.



(Ord. 84-19, passed 12-17-84)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.02  DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION; SIZE OF DRAINAGE TILE.



   (A)   Where driveways cross open ditches, culverts shall be
installed, or the driveway shall be constructed in such a manner so as to
impede the normal flow of water in said ditch.  Said culverts shall be of
such size and shall be constructed that in no instance shall the size of
opening be less than obtained by a tweleve (12)-inch diameter pipe.



   (B)   All driveways constructed or reconstructed over, across or
upon any public street in the city shall be kept and maintained at all times
in accordance with the provisions hereof by the person so constructing,
reconstructing or using the same as an adjunct or appurtenant to lands or
properties immediately adjacent thereto.



(Ord. 79-7, passed 4-16-79)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 152.01
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifteen dollars ($15) nor more
than fifty dollars ($50) for each offense.  Each day that a violation exists
shall be considered a separate offense.  All citations which are not paid
within seven (7) days of their date of issue shall have added a late charge
of two dollars ($2).  Fines which are not paid in accordance with this
chapter shall after 28 days be processed by the Police Department through the
District Court for their collection.



      (2)   Any fines which are assessed by reason of this violation
of § 152.01 shall be payable to City Clerk/Treasurer.  These fines shall be
payable to the General Fund of the city and be expended for general city
purposes.



(Ord. 84-19, passed 12-17-84)



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of § 152.02 shall be
subject to a fine in an amount not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50).



(Ord. 79-7, passed 4-16-79)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Statutory authorization



   153.02   Findings of fact



   153.03   Statement of purpose



   153.04   Objectives



   153.05   Definitions



   153.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   153.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas



   153.08   Establishment of development permit



   153.09   Compliance



   153.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   153.11   Interpretation



   153.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   153.13   Enforcement, violation notice and penalties



Administration



   153.20   Designation of a local administrator



   153.21   Establishment of development permit



   153.22   Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator



Flood Hazard Reduction Provisions



   153.30   General construction standards



   153.31   Specific standards



   153.32   Standards for streams without established base flood
elevation (unnumbered A zones) and/or floodways



   153.33   Standards for shallow flooding zones



   153.34   Standards for subdivision proposals



   153.35   Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning
with the letter "A"



   153.36   Critical facilities



Appeals and Variance Procedures



   153.40   Appeals and variance procedures



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in KRS
82.082 and KRS 100 et seq. delegated to local government units the authority
to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry.



   (B)   The City Council based on its experience with floods within
the city adopts this chapter.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and
by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding
by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood
waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other areas.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas
in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by
flooding;



   (G)   Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property
is in a special flood hazard area; and



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area
assume responsibility for their actions.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE.  Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the
principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a
combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but
waves are usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of one
hundred (100) year flood, base flood elevations and flood hazard factors are
not determined.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).  A structure located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human
habitation, and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage
sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE).  Any walled and roofed expansion
to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a
common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   A1-30 and AE ZONES.  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the one
percent (1%) annual chance flood (one hundred (100) year flood). Base flood
elevations (BFEs) are determined.



   AH ZONE.  An area of one hundred (100) year shallow flooding where
depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet (usually shallow ponding). Base
flood elevations are shown.



   AO ZONE.  An area of one hundred (100) year shallow flooding where
water depth is between one (1) and three (3) feet (usually sheet flow on
sloping terrain). Flood depths are shown.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator's ruling on a request for a variance.



   AR/A1 – A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A ZONES.  Special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored
to provide a one hundred (100) year or greater level of flood protection.
After restoration is complete these areas will still experience residual
flooding from other flooding sources.



   A99 ZONE.  That part of the SFHA inundated by the one hundred (100)
year flood which is to be protected from the one hundred (100) year flood by
a federal flood protection system under construction. No base flood
elevations are determined.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one
(1) to three (3) feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   B AND X ZONES (SHADED).  Areas of the two-tenths percent (0.2%) annual
chance (five hundred (500) year) flood, areas subject to the one hundred
(100) year flood with average depths of less than one (1) foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one (1) square mile, and areas protected
by levees from the base flood.



   BASE FLOOD.  A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred (100)
year flood"). BASE FLOOD is the term used throughout this chapter.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE,
AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO that  indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a structure having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all four sides.



   BUILDING.  A walled and roofed structure that is principally
aboveground; including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank, or
other man-made facility or infrastructure. See definition for structure.



   C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES.  Areas determined to be outside the five
hundred (500) year floodplain.



   COMMUNITY.  A political entity having the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).  A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the
Regular Program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements
to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.



   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA).  An area that has been determined
by the Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified
community official) from available technical studies, historical information,
and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic
inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety
and general welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.  Any property that, if flooded, would result in
severe consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if
unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely
affect the health and safety of the public. Critical facilities include, but
are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently
mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing
homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle
and equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be
called upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility
facilities important to maintaining or restoring normal services before,
during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which
produce, use or store volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or
water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.



   D ZONE.  An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or
permanent storage of materials or equipment.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE.  A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, piling, columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway
walls. (See freeboard requirements for residential and non-residential
structures.)



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the
time of certification that verifies a structure's elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM.  The initial phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCLOSURE.  That portion of a structure below the Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage, or access to the
structure.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures or development
into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a
floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION
may also be referred to as "Existing structures".



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance
adopted by the city based on specific technical base flood elevation data
which established the area of special flood hazards.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD).  The flood that has a
two-tenths percent (0.2%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
Areas subject to the five hundred (500) year flood have a moderate to low
risk of flooding.



   FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOOD WATER.



      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and/or mudslides (i.e. mudflows). See Mudslides.



      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See
flood-related erosion.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  A map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  A map on which the boundaries of
the flood, mudslide (i.e. mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having
special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and/or the Flood
Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by floodwaters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual appointed by a NFIP
participating community to administer and enforce the floodplain management
ordinances.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
ordinances, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other
applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the
time of certification stating that a non-residential structure, together with
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified
design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and
anticipated debris impact forces.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one (1) foot. Also referred to as the "regulatory floodway".



   FLOODWAY FRINGE.  That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional
hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the
BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. Freeboard must be
applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level,
but also to the level of protection provided to all components of the
structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components, etc.



   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION.  As related in § 153.40, means that the
variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In
examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that
every newly constructed structure adds to government responsibilities and
remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years.
Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those
increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase
the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can
be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY.  A facility, structure, or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The
term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality
that is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



   HAZARD POTENTIAL.  The possible adverse incremental consequences that
result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam
or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential
classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of
a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity,
flood routing capacity).



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior, or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).  Increased cost of compliance
coverage provides for the payment of a claim for the cost to comply with
state or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a direct
physical loss by flood. When a building covered by a Standard Flood Insurance
Policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the state or community declares the
building to be substantially or repetitively damaged, ICC will help pay up to
thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) for the cost to elevate, floodproof,
demolish, or remove the building. ICC coverage is available on residential
and non-residential buildings (this category includes public or government
buildings, such as schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under
the NFIP.



   KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE 151.250.  PLANS FOR DAMS, LEVEES, ETC. TO BE
APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED BY CABINET – (ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC
PROTECTION CABINET).



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person
and no city, county, or other political subdivision of the state, including
levee districts, drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or
similar bodies, shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation
or improvement of any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other
obstruction (except those constructed by the Department of Highways) across
or along any stream, or in the floodway of any stream, unless the plans and
specifications for such work have been submitted by the person or political
subdivision responsible for the construction, reconstruction or improvement
and such plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the
cabinet and a permit issued. However, the cabinet by regulation may exempt
those dams, embankments or other obstructions which are not of such size or
type as to require approval by the cabinet in the interest of safety or
retention of water supply.



      (2)   No person, city, county or other political subdivision
of the state shall commence the filling of any area with earth, debris, or
any other material, or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a
building, barrier or obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to
a river or stream or in the floodway of the stream so that such filling,
raising or obstruction will in any way affect the flow of water in the
channel or in the floodway of the stream unless plans and specifications for
such work have been submitted to and approved by the cabinet and a permit
issued as required in division (1) above.



      (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to give the cabinet
any jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction,
improvement, enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district,
ditch, or system established for agricultural purposes, or to require
approval of the same except where such obstruction of the stream or floodway
is determined by the cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the beneficial
use of water resources in the area, and the person or political subdivision
in control thereof so notified. The Kentucky Bureau of Surface Mining through
KRS Chapter 350 shall have exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Chapter 151
concerning the regulation of dams, levees, embankments, dikes, bridges,
fills, or other obstructions across or along any stream or in the floodway of
any stream which structures are permitted under KRS Chapter 350 for surface
coal mining operations.



   KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE 151.320 – OFFICERS REQUIRED TO ENFORCE LAW.



      (1)   The mayor or chief executive officer of each city and
the county judge/executive of each county, shall have the concurrent duty of
enforcing with the cabinet, within their respective cities and counties, the
provisions of KRS 151.250, 151.280 and 151.310 and rules and regulations
issued thereunder.



      (2)   When a violation of KRS 151.250, 151.280 or 151.310
within his jurisdiction is brought to the attention of a mayor or chief
executive officer of a city or a county judge/executive, he shall immediately
notify the cabinet of the location and details of such violation.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC).  Is an official FEMA determination, by
letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC's include the
following categories:



      (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA).  A revision based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes
that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.



      (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).  A revision based on
technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood
zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and
planimetric features.



      (3)   Letter of Map Revision – Fill (LOMR F).  A
determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed
engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SFHA.



   LEVEE.  A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. 



      (1)   A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



      (2)   For a levee system to be recognized, the following
criteria must be met:



         (a)   All closure devices or mechanical systems for
internal drainage, whether manual or automatic, must be operated in
accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of which must
be provided to FEMA by the operator when levee or drainage system recognition
is being sought or revised).



         (b)   All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a
federal or state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an
agency of a community participating in the NFIP.



   LIMITED STORAGE.  An area used for storage and intended to be limited
to incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant material,
void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck
support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the
completion of construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for
aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include
natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a
structure's foundation system.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, structure access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a structure's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected or attached to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The
term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a "recreational vehicle" (see
Recreational Vehicle).



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MAP.  The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER.  The four (4) digit number on a flood map, followed
by a letter suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four (4) digits represent the
map panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter "A" is not used by FEMA, the letter "B" is the
first revision.)



   MARKET VALUE.  The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (Actual
Cash Value) or adjusted assessed values.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL).  The average height of the sea for all stages of
the tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain as shown on a community's FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the
term is synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929
or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.



   MITIGATION.  Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
costs of disaster response and recovery.



   MUDSLIDE (I.E. MUDFLOW).  Describes a condition where there is a
river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result
of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of
water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained
rain. A mudslide (i.e. mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a
landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain
Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate
cause of damage that occurs.



   MUDSLIDE (I.E. MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT.  The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.
mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.



   MUDSLIDE (I.E. MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA.  An area with land surfaces and
slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate
indicate a potential for mudflow.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).  The federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal
government and the private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD).  As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older
FIRM's. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the city’s floodplain
management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the city’s adopted floodplain management
ordinances.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL.  Structures that are not designed for human
habitation, including but is not limited to: small business concerns,
churches, schools, farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool
houses, clubhouses, recreational structures, mercantile structures,
agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with
normal room rentals for less than six (6) months duration.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD).  As corrected in 1988, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRM's and Digitally
Referenced FIRM's (DFIRM's). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct
datum.)



   OBSTRUCTION.  Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD).  (see Base Flood). The flood
that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter "A" is subject to
the one hundred (100) year flood. Over the life of a thirty (30) year loan,
there is a twenty-six percent (26%) chance of experiencing such a flood with
the SFHA.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY.  A community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION.  Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION.  Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.



   PROBATION.  A means of formally notifying participating NFIP
communities of violations and deficiencies in the administration and
enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. During periods of
probation, each insurance policy is subject to a fifty dollar ($50) surcharge.



   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY.  A defect in a community's floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management standards or of the standards
of 44 CFR 60.3, 60.4, 60.5, and/or 60.6.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM.  The phase of a community's participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot. See Base Flood.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  The process by which a community brings a
structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain
management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure
or other development.



   REPAIR.  The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
structure.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) or more separate occasions during a ten (10) year period where the
value of damages equals or exceeds an average of fifty percent (50%) of the
current value of the structure, beginning on the date when the damage first
occurred, or, four (4) or more flood losses of one thousand dollars ($1000)
or more over the life of the structure, or, three (3) or more flood losses
over the life of the structure that are equal to or greater than the current
value of the structure.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



   SECTION 1316.  That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance
coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has
been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise
restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SHEET FLOW AREA.  See "Area of shallow flooding".



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  That portion of the floodplain
subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards
as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1 – A30, AH, AO, or AR.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION (INCLUDES SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND OTHER
PROPOSED NEW DEVELOPMENT).  The date a building permit is issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure (including manufactured home) on a
site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; the installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other
man-made facilities or infrastructures. See Building.



   SUBDIVISION.  Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots or parcels.



   SUBROGATION.  An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money
paid out where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or
omissions by a community or other third party.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. 



      (1)   Means any repair to a building for which the cost of
repairs equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that
are categorized as repetitive loss.



      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is
considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences.



      (3)   The term does not apply to:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a "historic structure".



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. 



      (1)   Means any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement to a building, taking place during a five (5) year period (during
the life of the building), in which the cumulative percentage of improvement
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the
building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



      (2)   The term does not apply to:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a "historic structure"; or



         (c)   Any building that has been damaged from any source
or is categorized as repetitive loss.



   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR
SUBDIVISIONS.  Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the
streets, utilities, and pads equaling or exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the
value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction,
or improvement commenced.



   SUSPENSION.  Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for
failure to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required
for participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.



   UTILITIES.  Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment.



   VARIANCE.  Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.



   VIOLATION.  Failure of a structure or other development to fully
comply with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



   WATERSHED.  All the area within a geographic boundary from which
water, sediments, dissolved materials, and other transportable materials
drain or are carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger
stream, lake, or underlying aquifer.



   X ZONE.  The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the
SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate
areas subject to inundation by the flood with a two-tenths percent (0.2%)
probability of being equaled or exceeded (the five hundred (500) year flood)
in any year. Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs) designate areas where
the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than two-tenths percent
(0.2%).



   ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and,
as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated,
or qualified community official as determined by the City Council from
available technical studies, historical information, and other available and
reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the City Council which may
be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of city.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bullitt
County, dated April 5, 2016, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMS) and other supporting data  and any subsequent amendments thereto,
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these
regulations by the city, and for those land areas acquired by the city
through annexation.  This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of
applicability of this section and may be supplemented by studies for other
areas which allow implementation of this section and which are recommended to
the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by City
Council pursuant to statutes governing land use management regulations.  The
FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of the city and are on file and
available for review by the public during regular business hours at the City
Hall.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2006-09, passed 8-21-06; Am. Ord.
2016-07, passed 4-1-16)



§ 153.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See §  153.07 for
instructions and explanation.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable state regulations.  Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City Council, any officer or
employee, the Commonwealth of Kentucky, the Federal Insurance Administration,
or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.13  ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION NOTICE AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Civil offense.  If, at any time, development occurs which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit
and any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil
offense.



   (B)   Notice of Violation.  If, at any time, a duly authorized
employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit
and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the
Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for
the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or
violation, the section of this chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it
occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into
conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what
period of time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be
reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the violation and whether
or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to
stop work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may
be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and corrective
actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary fine and
shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See below.



   (C)   Notice of Citation; Notice of Violation.  If, at any time, a
duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has
reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur
which is not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including
obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain
construction permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized
employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender
stating the violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation
is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter
or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to
occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is
issued, the person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the
citation within seven (7) days of the date the citation is issued by either
carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying
the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a hearing before the
governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued does not respond
to the citation within seven (7) days, that person shall be deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation occurred
shall be considered final.



   (D)   Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a
variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor civil offense.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90)
days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 153.20  DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Council hereby appoints the City Clerk to administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions, and is herein referred
to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.21  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development begins within any special flood hazard area established in §
153.07. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished
by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities, and may
include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of local
administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can
be processed. Specifically, the following information is required:



   (A)   Application Stage.



      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level (MSL)
of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A
and elevation of highest adjacent grade; or



      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level to
which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;



      (3)   All appropriate certifications from a registered
professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed
structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in § 153.31(B) and §
153.33(B);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



   (B)   Construction Stage.



      (1)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before
construction continues, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, it
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator and to the state a certification of the elevation of the lowest
floor or flood-proofed elevation, as built, in relation to Mean Sea Level. In
AE, A1-30, AH, and A zones where the community has adopted a regulatory Base
Flood Elevation, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same.



      (2)   When flood proofing is utilized for a particular
structure, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued
work undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest
floor and flood proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately
and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall
be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.22  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed,
authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render
interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.



   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   Permit review.  Review all development permits to
ensure that:



         (a)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;



         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have
been obtained. Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may
be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with
the development permit;



         (c)   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible
manner;



         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect
the carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this chapter,
"adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development
will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1)
foot at any point.



      (2)   Review and use of any other base flood data.  When base
flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with § 153.07, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state
agency, or other source, in order to administer §§ 153.20et seq. Any such
information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption.



      (3)   Notification of other agencies.



         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division
of Water, and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or
regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the
watercourse; and



         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
and



         (c)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.



      (4)   Documentation of floodplain development.  Obtain and
maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:



         (a)   Certification required by § 153.31(A) (lowest
floor elevations) as shown on a completed and certified Elevation
Certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea
Level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, in accordance with § 153.21(B);



         (b)   Certification required by § 153.31(B) (elevation
or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on a completed and
certified floodproofing certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation
(in relation to Mean Sea Level) to which the new or substantially improved
structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with § 153.21(B);



         (c)   Certification required by § 153.31(C) (elevated
structures);



         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §153.34(A)
(subdivision standards);



         (e)   Certification required by § 153.31(E) (floodway
encroachments);



         (f)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished;



         (g)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



         (h)   Remedial action.  Take action to remedy
violations of this chapter as specified in § 153.13.



      (5)   Map determinations.  Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas,
for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions.



         (a)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
153.40(C)(2);



         (b)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data
have not been provided in accordance with § 153.07, then the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source,
in order to administer the provisions of §§ 153.30et seq.;



         (c)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular
structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
153.31(B);



         (d)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and
shall be open for public inspection.



      (6)   Right of entry.



         (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the administrator
has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon
any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building,
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may
enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
the same or perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.



         (b)   If such structure or premises are occupied, he/she
shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building,
structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such
request entry.



         (c)   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.



         (d)   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a
proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no
owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any
building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request
is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the
Administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this
chapter.



      (7)   Stop work orders.  Upon notice from the Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent,
or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed.



      (8)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or
plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



      (9)   Liability.  Any officer, employee, or member of the
Floodplain Administrator's staff, charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of
his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee, or
member because of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any
provision of this chapter shall be defended by the department of law until
the final termination of the proceedings.



      (10)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit.  A
floodplain construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall
expire if the holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced
construction within one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days from the date
of its issuance by the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION PROVISIONS



§ 153.30  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy;



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or fame ties to ground anchors. This standard
shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for
resisting wind forces;



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding; and



   (F)   Within Zones AH or AO, there shall be adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from
proposed structures;



   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;



   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters;



   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this
chapter;



   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended,
or replaced.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.31  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have
been provided, as set forth in § 153.07, the following provisions are
required:



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor, including basement  (mechanical and utility equipment, and
ductwork), elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of § 153.31(C).



      (1)   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade
to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the
FIRM, or elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if
no depth number is specified. (The Commonwealth of Kentucky recommends that
the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height
exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one (1)
foot, or elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade if
no depth number is specified.)



      (2)   In an A zone, where no technical data has been produced
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation, as determined by this community. (The Commonwealth of
Kentucky recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one (1) foot above
the base flood elevation.) The Floodplain Administrator will determine the
method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods include but are
not limited to detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, use of existing
data available from other sources, use of historical data, best supportable
and reasonable judgment in the event no data can be produced. Title 401 KAR
(Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Chapter 4, Regulation 060, Section
5(5)a, states as a part of the technical requirements for a State Floodplain
Permit: The applicant shall provide cross sections for determining floodway
boundaries (and thereby Base Flood Elevations) at any proposed construction
site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross sections shall be
referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no
more than + five-tenths (0.5) foot. Cross section elevations shall be taken
at those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points
where hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross
section shall extend across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the
number and at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure
that significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require
additional cross sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond
those needed for making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.



      (3)   In all other zones, elevated one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation. (The Commonwealth of Kentucky recommends the lowest floor be
elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.)



      (4)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building
inspection department to be properly elevated. Such certification and
verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure
(including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with § 153.31(A) or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities:



      (1)   Be floodproofed below an elevation one (1) foot above
the level of the base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;



      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement  (mechanical
and utility equipment, and ductwork), elevated no lower than one (1) foot
above the level of the base flood elevation; or



      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
153.21(A)(3).



      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in §
153.31(D).



      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which
are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials
below an elevation one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, and, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Opening sizes (FEMA
Technical Bulletin 1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect; or



         (b)   Have a minimum of two (2) openings with a total
net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one (1) foot above grade.  Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.



   (C)   Elevated structures.  New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures on columns, posts, or pilings (e.g.) that
include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls
below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living
space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.



      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one (1) foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in
elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions.



      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and



      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.



      (1)   All new or substantially improved manufactured homes
placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:



         (a)   On individual lots or parcels;



         (b)   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks
or subdivisions;



         (c)   In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;



         (d)   In substantially improved manufactured home parks
or subdivisions;



         (e)   Outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision; and



         (f)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood.



      (2)   All manufactured homes must be:



         (a)   Elevated on a permanent foundation;



         (b)   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one
(1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, (the Commonwealth of
Kentucky recommends at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation); and



         (c)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (3)   Excepting manufactured homes that have incurred
substantial damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that the manufactured home is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement, so that either the:



         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood
elevation; or



         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength, of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above the highest
adjacent grade.



      (4)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within
A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
must either:



         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days;



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or



         (c)   Meet the permit requirements for new construction
of this chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements for
"manufactured homes".



      (5)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
licensed and insured in accordance with the state motor vehicle regulations,
is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.



   (E)   Floodways.  Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in §153.07  are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters
which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood
discharge;



      (2)   If § 153.31(E)(1) is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§ 153.30et seq.



   (F)   Standards for utilities.



      (1)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:



         (a)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



         (b)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.



      (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding.



   (G)   Structures elevated on fill.  A residential or
non-residential structure may be constructed on permanent fill in accordance
with the following:



      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) of the structure
or addition shall be no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation;



      (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
(1) foot deep before compacting and should extend at least ten (10) feet
beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below the base flood
elevation, said slope being no greater than a 2:1 ratio unless a stability
analysis is provided by a registered professional engineer;



      (3)   The top of the fill shall be no lower than one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation. However, the one (1) foot minimum may be
waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect
the structure from damage due to erosion, scour, and other hydrodynamic
forces;



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties; or



      (5)   All new structures built on fill must be constructed on
properly designed and compacted fill (ASTM D-698 or equivalent) that extends
beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation and
has appropriate protection from erosion and scour. The design of the fill or
the fill standard must be approved by a licensed professional engineer.



   (H)   Vegetative buffer strips (riparian zones).  For all
activities involving construction within twenty-five (25) feet of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:



      (1)   A natural vegetative buffer strip shall be preserved
within at least twenty-five (25) feet of the mean high water level of the
channel.



      (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip
during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall
be established upon completion of construction.



      (3)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in
the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided for
stream maintenance purposes.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.32  STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 153.07
where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where
base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions
apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall
be located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1)  foot at any point within the
community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical
data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.



   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures
shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance
with § 153.07.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.33  STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 153.07
are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet, where
a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood
depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent
grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures shall:



      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade.
In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest
adjacent grade.



      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
be completely floodproofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in
Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one (1) foot
so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in § 153.31(B).



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.34  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood
hazard area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and



   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not
available (Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway
data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than fifty (50) lots or
five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall be provided.



   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed
structure(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base
flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided
to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (F)   All new subdivision proposals shall include streets for
emergency access that will be subject to no more than six (6) inches of flood
waters during the one percent (1%) annual chance flood (one hundred (100)
year flood).



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.35  STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH
THE LETTER "A".



   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated
"A" the following provisions shall apply:



   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;



   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;



   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one (1) foot
above grade, total openings are to be one (1) square inch per one (1) square
foot of floor area, at least two (2) openings required on opposite walls;



   (D)   Built of flood resistant materials below a level one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation;



   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;



   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking;



   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



§ 153.36  CRITICAL FACILITIES.



   (A)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the
extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA (one hundred (100)
year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall not be
permissible within the floodway; however, they may be permissible within the
SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities
constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated of one (1)
foot or more above the level of the base flood elevation at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.



   (B)   Critical facilities shall be constructed on properly compacted
fill and have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one (1)
foot above the elevation of the five hundred (500) year flood. A critical
facility shall have at least one (1) access road connected to land outside
the five hundred (500) year floodplain that is capable of supporting a twelve
thousand five hundred (12,500) pound vehicle. The top of the road must be no
lower than six (6) inches below the elevation of the five hundred (500) year
floodplain.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES



§ 153.40  APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Nature of variances.



      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the
chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances
pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may
be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual
that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an
exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to
the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.



      (2)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its
citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of
the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that
variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood
regulations are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited.
Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed
and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be
properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in
which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board.  City Council does
establish an Appeal Board which will consist of the City Council.



   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeal Board.



      (1)   The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or
determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Bullitt Circuit Court, as
provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   (D)   Appeals/variance procedures.  In passing upon such
applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter
and the:



      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;



      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual
owner and future owners of the property;



      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by
the proposed facility;



      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront,
in the case of functionally dependent facility;



      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets, and
bridges.



   (E)   Conditions for variances.  Upon consideration of the factors
listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.



      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on
a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by
lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing that the procedures of this chapter have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the "minimum necessary" to afford relief considering the
flood hazard. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of
deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of
variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not
grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever
elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City
Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this
chapter.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the "minimum necessary" to afford relief considering the
flood hazard. In the instance of a historical structure, a determination
shall be made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and
not destroy the historic character and design of the structure.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this
chapter); and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood height, additional threats to public
safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in
the definition section under "Public safety and nuisance"), cause fraud or
victimization of the public (as defined in the definition section) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.



      (6)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



      (7)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon
request.



      (8)   Variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of §§
153.40et seq. are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a
public nuisance.



   (F)   Variance notification.  Any applicant to whom a variance is
granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for one
hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage; and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.



      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (G)   Historic structures.  Variances may be issued for the repair
or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (see § 153.05) upon determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway.  Variances shall
not be issued within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



(Ord. 2005-17, passed 11-21-05)



CHAPTER 154:  JOINT EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE



Section



   154.01   Joint Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Ordinance
incorporated by reference



§ 154.01  JOINT EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   Bullitt County Ordinance No. 13-10, an ordinance relating to the
regulation, control and elimination of soil erosion and sedimentation
resulting from land disturbance activities in Bullitt County, is hereby
incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein.  A copy of this
ordinance is on file in the Office of the City Clerk and can be reviewed by
the public during regular office hours.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-17-14)



CHAPTER 155:  JOINT POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF ORDINANCE



Section



   155.01   Joint Post-construction Stormwater Runoff Ordinance
incorporated by reference



§ 155.01  JOINT POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF ORDINANCE INCORPORATED
BY REFERENCE.



   Bullitt County Ordinance No. 13-11, an ordinance relating to
post-development maintenance and reduction of erosion, pollution, siltation
and sedimentation, and local flooding in Bullitt County, is hereby
incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein. A copy of this
ordinance is on file in the Office of the City Clerk and can be reviewed by
the public during regular office hours.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 2-17-14)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   ANNEXATIONS





         II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS





         III.   FRANCHISES





         IV.   ZONING CHANGES





         V.   STREET NAMING





         VI.   LEASES




TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




75-1
 
1-20-75
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at the northeast corner
of the original boundary of the City of Hillview, said point being north 18º
10' east 2640.00 feet.


76-5
 
11-15-76
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at a point in the south
west corner of Lot 4 of Lone Acres Subdivision, Section 1 as recorded in Plat
Book 2, Page 145.


76-8
 
12 -  - 76
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at the northwest corner
of Maryville, Section N of record in Plat and Subdivision Book 3, Page 17, in
the office of the County Court Clerk of Bullitt County, Kentucky, said point
being north 68 degrees, 57 minutes 30 seconds west, 504.11 feet from the
southwest corner of the original boundary of the City of Hillview, Kentucky.


78-10
 
12-18-78
 
Tract I. Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning in the southerly
right-of-way line of Maryville Drive at its intersection with the easterly
line of the land conveyed to Jeffie Lee by deed of record in Deed Book 62,
Page 406 in the office of the Clerk of the County Court of Bullitt County,
Kentucky.


 
 
 
 
Tract II.  Beginning in the easterly line of the land conveyed to Jeffie Lee
by deed of record in Deed Book 62, page 406 in the office of the Clerk of the
County Court of Bullitt County, Kentucky, at a point therein which is south
18 degrees 48 minutes 30 seconds west 131 feet and south 18 degrees 58
minutes 10 seconds west 178.52 feet from the southerly line of Maryville Road.


81-1
 
2-11-81
 
Annexing the following described territory beginning at a point, said point
being north 18º 10' east, 1965.30 feet from the southeast corner of the
original boundary of the City of Hillview, thence north 0º 34' east 1368.50
feet to a point.


82-11
 
11-15-82
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at a point in the
southeast corner of the original boundary of the City of Hillview.


82-12
 
12-20-82
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory described as follows:


 
 
 
 
Beginning at an iron pin, said pin being located in the northeast corner of
Hunters Hollow, Section 1, Deed Book 192, Page 255 in the south right-of-way
of Maryville Drive.


109
 
6-20-83
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory described as follows:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Beginning at an iron pin in the southeast corner of Lot 1 Lees
Acre Subdivision, Section 7 and being in the north right-of-way of Maryville
Drive.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Beginning at an iron pin, said pin being located in the
southeast corner of Lot 7, Lees Acre Subdivision, Section 7 and being in the
north right-of-way of Maryville Drive.


113
 
12-19-83
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at an iron pin, said pin
being located in the east right-of-way of Kentucky Highway 1450 (Blue Lick
Road) at its intersection with the north right-of-way of a 50-foot street as
shown on plat of Lee's Acres, Section 4-B, recorded in Plat Book 4, Page 29.


87-07
 
6-15-87
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at a point in the current
boundary of the City of Hillview, said point being located at the
intersection of the south right-of-way of Jeffie Lane and the east
right-of-way of Blue Lick Road.


87-13
 
8-6-87
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory described as follows:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Beginning at a stake on the east side of State Highway 61, 79
feet from the north line of the 40 foot passway to Roger Barger's which is
also the south line of the tract of which this is a part.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Beginning at an iron pipe in line of Joe Brooks at the northeast
corner of the lot conveyed to Crenshaw by R. B. Hines, September 28, 1956, by
deed recorded in Deed Book 88, Page 597 in the office of the County Court
Clerk of Bullitt County, Kentucky.


 
 
 
 
Tract Three:  Beginning at an iron stake on the northeast side of State
Highway No. 61 at the northwesst corner of the lot conveyed Crenshaw by R. B.
Hines and wife by deed recorded in Deed Book 88, Page 597 and corner to
Brooks and running thence with line of the same north 89 east 231.5 feet to
an iron stake corner to the Hines lot and the lot conveyed by J.R. Barger to
Crenshaw.


 
 
 
 
Tract Four:  Beginning at a stake on the northeast side of State Highway No.
61 at the southwest corner of the tract conveyed by R.B. Hines to Leland
Crenshaw by deed recorded in Deed Book 88, page 597 and running thence
parallel with the 33 feet from the center of said highway south 30 ½  east
79 feet.


87-21
 
10-29-87
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at a point in the west
right-of-way of Blue Lick Road, said point being south 23 degrees 12 minutes
41 seconds west 50.90 feet from the iron pin at the northeast corner of Tract
2 of the S.B. Williams, Jr. and Pauline Williams property as shown by survey
of H.B. Sedoris, Jr. dated November 24, 1986.


88-1
 
2-29-88
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory described as follows:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Beginning at a stone, corner to 1 ½  acre tract of Russell
Davis and in line of 28.8 acre tract of Russell Davis and running thence with
lines of Russell Davis and Rogers and Neil south 6 degrees 35 minutes (for 20
½) east 445 feet to an iron pipe on the south side of a drain in line of
Neil, corner to J. N. Brooks.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Beginning at a stake in east right-of-way line of Kentucky
Highway No. 61 at intersection of same with northwest corner of land of Davis.


 
 
 
 
Tract Three:  Beginning at a stake in the southeast property corner, said
stake being 35 feet right of the proposed center line of Rogers Lane.


 
 
 
 
Tract Four:  Beginning at an iron pipe in the intersection of the North line
of Huber's Subdivision and the West line of Wilma Avenue.


 
 
 
 
Tract Five:  Beginning at a point in the northwest property corner of Parcel
No. 45, said point being in the centerline of existing Preston Street and
also being 146.82 feet right of and opposite proposed Preston centerline
Station 390 + 45.40.


 
 
 
 
Tract Six:  Beginning at an existing iron pin corner of W.R. Simpson and
thence with line of W.R. Simpson south 85 degrees 06'40" West 124.56 feet to
an existing iron pin at 1.10 feet east of W.W. fence.


 
 
 
 
Tract Seven:  Beginning at a point, said point being south 88º 8' west
285.57' from an iron pin located at the northeast corner of Lot 17, §1,
Bullitt Hills Subdivision, as shown by plat recorded in Plat Book 4, page 26;
thence south 3º 5' west 294.92' to a point.


88-4
 
2-29-88
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at a post, said post
being located in the northwest corner of Donna Lynn Subdivision as shown by
plat recorded in Plat Book 5, Page 69, where said northern property line of
Donna Lynn Subdivision intersects with the eastern right-of-way of Interstate
65, which point is located within the city's current boundary.


89-9
 
6-29-89
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at an iron pin, said pin
being located at the northeast corner of the intersection of the south
right-of-way of old Highway 1450 and east right-of-way of Interstate 65.


89-10
 
6-29-89
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory commencing at a steel fence post at
the intersection of the east right-of-way of Brooks Hill Road and the north
right-of-way of Blue Lick Road.


89-11
 
8-22-89
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at a corner common to Arens and Hinton.


90-03
 
2-27-90
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at an iron pin located at the west
termination of the southbound exit ramp access control fence and the north
right-of-way of Brooks Hill Road.


90-05
 
3-28-90
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at an existing iron pin set in the
eastern right-of-way line of the new Blue Lick Road and the centerline of the
old abandoned Brooks Road.


90-10
 
7-17-90
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at an iron pin located in
the northwest corner of Lot Ten, Section Two, Hunters Hollow Estates.


90-17
 
11-19-90
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning in the north right of way
of Kentucky Hwy. 1526 at its intersection with the east right of way of a
gravel lane known as Sanders Lane, in the north boundary of the city.


92-17
 
6-25-92
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory beginning at an iron pin in the
north right-of-way of Blue Lick Road and the southwest corner of Pinkston Oil
Company.


93-02
 
3-15-93
 
Intent to annex unincorporated territory from a point located in the Southern
boundary of the city near I-65 and along the right-of-way of I-65.


93-03
 
6-2-93
 
Annexing certain territory from a point located in the Southern boundary of
the city near I-65 and along the right-of-way of I-65 containing 124 acres
more or less.


93-11
 
9-20-93
 
Intent to annex certain unincorporated territory beginning at a point lying
in the eastern right-of-way of Blue Lick Road.


93-12
 
10-18-93
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at an iron pin, said pin being located
in the east right of way of Blue Lick Road and the northwest corner of
Majestic Acres Section 1 (Plat Cabinet 1 Slide 71).


94-05
 
5-2-94
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at a point marked by an iron pin and cap
in the east line of Blue Lick Road at the intersection of the centerline of
Old Brooks Road, said point also being the north corner of Lot 3 of Myers
Commercial Subdivision as recorded in Plat Cabinet 2, Slide 58 in the office
of the Bullitt County Clerk, and a corner of a tract conveyed to Willabrook,
Inc. by deed dated February 10, 1993, and recorded in Deed Book 368 Page 392
in said Clerk's office.


94-12
 
8-4-94
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at an iron pipe in the eastern
right-of-way line of Kentucky Highway # 61, said pipe being S. 11o 15' W.
300.00 feet from the corner of Craddock (DB92 P434); thence S. 86o 45' E.
292.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence S. 11o 15' W. 150.00 feet to an iron
pipe; thence N. 86o 45' W. 292.00 feet to an iron pipe in the eastern
right-of-way line of Kentucky Highway # 61; thence N. 110 15' E. 150.00 feet
to the point of beginning, containing 1.00 acre.


94-16
 
8-16-94
 
Proposing the annexation of certain territory beginning at an iron pipe in
center of original Louisville Turnpike and at the northeast corner of tract
conveyed to Roy Braden by a deed recorded in Deed Book 77 Page 44, in the
office of the Clerk of Bullitt County, Kentucky and containing 33.847 acres
more or less.


94-20
 
8-4-94
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at a point, said point being in the
boundary of the city where it intersects the east right of way of Interstate
65 in the northeast quadrant of the Brooks Road Interchange; then with the
east right of way of Interstate 65 in a northerly direction 1320' to a field
division fence (cultivated field/pasture field); thence with the field
division fence in an easterly direction 1220'; thence following the fence in
a southerly direction to a point in the existing boundary of the city,
containing approximately 32 acres more or less.


94-22
 
10-26-94
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at a point in the south right-of-way
line of Bells Mill Road (Kentucky Highway 1526), said point being a common
corner with the city, and containing 2.29 acres more or less.


94-23
 
10-26-94
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at a point in the north right-of-way
line of Bells Mill Road (Kentucky Highway 1526), said point being a common
corner with the city, and containing 0.31 acres.


94-27
 
10-26-94
 
Annexing certain territory:


 
 
 
 
(1) Beginning at an intersection of the center line of an abandoned section
of Hebron Lane with the easterly boundary of Blue Lick Road; excepting
therefrom so much of said property as conveyed to the Commonwealth of
Kentucky for the use and benefit of the Department of Transportation by deed
dated April 13, 1981, in Deed Book 243, Page 826.


 
 
 
 
(2) Beginning at a point in center of the Blue Lick Road at the southwest
corner of the 15 acres conveyed to Raymond Farmer by deed recorded in Deed
Book 74, Page 301, containing 1 acre.


94-28
 
11-21-94
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at an iron pipe in center of original
Louisville Turnpike and at the northeast corner of tract conveyed to Roy
Braden by a deed recorded in Deed Book 77, Page 44, in the office of the
Bullitt County Clerk, containing 33.847 acres more or less.


94-30
 
12-19-94
 
Annexing certain territory:


 
 
 
 
(1) Tract One: Beginning at an iron pipe at a wood fence post in the northern
corner of Claude Fontaine (Deed Book 121, Page 28), and the edge of Blue Lick
Road (Kentucky Highway 1450), containing 14.904 acres.


 
 
 
 
(2) Tract Two: Beginning at a stone in the east line of Blue Lick Road, said
point also being a southwest corner of a tract conveyed to George Wise, etc.,
by deed recorded in Deed Book 62, Page 571, containing 5.4 acres more or less.


95-01
 
2-20-95
 
Proposing the annexation of certain property:


 
 
 
 
(1) Beginning on the eastwardly line of the Blue Lick Road at the
southwesterly corner of the Wilson Summers 100 acre tract extending thence
north along the line of Blue Lick Road, containing .85 acre more or less.


 
 
 
 
(2) Beginning at a stake in the center of the Blue Lick Road at corner of
Wilson Summers; thence south 21-1/2 west 17.1 poles with same to a stake,
corner to Maggie Curry; containing 11 acres more or less.


95-05
 
5-15-95
 
Proposing the annexation of certain territory commencing at an iron pin in
the northeast corner of Charles C. Robison's property recorded in Deed Book
164, Page 64 and in the west right-of-way line of West Hebron Lane;
containing 1.38 acres.


95-07
 
9-19-95
 
Annexing certain territory:


 
 
 
 
(1)

Tract 1: Beginning at a spike in the center line of the Blue Lick Road at the
original western corner of the Goldsmith tract; thence with the center line
of Blue Lick Road, containing 0.91 acre more or less.


 
 
 
 
(2) Tract 2: Beginning at a point in the center line of the Blue Lick Road,
corner to the 0.91 acre tract # 1, containing 1.52 acres more or less.


 
 
 
 
(3) Beginning at a set pipe the northwest junction of Millay DB 68, Page 525
and Payne DB 109, Page 543, containing 1.001 acres more or less.


95-11
 
8-21-95
 
Annexing certain property:


 
 
 
 
(1) Beginning on the eastwardly line of the Blue Lick Road at the
southwesterly corner of the Wilson Summers 100 acre tract extending thence
north along the line of Blue Lick Road, containing .85 acre more or less.


 
 
 
 
(2) Beginning at a stake in the center of the Blue Lick Road at corner of
Wilson Summers; thence south 21-1/2 west 17.1 poles with same to a stake,
corner to Maggie Curry, containing 11 acres more or less.


95-12
 
10-16-95
 
Annexing certain territory commencing at an iron pin at the northeast corner
of Charles C. Robison's property recorded in Deed Book 164, Page 64, and in
the west right-of-way line of West Hebron Lane, containing 1.38 acres.


95-18
 
11-20-95
 
Proposing the annexation of certain territory beginning at an iron pin, said
pin being located in the northwest corner of Childress (Deed Book 107 Page
510) in line of Lowell (Deed Book 170 Page 279).


95-19
 
12-18-95
 
Annexing certain territory beginning at a pin in the center of Bells Mill
Road at the southeast corner of Bullitt County Stone Co., Inc., said pin
being 85o30' east 1983.85 feet from the eastern right of way line of Kentucky
Highway # 61 as measured with the center line of Bells Mill Road.


95-20
 
1-15-96
 
Proposing the annexation of certain property beginning at an iron pin, said
pin being located in the southwest corner Keystops, Inc. (Deed Book 289 Page
69) and the east right of way line of Kentucky Highway #61 (Preston Highway)
which is the current boundary of the city.


96-02
 
3-18-96
 
Annexing certain property beginning at an iron pin located in the northwest
corner of Chidress (Deed Book 107 Page 510) in line of Lowell (Deed Book 170
Page 279)


96-05
 
4-25-96
 
Annexing certain property beginning at an iron rod being the northwest corner
of the Albert K. and Bonnie S. Koch track as recorded in the County Court
Clerk's office of Bullitt County, Kentucky. There is also conveyed a 20 foot
easement for ingress and egress beginning at a pin in the center line of
Bells Mill Road at the southwest corner of Albert Koch's property as recorded
in Deed Book 166, Page 178.


96-06
 
4-25-96
 
Proposing the annexation of certain property beginning at an iron pin located
in the northwest corner of Lot 1 Rodgers Subdivision (Plat Book 3 Page 15) in
the south right of way of Rogers Lane.


96-12
 
8-19-96
 
Annexing certain property beginning at an iron pin located in the northwest
corner of Lot 1 Rodgers Subdivision (Plat Book 3 Page 15) in the south right
of way of Rodgers Lane.


97-02
 
 
 
Annexing certain property: 


 
 
 
 
(1) Containing 0.43 acres beginning at a stone inline of Stiles, corner to
Pope, and running with line of Pope south 4º 48 min (6 1/2) east 96 feet to
stake corner to N. H. Miller.


 
 
 
 
(2) Beginning at an iron fence post in the west line of Highway 61 corner to
Pearl Harvey.


97-05
 
5-19-97
 
Proposing the annexation of certain property beginning at an iron pin, said
pin being located in the west right of way of Interstate 65 in the current
municipal boundary line of the City of Hillview, thence with the west right
of way line of Interstate 65, South 03º 37' 09" East 178.41'.


97-15
 
9-15-97
 
Annexing certain property beginning at an iron pin, located in the west right
of way of Interstate 65 in the current municipal boundary line of the city,
thence with the west right of way line of Interstate 65, South 03º 37' 09"
East 178.41'.


97-19
 
10-21-97
 
Annexing Lot Five (5) and Lot Six (6), of Lee's Acres Subdivision, Section 7,
plat of which is recorded in Plat Book 3, Page 37, Bullitt County Clerk's
Office.



98-04
 
5-18-98
 
Annexing Lot 5 and Lot 8 Maryville Drive, of Majestic Acres Subdivision,
Section 5, as shown in Plat and Subdivision Book 2, page 123, Bullitt Coutny
Clerk's Office.


98-06
 
6-15-98
 
Proposing the annexation of certain property beginning at a pin in the east
right-of-way line of Smith Lane, said pin being at the northwest corner of
the tract conveyed to Lovie H. Smith and recorded in Deed Book 136, page 84,
in the Bullitt County Clerk's office, said pin also being at the southwest
corner of the tract conveyed to Thomas and Francis Bader by Deed Book 86,
Page 193.


98-08
 
6-22-98
 
Annexing certain property beginning at an iron pin, said pin being located in
the west right-of-way of Blue Lick Road in the current boundary of the city.


98-14
 
10-19-98
 
Annexing certain property beginning at a pin in the east right-of-way line of
Smith Lane, said pin being at the northwest corner of the tract conveyed to
Lovie H. Smith and recorded in Deed Book 136, Page 84, in the Bullitt County
Clerk's Office, said pin also being at the southwest corner of the tract
conveyed to Thomas and Francis Bader by Deed Book 86, Page 193.


98-15
 
10-19-98
 
Annexing certain property beginning at a pipe on the east side of Blue Lick
Road 30 feet from the center of the same N 15 ¾ E, 330.3 feet from the
intersection of the center line of Blue Lick Road and Hebron Lane.


99-17
 
1-12-00
 
Annexing approximately 90.38 acres of land contiguous to the existing city
limits and located on East Blue Lick Road.


00-02
 
3-20-00
 
Annexing approximately 117 acres of land contiguous to the existing city
limits and located on the east side of Old Kentucky Highway 61.


00-03
 
4-17-00
 
Proposing the annexation of approximately 7.2 acres of unincorporated
territory adjoining the city.


00-04
 
5-15-00
 
Annexing approximately 16.28 acres of land contiguous to the existing city
limits and located on the west side of Kentucky Highway 1450.


00-05
 
5-15-00
 
Annexing Lot. No. 1, Slide 79, Map 43, on the PVA maps,  being on the
northerly right-of-way of Blue Lick Road at the southeasterly corner of a
tract conveyed to Waffle House, Inc.


2001-09
 
7-16-01
 
Proposing the annexation of approximately 15 acres of land contiguous to the
existing city limits and located on the east side of Blue Lick Road.


2001-13
 
10-15-01
 
Annexing approximately 15 acres of land contiguous to the existing city
limits and located on the east side of Blue Lick Road.


2001-14
 
11-19-01
 
Annexing approximately 70 acres of land contiguous to the existing city
limits and located on Preston Highway and Hebron Lane.


2001-15
 
12-17-01
 
Annexing approximately 75 acres of land contiguous to the existing city
limits and located at the terminus of Robin Way.


2003-01
 
2-17-03
 
Proposing the annexation of approximately 97 acres of unincorporated
territory adjoining the city.


2003-02
 
2-17-03
 
Annexing certain territory:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Approximately  1.51 acres in the southwesterly corner of the
tract conveyed to the Bluegrass Saddle Club, Inc.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Approximately 3.0 acres beginning at a stone corner to Daily &
McWhorter.


 
 
 
 
Tract Three:  Beginning at a stone at the northeast corner of the tract
conveyed to George and Diane Hilliard.


2003-05
 
5-1-03
 
Annexing approximately 3 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2003-07
 
5-1-03
 
Annexing certain territory:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Approximately 35 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Approximately 22.7907 acres of unincorporated territory
adjoining the city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Three:  Beginning at an iron pin and cap stamped RLS No. 3125.


2003-13
 
6-16-03
 
Annexing approximately 97 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2003-14
 
7-31-03
 
Proposing the annexation of certain territory:


 
 
 
 
Tract One: Approximately 23.5 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Approximately 96.78 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining
the city.


2003-15
 
10-20-03
 
Proposing annexation of approximately 6.50 acres of unincorporated territory
adjoining the city.


2003-22
 
10-28-03
 
Annexing certain territory:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Approximately 23.5 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining
the city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two:  Approximately 96.78 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining
the city.


2004-02
 
1-26-04
 
Annexing approximately 6.50 acres proposed to be annexed in Ord. 2003-15.


2005-02
 
3-21-05
 
Annexing 76 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2006-04
 
6-19-06
 
Annexing 5.635 acres beginning at an iron pin in the northwest corner of
Andy's Properties, LLC.


2006-05
 
6-19-06
 
Annexing 5.7384 acres beginning at an iron pin being located in southeast
corner of Tract Two.


2006-10
 
9-18-06
 
Annexing 22.80 acres beginning in the west right- of-way of Hebron Lane.


2006-15
 
11-20-06
 
Annexing 5.01 acres beginning at the north right- of-way line of Zoneton
Road, corner to Bullitt Land Company, LLC.


2007-06
 
7-16-07
 
Annexing unincorporated territory beginning at a steel pin in the northwest
corner of a tract of real estate adjoining Lot 58 Section 1 Lee's Acres
Subdivision.


2007-09
 
7-16-07
 
Proposing the annexation of unincorporated territory beginning at the
intersection of the north right-of-way of Bells Mill Road and the east right-
of-way of Ky. Hwy. 61 (Preston Highway).


2007-15
 
10-15-07
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city, located in the east
right-of-way of East Blue Lick Road, thence crossing East Blue Lick Road.


2007-16
 
11-19-07
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city, beginning at the
current boundary of the city, thence in a westerly direction crossing Ky.
Highway 61.


2008-01
 
2-18-08
 
Proposing the annexation of unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2008-05
 
4-23-08
 
Annexing unincorporated territory located in the south right-of-way of Brooks
Hill Road (Ky. 1526) in the northwest corner of Revised Lot 1 ProLogis Park.


2008-08
 
6-16-08
 
Correcting Ordinance No. 2008-05.


2008-14
 
10-20-08
 
Proposing annexation of certain unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2009-01
 
2-16-09
 
Annexing certain property:


 
 
 
 
Tract One:  Approximately 106 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining
the city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Two: Approximately 32 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Three:  Approximately 50 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining
the city.


 
 
 
 
Tract Four:  A 20-foot roadway excluded in description in deed to Louisville
and Nashville Railroad.


2009-04
 
5-18-09
 
Proposing annexation of certain unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2009-13
 
9-21-09
 
Annexing approximately 12.446 acres beginning at magnetic nail in the
centerline of West Williams Lane n/k/a North Williams Lane.


2010-02
 
4-19-10
 
Proposing annexation of certain unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2010-11
 
8-16-10
 
Annexing approximately 22.55 acres in the north right-of-way of Brooks
Schoolhouse Road.


2010-17
 
9-20-10
 
Annexing approximately 10.71 acres beginning in the northeast corner of the
Jefferson Gun Club.


2010-18
 
9-20-10
 
Adopting a modern and accurate legal description of all territory previously
annexed.


2011-03
 
7-18-11
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2011-04
 
7-18-11
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2011-11
 
11-21-11
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2011-12
 
11-21-11
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2011-13
 
11-21-11
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjoining the city.


2012-04
 
6-18-12
 
Annexing approximately 1.3 acres located on Ky Hwy #1450 and located adjacent
to the city.


2012-11
 
10-15-12
 
Annexing approximately 1.3 acres located on Ky Hwy #1450 and located adjacent
to the city.


2012-12
 
10-15-12
 
Annexing approximately 2.0 acres located on Ky Hwy #1450 and located adjacent
to the city.


2013-06
 
7-15-13
 
Annexing approximately 9.86 acres located adjacent to the city and including
part of Brooks Hill Road right-of-way (Ky Hwy 1526), and part of the south
bound ramp to I-65 right-of-way.


2013-07
 
7-15-13
 
Annexing approximately 5.27 acres lying on the west side of Old Preston
Highway, north of the intersection with the north right-of-way line Windy
Hill Spur.


2016-12
 
5-2-16   
 
Annexing approximately 90.36 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2016-16
 
8-15-16
 
Finally annexing approximately 90.36 acres of unincorporated territory
adjoining the city.


2016-21
 
10-17-16
 
Proposing the annexation of approximately 6.44 acres of unincorporated
territory adjoining the city.


2016-26
 
10-17-16
 
Proposing the annexation of approximately 14.59 acres of unincorporated
territory adjoining the city.


2016-28
 
1-16-17
 
Finally annexing approximately 1.49 acres of unincorporated territory
adjoining the city.


2017-01
 
2-6-17
 
Annexing approximately 6.44 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2017-02
 
2-6-17
 
Annexing approximately 14.59 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2017-03
 
3-6-17
 
Annexing approximately 58.928 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2017-05
 
5-15-17
 
Annexing of approximately 2.36 acres of unincorporated territory located
between Preston Highway and Wilma Avenue and adjoining the city.


2017-06
 
5-15-17
 
Annexing approximately 17.11 acres of unincorporated territory on Sarver Lane
and adjoining the city.


2017-07
 
6-5-17
 
Annexing approximately 58.928 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2017-11
 
7-17-17
 
Annexing of approximately 54.19 acres of unincorporated territory located on
Maple Branch Drive off of Christman Lane and adjoining the city.


2017-19
 
10-2-17
 
Annexing approximately 2.36 acres of unincorporated territory adjoining the
city.


2017-20
 
10-16-17
 
Annexing approximately 54.17 acres of unincorporated territory located on
Maple Branch Drive off of Christman Lane and adjoining the city.


2018-03
 
3-5-18
 
Annexing approximately 31.16 acres of unincorporated territory on the east
side of West Hebron Lane, approximately 495 feet to the south of Lee Hester
Parkway and adjoining the city.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


87-14
 
8-6-87
 
Agreement authorizing the execution of the "Interlocal Cooperation Agreement
to Establish the Kentucky Municipal Risk Management Association."


89-12
 
8-22-89
 
Authorizing the execution of the "Trust Participation Agreement" between the
city and the Kentucky Municipal Risk Management Association.


89-19
 
12-18-89
 
Authorizing the execution of the "Trust Participation Agreement" between the
city and the Kentucky Municipal Risk Management Association.


96-19
 
12-16-96
 
Authorizing the city to participate in the County Employees Retirement System.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




74-11
 
11-18-74
 
Creating a franchise for electric and gas facilities and service.


80-03
 
1-21-80
 
Creating a franchise for radio, television and other cable communication
services.


80-4
 
1-21-80
 
Granting a cable television franchise to Bullitt County Communications,  Inc.


80-5
 
3-17-80
 
Amending the cable television franchise awarded to Bullitt County
Communications, Inc.


5-17-83
 
 
Creating a franchise for radio, television and other cable communication
services.


87-15
 
8-31-87
 
Transferring cable television franchise from Matrix Vision of Bullitt County,
Inc. to 1st Cablevision, Inc.


89-16
 
10-26-89
 
Approving the transfer and assignment by 1st Cablevision, Inc., to TCI
Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc., of the franchise to operate a
cable television system in the city.


95-09
 
6-19-95
 
Granting a franchise for erecting, laying and maintaining cable television
facilities to TCI Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc.


2003-24
 
11-17-03
 
Granting an exclusive franchise for the collection and disposal of garbage
and trash and providing for the sale of the franchise within the city.


2004-03
 
1-26-04
 
Amending franchise for the collection and disposal of garbage and trash.


 
 




 



TABLE IV:  ZONING CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




84-8
 
2-20-84
 
Rezoning the following described property from B-1 Commercial to B-2
Commercial:  Clark-Owens Oil Corporation, Deed Book 129, page 499; David L.
Wheeler and Shirley E. Wheeler, Deed Book 249, Page 505; Gustav Bronner, Deed
Book 114, page 402; preston Properties, Inc., Deed Bood 214, page 8; Joseph
D. Gunning and Willie F. Burnett, Deed book 226, page 187; Louis Don Taylor
and Clara Taylor, Deed book 139, Page 357.


84-9
 
4-16-84
 
Rezoning the following described property from R1 Residential to IL Light
Industrial:  Deed Book 79, Page 456; Deed Book 88, Page 365; Deed Book 94,
page 312; Deed book 109, page 111; and Deed Book 149, Page 390.


87-1
 
1-19-87
 
Rezoning lots 1 through 8 and lots 176 through 187 of Hunters Hollow from R3
Residential to B1 Commercial.


87-2
 
2-16-87
 
Rezoning certain property recorded in Deed book 280, Page 23, from R-2
Residential to B-2 Central Business.


87-16
 
8-31-87
 
Rezoning certain property owned by PCH Enterprises and recorded in Deed Book
291, Page 674 from R-1 Residential to B-1 Highway Business, R-2 Residential
and R-3 Residential.


87-22
 
10-28-87
 
Rezoning certain property owned by North Central, Inc. and recorded in Deed
Book 296, Page 667 from R-3 Residential to B-1 Highway Business and IL Light
Industrial.


87-24
 
12-1-87
 
Rezoning the following described property from R-1 Residential to B-1
Highway:  Deed Book 262, Page 656; Deed Book 258, Page 266; and Deed Book
262, Page 658.


88-7
 
5-13-88
 
Rezoning 47 acres of property owned by Homer L. Myers, Sarah Fay Myers, Jon
Victor Myers and Janet Myers Daniel from R-1/R-2 Residential to B-1 Highway
Commercial.


90-9
 
6-7-90
 
Rezoning 4.9723 acres of property beginning at an existing iron pin set in
the eastern right-of-way line of the New Blue Lick Road and the centerline of
the old abandoned Brooks Road from R-1 Residential to B-1 Highway Commercial.


90-16
 
10-18-90
 
Rezoning property beginning at an iron pin located at the southwest corner of
Majestic Acres from R-2 Residential and B-1 Highway Business to R-3
Residential.


91-04
 
6-17-91
 
Rezoning property beginning at a point in the southwest corner of Lot 6 of
the Wallace Subdivision from B-1 to R-3.


92-22
 
7-28-92
 
Rezoning property beginning in the line of Tract #1 of the subdivided
property belonging to Homer Myers, Jon Victor Myers and Janet Myers Daniel
and containing 76.96 acres from R-1 to IL.


92-23
 
9-9-92
 
Rezoning certain property beginning in the north right-of-way of Blue Lick
Road and the southwest corner of Pinkston Oil Company and containing .619
acres from B-1 to B-2.


93-04
 
6-2-93
 
Rezoning certain property beginning at the introduction of Tanyard Springs
Boulevard and Spring House Lane and containing Lots 198 through 202 of the
Tanyard Springs Addition from B-1 to R-3.


94-11
 
7-21-94
 
Rezoning 49.73 acres beginning at a point located in the centerline of the 80
foot right-of-way for Tanyard Springs Boulevard at the end of construction
for Section 1 from R-2 to R-3.


94-29
 
11-21-94
 
Rezoning 40.97 acres beginning at a point in the northwest corner of a tract
of land conveyed to Newcomb Oil Company, Inc. as recorded in Deed Book 292,
Page 156 and Deed Book 292, Page 166, from A and B-1 to B-2, with the
following exception:  a tract of land beginning at a point N 13o23'23" W
282.00 feet; thence S 81o02'03" W 120.00 feet to a point, N 08o55'36" W.
370.00 feet to a point, N 81o02'03" E 120.00 feet to a point, and 08o55'36" E
370.00 feet to the point of beginning containing 1.02 acres.


94-31
 
1-16-95
 
Rezoning certain property beginning at an intersection of the center line of
an abandoned section of Hebron Lane with the easterly boundary of Blue Lick
Road from R-1 to B-2, excepting therefrom so much of said property as was
conveyed to the Commonwealth of Kentucky for the use and benefit of the
Department of Transportation by deed dated April 13, 1981 of record in Deed
Book 243, Page 826.


95-03
 
4-17-95
 
Rezoning certain property beginning at a point in center of the Blue Lick
Road at the southwest corner of the 15 acres conveyed to Raymond Farmer by
deed recorded in Deed Book 74, page 301, thence with his line south 87-1/2
east 25 poles 8 links to a stake from R-1 to B-2, excluding that part of the
property conveyed to Commonwealth of Kentucky in Deed Book 81, Page 199 and
Deed Book 84, Page 117.


95-04
 
4-17-95
 
Rezoning 5.4 acres beginning at a stone in the east line of Blue Lick Road,
said point also being a southwest corner of a tract conveyed to George Wise,
by deed recorded in Deed Book 62, Page 571, from R-1 to B-1.


95-06
 
5-10-95
 
Rezoning 6.767 acres beginning at an iron pin, said pin being located in the
Southeast corner of Interstate Facilities (Deed Book 311, Page 552) in the
east right of way of Sara Way, thence with the south property line of
Interstate Facilities, from B-1 to R-3.


95-13
 
9-18-95
 
Rezoning 14.904 acres beginning at an iron pipe at a wood fence post in the
Northern corner of Claude Fontaine (Deed Book 121, Page 28) and the edge of
Blue Lick Road (Kentucky Highway 1450) from R-2 to B-1.


96-01
 
3-4-96
 
Rezoning 690.26 acres beginning at the Northwest corner of the Newton County
Stone Company, as recorded in Deed Book 119, Page 448, said corner being in
the south right of way line of Bells Mill Road (KY Hwy 1526) and the
Northeast corner of Winston and Dolores Humphrey, as recorded in Deed Book
104, Page 427, from (A), (SR), and (IG) to (EP).


96-03
 
4-15-96
 
Rezoning:


 
 
 
 
(1)  85/100 of an acre beginning on the Eastwardly line of the Blue Lick
Road at the Southwesterly corner of the Wilson Summers 100 acre tract.


 
 
 
 
(2)  11 acres beginning at a stake in the center of the Blue Lick Road at
corner of Wilson Summer;


96-07
 
4-25-96
 
Rezoning 1.50 acres beginning at an iron pin located in the north right of
way of Carter Avenue and the southwest corner of Corbett (Deed Book 385, Page
18) from B-1 to IL.


96-08
 
4-25-96
 
Rezoning certain property beginning at an iron pin located in the northwest
corner of Childress (Deed Book 107, Page 510) in line of Lowell (Deed Book
170, Page 279) from B-1 to R-3.


96-09
 
6-17-96
 
Rezoning Lot Seventeen (17) and Eighteen (18), of T. B. Lee, Jr. Subdivision,
from R-2 to B-2.


96-16
 
9-16-96
 
Rezoning 5.8244 acres beginning at a steel pipe at the intersection of the
western right-of-way line of a 20 foot road as described in Deed Book 95,
Page 404, for Tract #3 as recorded in the Bullitt County Clerk's office in
Shepherdsville, Kentucky, and the northern right-of-way line of State Road
#1526 as improved; from R-1 to B-2.


97-06
 
5-19-97
 
Rezoning 2.70 acres beginning at an iron rod being the Northwest corner of
the Albert K. and Bonnie S. Koch tract as recorded in the County Court
Clerk's office of Bullitt County, Kentucky; thence leaving the common line of
Albert K. and Bonnie S. Koch and following the remaining lands of Newton
County Stone Company. There is also conveyed a 20 foot easement for ingress
and egress beginning at a pin in the center line of Bells Mill Road at the
Southwest corner of Albert Koch's property as recorded in Deed Book 166, Page
178 in the office of the Bullitt County Clerk from A to B-1.


97-20
 
1-19-98
 
Rezoning certain property of Vernon G. Roederer and Ruth E. Roederer from R-1
to B-1.


98-02
 
4-20-98
 
Rezoning certain property of J. Miller Builders, Inc. from R-1 and R-2 to B-2.


98-07
 
7-20-98
 
Rezoning certain property of Phyllis M. Spalding from R-2 to B-2.


98-13
 
10-19-98
 
Rezoning certain property of Tom Jean and Nola Jean from B-1 to IG.


98-18
 
12-7-98
 
Rezoning certain property of Phyllis M. Spalding from A to B-2.


98-19
 
12-7-98
 
Rezoning certain property of Rogers Group, Inc. from A and B-2 to LI.


99-01
 
5-17-99
 
Rezoning certain property of Tergo Corporation from R-2 to R-3.


99-02
 
5-17-99
 
Rezoning certain property of Daymon and Nancy Stange from R-2 to B-3.


99-10
 
8-31-99
 
Rezoning certain property of Homeplate Enterprises, LLC, from I-L to B-1.


99-16
 
11-17-99
 
Rezoning certain property of Ben F. Robards from Agricultural to B-1.


00-01
 
4-17-00
 
Rezoning Williams property adjacent to homestead on Blue Lick Road from R-2
and B-1 to IL.


2000-13
 
12-18-00
 
Rezoning two tracts, being 52.56 acres located at the northeast intersection
of North Preston Highway and Bells Mill Road from AG to IL.


01-05
 
4-16-01
 
Rezoning 1.52 acres located at the southeast corner of Preston Street and
Bells Mill Road from AG to B-1.


2001-06
 
5-21-01
 
Rezoning 23.4 acres beginning at a stake in the east  right-of-way line of
Kentucky Highway No. 61 from R-1 to R-3.


2003-09
 
6-16-03
 
Rezoning Lot No. 10 in T.B. Lee Subdivision from R-2 to B-2.


2003-20
 
10-20-03
 
Rezoning seven tracts of land beginning at a point in the southeast corner of
Paul D. Dailey and Jimmy L. McWhorter in the west right-of-way of Barricks
Road from R-1/ R-3/ B-1 to EP.


2003-21
 
10-20-03
 
Rezoning 1.404 acre tract in the southeastern quadrant of the intersection of
West Triangle Lane and Octagon Avenue from R-3 to B-1.


2004-01
 
1-26-04
 
Rezoning from R-1 to R-3:


 
 
 
 
(1)  81.16 acre tract beginning at an iron rod set in the north right-of-way
line of Zoneton Road and corner to Ball.


 
 
 
 
(2)  10.34 acre tract beginning at an iron rod set in north right-of-way
line of Zoneton Road and corner to Williams.


 
 
 
 
(3)  3.54 acre tract beginning at an iron rod set in north right of way of
Zoneton Road and in right- of-way of Christman Lane.


2004-05
 
5-18-04
 
Rezoning from A to R-1:


 
 
 
 
(1)  7.4 acre tract beginning at a stake in line of Williams at the
northwest corner of parcel number 4.


 
 
 
 
(2)  A tract beginning at a stake in the line of E. C. Tyler division corner
to Lot No. 2.


2004-18
 
12-20-04
 
Rezoning from R-1 to R-3 a 15.62 acre tract beginning at an iron rod located
in the southwest corner of Charles D. Williams in the north right-of-way of
Zoneton Road.


2005-03
 
3-21-05
 
Rezoning from B-2 to R-3 a 2.18 acre tract beginning at an iron pin in the
south line of Maryville Subdivision.


2005-05
 
5-16-05
 
Rezoning from IL to B-1 a 20.01 acre tract beginning at a railroad spike in
the centerline of Ferguson Road.


2005-11
 
6-20-05
 
Rezoning from R-1 to B-1 an approximately 3 acre tract beginning at a P. nail
in the center of Blue Lick Road at the southeast corner of Myers Subdivision.


2005-18
 
11-22-05
 
Rezoning from R-2 to IL a 76 acre tract beginning at an iron rod in the west
right-of-way of KY Highway 1450.


2006-18
 
12-4-06
 
Rezoning from B-2 to R-3 a 4.33 acre tract being N 78° 46' 26" W 215.00'
from the southeast corner of Tract 1 of the Tanyard Springs Commercial
Development.


2007-01
 
2-19-07
 
Rezoning from R-1 and R-2 to R-3 22.80 acres beginning in the current
boundary of the city in the west right-of-way of Hebron Lane.


2007-18
 
12-17-07
 
Rezoning from B-2 to R-3 a 4.33 acre tract at the northwest corner of tract
#1 in the south line of Tanyard Park Place.


2008-02
 
3-17-08
 
Rezoning from IL to IL a 5.00 acre tract and shown on minor plat of Robards
Division.


2008-03
 
2-27-08
 
Rezoning from R-2 and B-1 to B-2:


 
 
 
 
(1) 124 acres beginning at a stone in the line between M.W. Sadler and land
now owned by Josie Croan.


 
 
 
 
(2) Lot No. 3, as shown on Plat of Wallace Subdivision.


 
 
 
 
(3) Beginning in the west line of Kentucky State Highway #61 at a point North
14 degrees 45 minutes East 290 feet from an iron pipe.


 
 
 
 
(4) Beginning at a stake in line of Bates Samuels on the east side of and
near Brooks Station Road.


2008-09
 
7-21-08
 
Rezoning from R-1 to R-3 a 5 acre tract beginning at a point in the north
right-of-way line of Zoneton Road, corner to Bischoff, North 38 East 970 feet
with line of Bischoff to a stake.


2009-03
 
3-16-09
 
Rezoning from B-2 to R-3 Lots 1 and 2, T.B. Lee, Jr. Subdivision, Section 2.


2010-01
 
4-19-10
 
Rezoning from R-1 to IL property located at 1124 E. Blue Lick Road.


2010-19
 
10-18-10
 
Rezoning 6.681 acres of property owned by G.W. Chandler from R-2 to IG .


2010-20
 
10-18-10
 
Rezoning 7.68 acres of property owned by Willabrook, Inc. from B-1 to IG.


2011-09
 
10-17-11
 
Rezoning 1.00 acre of property owned by Joe Burnett from I-L to B-2.


2102-06
 
8-20-12
 
Rezoning 301.41 acres of property owned by the Annie Reeves Bates Trust from
A and SR to EP.


2012-14
 
12-17-12
 
Rezoning 8.58 acres of property owned by Brooks Crossing, LLC, from B-1 to
R-3.


2015-04
 
7-20-15
 
Rezoning 15 acres of property located at 1800 East Blue Lick Road, from R-1
to I-L.


2016-02
 
2-15-16
 
Rezoning 70 acres of property located at the northwest corner of I-65 and
Brooks Hill Road, from I-G, R-2, and B-1, to I-L.


2016-06
 
3-21-16
 
Rezoning 15.25 acres from B-1 to I-L.


2016-15
 
7-18-16
 
Rezoning 13.24 acres located at the southeast corner of Brooks Way and
International Boulevard, from B-1 to I-L.


2016-29
 
1-4-17
 
Rezoning 17.95 acres located at Stacie Lane and Centre Drive, from I-L to B-2.


2017-04
 
3-20-17
 
Rezoning 93.477 acres located at Christman Lane, from R-2 to R-3.


2018-01
 
2-5-18
 
Rezoning 17.11 acres located on Server Lane at its terminus, from R-2 and R-4
to I-L.


2018-04
 
3-19-18
 
Rezoning 2.61 acres, more or less, located at 700 Bells Mill Road, from
Agricultural to B-2.


2018-05
 
3-19-18
 
Rezoning 95.9 acres, more or less, located at 700 Bells Mill Road from
Agricultural to R-1.


2018-06
 
4-2-18
 
Rezoning 31 acres, located at 1714 West Hebron Lane from R-1 and R-2 to R-3.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  STREET NAMING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


2002-02
 
4-15-02
 
Changing name of Tanyard Way to Dr. Arla Way.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE VI:  LEASES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


2003-26
 
11-18-03
 
Approving lease for financing of three police cars.


2010-04
 
5-11-10
 
Approving a lease for the financing of a project providing for the payment
and security of the lease.


2010-05
 
5-11-10
 
Approving a lease for the financing of a project providing for the payment
and security of the lease.


2018-16
 
10-15-18
 
Approving a lease for the financing of a project; providing for the payment
and security of the lease; creating a sinking fund; and authorizing the
execution of various documents related to such lease.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Kentucky Revised Statutes





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES



 

KRS Section
 
Code Section




Section 43, Ky. Const.
 
32.48


Section 228, Ky. Const.
 
31.01 (A), 31.36 (E), 31.37, 35.14


Section 246, Ky. Const.
 
31.02 (A)


6.050
 
32.48


6.955 - 6.975
 
33.04


Ch. 13A
 
93.02


Ch. 13B
 
93.05


15.410 - 15.510
 
35.04


Chs. 39A - 39F
 
36.02


Ch. 45A
 
34.12, 34A.05


Ch. 56   
 
34.12, 34A.05


Ch. 61
 
32.21


61.805 - 61.850
 
34A.10


61.805 (1)
 
34A.01


61.805 (2)
 
34A.01


61.805 (3)
 
34A.01


61.805 (4)
 
34A.01


61.805 (5)
 
34A.01


61.810
 
34A.05, 40.46


61.815
 
34A.06


61.820
 
34A.07


61.823
 
34A.08


61.826
 
34A.09


61.840
 
34A.09


61.846
 
34A.10


61.848
 
34A.10


61.850
 
34A.10


61.870 - 61.882
 
31.36


61.870
 
34.01


61.872 - 61.884
 
40.15


61.872 (1)
 
34.05(B)


61.872 (2)
 
34.05(A)


61.872 (3)
 
34.05(C)


61.872 (4)
 
34.06


61.872 (5)
 
34.07


61.872 (6)
 
34.08


61.874 (1)
 
34.05 (C)


61.874 (2)(b)
 
34.05


61.874 (4)
 
34.05


61.874 (5)
 
34.05


61.874 (6)
 
34.05


61.878
 
34.01, 34.12


61.880
 
34.09


61.882
 
34.09


61.884
 
34.11


62.020
 
31.01


62.060
 
31.01 (B)


65.120
 
72.01


65.8801 - 65.8839
 
37.50, 37.51, 37.62, 92.01


65.8815(5)
 
37.54


82.082
 
153.01


Ch. 83A
 
31.20


83A.010 (5)
 
10.02


83A.010 (6)
 
10.02


83A.010 (7)
 
10.02


83A.010 (8)
 
10.02


83A.010 (9)
 
10.02


83A.010 (10)
 
10.02


83A.010 (11)
 
10.02


83A.030 (1)
 
31.21


83A.040 (2)(c)
 
31.21


83A.040 (3)
 
31.21


83A.040 (4)
 
32.01


83A.040 (5), (6)
 
31.21


83A.040 (6)
 
32.02


83A.040 (7)
 
31.21, 32.02


83A.040 (8)
 
31.21, 32.02


83A.040 (9)
 
31.03


83A.050
 
31.20


83A.060 (1)
 
32.35


83A.060 (2)
 
32.36


83A.060 (3)
 
32.37


83A.060 (4), (7)
 
32.38


83A.060 (5)
 
Adopting Ordinances, 32.40


83A.060 (6)
 
32.22


83A.060 (8)
 
32.41, 32.42


83A.060 (9)
 
32.43


83A.060 (10)
 
32.44


83A.060 (11)
 
32.45


83A.060 (12),(13)
 
32.46


83A.060 (14)
 
32.47


83A.060 (15)
 
32.48


83A.065
 
10.02


83A.070
 
31.02


83A.075
 
31.02


83A.080
 
31.37, 39.08


83A.080 (1)
 
31.35


83A.080 (2)
 
31.03, 31.35


83A.080 (3), (4)
 
31.20


83A.085
 
31.36, 39.64


83A.130
 
31.21, 39.03


83A.130 (1)
 
30.01


83A.130 (2)
 
30.02(A)


83A.130 (3)
 
31.21


83A.130 (4)
 
31.21, 35.10


83A.130 (5)
 
32.20


83A.130 (6)
 
32.39


83A.130 (7)
 
31.21


83A.130 (8)
 
31.21


83A.130 (9)
 
31.21, 39.08


83A.130 (10)
 
31.21


83A.130 (11)
 
32.03(A), 32.21


83A.130 (12)
 
31.37, 32.03(B), (C)


83A.130 (13)
 
32.03(D)


83A.165
 
31.20


83A.175
 
32.02


83A.175(1) - (6)
 
31.20


90.310
 
37.01


90.310 - 90.410
 
37.01, 37.02


90.310 (2) - (4)
 
37.02


90.320
 
37.03


90.330
 
37.04


90.340
 
37.05


90.350
 
37.06


90.360
 
37.07


90.370
 
37.08


90.380
 
37.09


90.390
 
37.10


91A.010
 
33.01


91A.010 (6)
 
33.01


91A.010 (7)
 
33.01


91A.010 (8)
 
10.02


91A.020
 
33.02


91A.030 (7)
 
33.03


91A.040
 
33.04


91A.050
 
33.04


91A.060
 
33.05


91A.200
 
33.11 (A)


91A.210
 
33.10


91A.220
 
33.11


91A.230
 
33.12


91A.240
 
33.13


91A.250
 
33.14


91A.260
 
33.15


91A.270
 
33.16


91A.280
 
33.17


91A.290
 
33.18


92.310
 
110.04


95.445
 
35.01


95.700
 
35.01


95.955
 
35.20


99.700 - 99.730
 
37.40, 37.41


99.705
 
37.41


99.720 (repealed)
 
37.41


Ch. 100
 
37.30, 37.41, 151.01


100 et seq.
 
153.01


100.365
 
90.01


Chs. 116-121
 
31.20 (A)


Ch. 118
 
31.20


118.035
 
39.32


131.010(6)
 
110.10, 113.99, 120.03


131.183
 
110.10, 120.03


132.487 et seq.
 
38.17


Ch. 136
 
116.01


136.120
 
110.22


136.575 (1)
 
116.01


Ch. 151
 
153.05


151.250
 
153.05


151.280
 
153.05


151.310
 
153.05


151.320
 
153.05


174.100
 
91.15


174.100(1)
 
91.16


174.100(2), (3)
 
91.17


174.100(4)
 
91.18


174.100(5)
 
91.19


174.100(6), (7)
 
91.20


186A.190
 
72.22


189.010(19)
 
70.01


189.020
 
71.27


189.290
 
71.25


189.330(8)
 
71.02


189.338
 
70.15


189.378
 
71.35, 71.99


189.378(1)
 
70.01


189.394
 
71.29


189.450(5), (6)
 
72.03


189.580
 
71.15


189.700
 
117.01


189.910
 
71.35


189.920
 
71.35


189.920(3)
 
71.05


189.930
 
71.26


189.990(1)
 
72.99


189.993(8)
 
71.99 (B)


190.010(6)
 
92.03


190.010(8)
 
92.03


190.010(11)
 
92.03


Ch. 198B
 
150.02


198B.060(1)
 
150.01


198B.070
 
150.02


198B.990(1)
 
150.99 (A) (1)


226.010
 
112.01


226.020
 
112.02


226.030
 
112.07


226.040
 
112.03 (A)


226.050
 
112.04


226.060
 
112.08


226.080
 
112.05


226.090
 
112.06


226.100
 
112.08


226.990(1)
 
112.99


227.550
 
92.02


227.700 - 227.750
 
93.01


227.700
 
93.01


227.702
 
93.01, 93.02, 93.06


227.704
 
93.01


227.706
 
93.01


227.708
 
93.01


227.710
 
93.02


227.715
 
93.02


227.720
 
93.03


227.730
 
93.04


227.740
 
93.04


227.750
 
93.05


227.990(1)
 
150.99(A)(2)


227.990(4)
 
93.99(A)


Chs. 241 - 244
 
113.31


241.010
 
113.30


241.100
 
31.39


241.160
 
113.60


Ch. 243
 
110.22


243.020 - 243.670
 
113.99


243.020(1)
 
113.99


243.020(3)
 
113.99


243.033
 
113.32


243.034
 
113.32


243.035
 
113.32


243.036
 
113.32


243.039
 
113.32


243.042
 
113.32


243.050
 
113.32, 113.99


243.070
 
113.10, 113.32


243.082
 
113.32, 113.99


243.084
 
113.32


243.086
 
113.32


243.088
 
113.32


243.089
 
113.32


243.120
 
113.32


243.130
 
113.32


243.150
 
113.32


243.157
 
113.32


243.160
 
113.32


243.170
 
113.32


243.180
 
113.32


243.240
 
113.32


243.250
 
113.32


243.260
 
113.32


243.280
 
113.32, 113.38


243.390
 
113.34


243.440
 
113.33


243.450
 
113.36


243.480
 
113.62


243.480 - 243.590
 
113.62


243.500
 
113.62


243.502(1)
 
113.99


243.620
 
113.99


243.710 - 243.720
 
113.99


243.710 - 243.850
 
113.99


243.720
 
113.99


243.730
 
113.99


243.897
 
113.99


244.080
 
113.45


244.083
 
113.43


244.085
 
113.45


244.290
 
113.32, 113.40


244.290(3)(b)
 
113.30


244.290(4)
 
113.40


244.480
 
113.40


Ch. 272
 
10.02


Ch. 281
 
72.21


281.010
 
92.03


281.655
 
117.24


318.990
 
150.99(A)(3)


Ch. 337
 
39.11


344.230
 
37.21


344.330
 
37.21


344.340
 
37.22


Ch. 350
 
153.05


376.275(1),(2)
 
72.21


376.275(3)
 
72.22


376.275(4)
 
72.22


Ch. 386
 
10.02


Ch. 386(A)
 
10.02


Ch. 404
 
117.24


Ch. 424
 
32.43(A), 33.04, 33.15, 35.03, 37.03, 37.09


424.190(2)
 
33.04


424.220
 
33.04


436.600
 
90.04, 90.99(C)


446.010(1)
 
10.02


446.010(2)
 
10.02


446.010(6)
 
10.02


446.010(8)
 
10.02


446.010(9)
 
10.02


446.010(10)
 
10.02


446.010(11)
 
10.02


446.010(13)
 
10.02


446.010(14)
 
10.02


446.010(15)
 
10.02


446.010(16)
 
10.02


446.010(18)
 
10.02


446.010(19)
 
10.02


446.010(24)
 
10.02


446.010(26)
 
10.02


446.010(27)
 
10.02


446.010(28)
 
10.02


446.010(30)
 
10.02


446.010(31)
 
10.02


446.010(33)
 
10.02


446.010(36)
 
10.02


446.010(37)
 
10.02


446.010(39)
 
10.02


446.010(43)
 
10.02


446.010(46)
 
10.02


446.010(47)
 
10.02


446.010(49)
 
10.02


446.010(55)
 
10.02


446.010(56)
 
10.02


446.020(1)
 
10.03(A)


446.020(2)
 
10.03(B)


446.030
 
10.04


446.050
 
10.05


446.060
 
10.06


446.080(1)
 
10.03(C)


446.080(3)
 
10.03(D)


446.080(4)
 
10.03(E)


446.090
 
10.07


446.100
 
10.08


446.110
 
10.09


446.140 - 527.020
 
130.17


532.090(1)
 
10.02


534.040(2)(a)
 
10.02


630.030
 
130.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




74-2
 
6-17-74
 
Repealed


74-4
 
6-17-74
 
Repealed


74-11
 
11-18-74
 
T.S.O. III


75-1
 
1-20-75
 
T.S.O. I


76-5
 
11-15-76
 
T.S.O. I


76-8
 
12 -  -76
 
T.S.O. I


78-10
 
12-18-78
 
T.S.O. I


79-1
 
1-15-79
 
71.28, 71.99


79-5
 
  -  - 
 
37.20 – 37.22, Ch. 95


79-6
 
4-16-79
 
Repealed


79-7
 
4-16-79
 
152.02, 152.99


79-8
 
6-18-79
 
Ch. 115


79-9
 
7-16-79
 
150.10 – 150.14


80-2
 
1-2-80
 
35.01


80-3
 
1-21-80
 
T.S.O. III


80-4
 
1-21-80
 
T.S.O. III


80-5
 
3-17-80
 
T.S.O. III


80-7
 
3-17-80
 
35.01


80-8
 
5-16-80
 
110.02, 110.04, 110.10, 110.99


80-9
 
8-18-80
 
37.30 – 37.33


81-1
 
2-11-81
 
T.S.O. I


81-4
 
1-19-81
 
Repealed


81-7
 
2-16-81
 
130.02


81-8
 
  -  -
 
33.03


81-14
 
1-18-82
 
150.20 – 150.23


82-1
 
1-4-82
 
32.21


82-11
 
11-15-82
 
T.S.O. I


82-12
 
12-20-82
 
T.S.O. I


106
 
5-17-83
 
T.S.O. III


109
 
6-20-83
 
T.S.O. I


113
 
12-19-83
 
T.S.O. I


84-8
 
2-20-84
 
T.S.O. IV


84-9
 
4-16-84
 
T.S.O. IV


84-12
 
8-21-84
 
36.01


84-15
 
9-15-84
 
72.03, 72.11


84-16
 
10-15-84
 
37.40, 37.41


84-18
 
12-17-84
 
Ch. 114


84-19
 
12-17-84
 
152.01, 152.99


84-20
 
12-17-84
 
72.99


85-1
 
1-21-85
 
Ch. 113


85-6
 
5-20-85
 
151.20 – 151.25


85-8
 
9-16-85
 
35.03, 37.01 – 37.11


85-12
 
11-7-85
 
35.02


85-13
 
12-16-85
 
151.01 – 151.10


86-1
 
1-7-86
 
31.36


86-2
 
1-7-86
 
35.10 – 35.14


86-6
 
1-7-86
 
35.20 – 35.24


87-1
 
1-19-87
 
T.S.O. IV


87-2
 
2-16-87
 
T.S.O. IV


87-7
 
6-15-87
 
T.S.O. I


87-8
 
5-18-87
 
130.04


87-13
 
8-6-87
 
T.S.O. I


87-14
 
7-20-87
 
T.S.O. II


87-15
 
8-31-87
 
T.S.O. III


87-16
 
8-31-87
 
T.S.O. IV


87-21
 
10-29-87
 
T.S.O. I


87-22
 
10-28-87
 
T.S.O. IV


87-24
 
12-1-87
 
T.S.O. IV


88-1
 
2-29-88
 
T.S.O. I


88-4
 
2-29-88
 
T.S.O. I


88-7
 
5-13-88
 
T.S.O. IV


88-11
 
9-19-88
 
38.01 – 38.07


88-12
 
9-19-88
 
38.30 – 38.33


88-13
 
9-19-88
 
38.15 – 38.19


89-9
 
6-29-89
 
T.S.O. I


89-10
 
6-29-89
 
T.S.O. I


89-11
 
8-22-89
 
T.S.O. I


89-12
 
8-22-89
 
T.S.O. II


89-13
 
9-18-89
 
38.01 – 38.07


89-14
 
9-18-89
 
38.15 – 38.19


89-16
 
10-26-89
 
T.S.O. III


89-19
 
12-18-89
 
T.S.O. II


90-01
 
1-17-90
 
T.S.O. I


90-03
 
2-27-90
 
T.S.O. I


90-05
 
3-28-90
 
T.S.O. I


90-07
 
5-30-90
 
110.20 – 110.37, 110.99


90-09
 
6-7-90
 
T.S.O. IV


90-10
 
6-17-90
 
T.S.O. I


90-12
 
9-17-90
 
Adopting Ordinance


90-16
 
10-18-90
 
T.S.O. IV


90-17
 
11-19-90
 
T.S.O. I


90-19
 
1-21-91
 
Ch. 39


91-04
 
6-17-91
 
T.S.O. IV


91-10
 
12-16-91
 
113.20, 113.21, 113.99


92-12
 
2-17-92
 
39.67


92-13
 
6-15-92
 
72.13 - 72.17, 72.99


92-17
 
6-25-92
 
T.S.O. I




 



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description
 
Code Section




92-22
 
07-28-92
 
Rezoning certain property from R-1 to IL
 
T.S.O. IV


92-23
 
09-09-92
 
Rezoning certain property from B-1 to B-2
 
T.S.O. IV


92-24
 
10-19-92
 
Adopting the uniform state building code
 
150.01


93-01
 
02-15-93
 
Setting compensation of mayor and council
 
33.02


93-02
 
03-15-93
 
Intent to annex territory lying near I-65
 
T.S.O. I


93-03
 
06-02-93
 
Annexing territory near I-65
 
T.S.O. I


93-04
 
06-02-93
 
Rezoning certain property from B-1 to R-3
 
T.S.O. IV


93-06
 
06-02-93
 
Authorizing participation in KLEFPF
 
35.04


93-07
 
08-16-93
 
Prohibiting noise pollution
 
131.01–131.05, 131.99


93-08
 
09-20-93
 
Ad valorem taxation real property
 
Temporary –Not Included


93-11
 
09-20-93
 
Intent to annex territory along Blue Lick Road
 
T.S.O. I


93-12
 
10-18-93
 
Annexation (Blue Lick Road)
 
T.S.O. I


94-01
 
03-21-94
 
Amending annual budget
 
Temporary – Not Included


94-02
 
05-16-94
 
Swimming pool regulations
 
Ch. 97


94-03
 
05-16-94
 
Vehicle weight limits
 
71.28, 71.99


94-05
 
05-02-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-06
 
06-20-94
 
Annual budget
 
Temporary – Not Included


94-07
 
06-20-94
 
Street closing
 
Not Included


94-08
 
08-18-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-09
 
07-18-94
 
Compensation of employees
 
39.68


94-10
 
07-01-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-11
 
08-04-94
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


94-12
 
08-04-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-13
 
08-04-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-14
 
08-03-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-15
 
08-04-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-16
 
08-03-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-17
 
08-16-94
 
Ad valorem taxes – real property
 
38.01


94-18
 
09-19-94
 
Ad valorem taxes – personal property
 
38.15


94-19
 
09-19-94
 
Ad valorem taxes – public service companies
 
38.30


94-20
 
08-04-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-21
 
10-26-94
 
Code of Ethics
 
Ch. 40


94-22
 
10-26-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-23
 
10-26-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-24
 
10-26-94
 
Zoning
 
150.20, 150.24


94-25
 
10-26-94
 
Zoning regulations
 
Not Included


94-26
 
10-26-94
 
Zoning regulations
 
Not Included


94-27
 
10-26-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-28
 
11-21-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-29
 
11-21-94
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


94-30
 
12-19-94
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


94-31
 
01-16-95
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


95-01
 
02-20-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-03
 
04-17-95
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


95-04
 
04-17-95
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


95-05
 
05-15-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-06
 
05-10-95
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


95-07
 
06-19-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-09
 
06-09-95
 
Franchise for cable television services to TCI cablevision
 
T.S.O. III


95-11
 
07-21-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-12
 
10-16-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-13
 
09-18-95
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


95-14
 
09-18-95
 
Regulations of open fires
 
93.22, 93.99


95-15
 
09-25-95
 
Ad valorem taxes – real property
 
38.01


95-16
 
09-25-95
 
Ad valorem taxes – personal property
 
38.15


95-17
 
09-26-95
 
Ad valorem taxes – public service companies
 
38.30


95-18
 
11-20-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-19
 
12-18-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


95-20
 
01-15-96
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


96-01
 
03-04-96
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


96-02
 
03-18-96
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


96-03
 
04-15-96
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


96-04
 
  -  -
 
Held for Hamilton annexation
 
Not Included


96-05
 
04-25-96
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


96-06
 
04-25-96
 
Proposing annexation of unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


96-07
 
04-25-96
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


96-08
 
05-25-96
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


96-09
 
06-17-96
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


96-10
 
06-17-96
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 96-97
 
Not Included


96-11
 
08-19-96
 
Establishing fees and requirements for the issuance of a liquor by the drink
license
 
113.10-113.13


96-12
 
08-19-96
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


96-13
 
09-16-96
 
Levying real property ad valorem taxes for 1996
 
38.01-38.07


96-14
 
09-16-96
 
Levying personal property ad valorem taxes for 1996
 
38.15-38.19


96-15
 
09-06-96
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on public service companies for 1996
 
38.30-38.33


96-16
 
09-16-96
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


96-19
 
12-16-96
 
Authorizing participation in the county employees' retirement system
 
T.S.O. II


96-20
 
12-16-96
 
Prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapons in city buildings
 
130.15-130.19


96-21
 
12-16-96
 
Imposing a local deposit franchise tax
 
Ch. 116


97-01
 
02-17-97
 
Amending zoning regulations
 
Not Included


97-02
 
  -  - 
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


97-03
 
03-17-97
 
Amending ordinance 85-8, Civil Service Ordinance
 
37.06 I


97-04
 
03-17-97
 
Amending ordinance 90-19, Personnel Policies
 
39.04(A) (1)


97-05
 
05-19-97
 
Proposing annexation of unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


97-06
 
05-19-97
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


97-07
 
06-16-97
 
Establishing a penalty for illegal use of city dumpster
 
Ch. 98


97-10
 
06-16-97
 
Establishing rate of compensation for city employees
 
39.69


97-11
 
09-15-97
 
Levying real property ad valorem taxes for 1997
 
38.01-38.07


97-12
 
09-15-97
 
Levying personal property ad valorem taxes for 1997
 
38.15-38.19


97-13
 
09-15-97
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on public service companies for 1997
 
38.30-38.33


97-14
 
09-15-97
 
Establishing sign regulations
 
150.99 (C)


97-15
 
09-15-97
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


97-18
 
11-17-97
 
Establishing regulations for operating a taxicab within the city
 
Ch. 117


97-19
 
10-21-97
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


97-20
 
01-19-98
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


98-01
 
02-16-98
 
Amending zoning code
 
Not Included


98-02
 
04-20-98
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


98-04
 
05-18-98
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


98-05
 
06-15-98
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 98-99
 
Not Included


98-06
 
06-15-98
 
Proposing to annex unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


98-07
 
07-20-98
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


98-08
 
07-22-98
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


98-10
 
09-21-98
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on real property
 
38.01-38.07


98-11
 
09-21-98
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on personal property
 
38.15-38.19


98-12
 
09-21-98
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on public service companies
 
38.30-38.33


98-13
 
10-19-98
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


98-14
 
10-19-98
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


98-15
 
10-19-98
 
Annexing unincorporated territory
 
T.S.O. I


98-16
 
05-17-99
 
Amending zoning code
 
Not Included


98-18
 
12-7-98
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


98-19
 
12-7-98
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


98-20
 
12-17-98
 
Establishing non-elected office of City Attorney
 
31.37


99-01
 
05-17-99
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


99-02
 
05-17-99
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


99-05
 
06-21-99
 
Amending annual budget FY 98-99
 
Not Included


99-06
 
06-21-99
 
Adopting annual budget FY 99-00
 
Not Included


99-07
 
07-19-99
 
Establishing environmental nuisance regulations
 
Repealed


99-08
 
07-26-99
 
Repealing provisions of Ord. 98-20 regarding the non-elected office of City
Attorney
 
31.37


99-09
 
09-20-99
 
Amending annual budget FY 99-00
 
Not Included


99-10
 
08-31-99
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


99-11
 
09-21-99
 
Amending personnel policies
 
39.04, 39.08, 39.10, 39.11, 39.15, 39.16, 39.19, 39.23-39.26, 39.29, 39.30,
39.32, 39.33, 39.37, 39.40, 39.45, 39.60-39.66, 39.68, 39.69


99-12
 
09-21-99
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on real property
 
38.01-38.07


99-13
 
09-21-99
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on personal property
 
38.15-38.19


99-14
 
09-21-99
 
Levying ad valorem taxes on public service companies
 
38.30-38.33


99-16
 
11-17-99
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


99-17
 
01-12-00
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


00-01
 
04-17-00
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


00-02
 
03-20-00
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


00-03
 
04-17-00
 
Proposing annexation of certain property
 
T.S.O. I


00-04
 
05-15-00
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


00-05
 
05-15-00
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2000-06
 
06-19-00
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2000-07
 
06-19-00
 
Adopting annual budget
 
Not Included


00-08
 
08-21-00
 
Adopting 2000 S-6 Supplement
 
Adopting Ordinance


2000-09
 
09-12-00
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2000-10
 
09-12-00
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2000-11
 
09-12-00
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


00-12
 
11-20-00
 
Changing date of observance of Martin Luther King, Jr. birthday
 
39.22


00-13
 
12-18-00
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


01-01
 
01-15-01
 
Repealing Ord. 98-20 regarding the non-elected office of City Attorney
 
31.37


01-02
 
01-15-01
 
Amending Ord. 90-97 regarding occupational license tax
 
110.23


01-03
 
01-15-01
 
Repealing Chapter 39 and adopting new Chapter 39 regarding the city personnel
policy
 
39.01 - 39.44, 39.60 - 39.69


01-04
 
01-22-01
 
Authorizing issuance of general obligation bonds
 
Not Included


01-05
 
04-16-01
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


2001-06
 
05-21-01
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


2001-07
 
06-18-01
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2001-08
 
06-18-01
 
Adopting annual budget
 
Not Included


2001-09
 
07-16-01
 
Proposing annexation of certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2001-10
 
09-04-01
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2001-11
 
09-04-01
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2001-12
 
09-04-01
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2001-13
 
10-15-01
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2001-14
 
11-19-01
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2001-15
 
12-17-01
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2002-02
 
04-15-02
 
Renaming street
 
T.S.O. V


2002-03
 
06-17-02
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2002-04
 
06-17-02
 
Adopting annual budget
 
Not Included


2002-05
 
07-15-02
 
Amending zoning code
 
Not Included


2002-06
 
09-23-02
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2002-07
 
09-23-02
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2002-08
 
09-23-02
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2003-01
 
02-17-03
 
Proposing annexation of certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-02
 
02-17-03
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-03
 
05-01-03
 
Establishing new sewer connection charges
 
Not Included


2003-04
 
05-01-03
 
Establishing wastewater user charges
 
Not Included


2003-05
 
05-01-03
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-06
 
05-01-03
 
Amending Ord. 2003-02 regarding annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-07
 
05-01-03
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-08
 
06-21-04
 
Adopting Chapter 50, Sewers
 
50.001 - 50.003, 50.015 - 50.019, 50.030, 50.031, 50.045 - 50.048, 50.060 -
50.067, 50.080 - 50.096, 50.110, 50.111, 50.120 - 50.123, 50.135 - 50.139,
50.999


2003-09
 
06-16-03
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2003-10
 
06-16-03
 
Repealing provisions of Ord. 95-14 regarding open fires
 
93.22, 93.99


2003-11
 
06-16-03
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2003-12
 
06-16-03
 
Adopting annual budget
 
Not Included


2003-13
 
06-16-03
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-14
 
07-31-03
 
Proposing annexation of certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-15
 
10-20-03
 
Proposing annexation of certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-16
 
10-20-03
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2003-17
 
09-15-03
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2003-18
 
09-15-03
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2003-19
 
09-15-03
 
Establishing non-elected office of Citation Officer
 
31.38


2003-20
 
10-20-03
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2003-21
 
10-20-03
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2003-22
 
10-28-03
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2003-24
 
11-17-03
 
Creating franchise for collection and disposal of garbage
 
T.S.O. III


2003-24A
 
11-17-03
 
Mandatory garbage pickup
 
52.01


2003-25
 
11-17-03
 
Adopting Chapter 118 regarding motor vehicle dealers
 
118.01


2003-26
 
11-18-03
 
Approving lease for three police cars
 
T.S.O. VI


2004-01
 
1-26-04
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2004-02
 
1-26-04
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2004-03
 
1-26-04
 
Establishing additional requirements for collection and disposal franchise
 
T.S.O. III


2004-04
 
2-16-04
 
New employee partial fringe benefit start date
 
39.31


2004-05
 
5-18-04
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2004-06
 
6-21-04
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2004-07
 
6-21-04
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2004-08
 
6-21-04
 
Amending job classification and wage scale
 
39.69


2004-09
 
8-16-04
 
Creating a Code Enforcement Board
 
Repealed


2004-10
 
10-4-04
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2004-11
 
9-27-04
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2004-12
 
9-27-04
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2004-13
 
9-20-04
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2004-14
 
11-15-04
 
New penalty for nuisance violations
 
Repealed


2004-15
 
11-15-04
 
Establishing new penalty for animal code violations
 
Repealed


2004-16
 
11-15-04
 
Establishing new penalty for parking violations
 
72.99


2004-17
 
11-15-04
 
Establishing storm drainage guidelines
 
51.0 - 51.24


2004-18
 
12-20-04
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2005-01
 
2-21-05
 
Fees for alcoholic beverage businesses
 
110.10


2005-02
 
3-21-05
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2005-03
 
3-21-05
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2005-04
 
4-18-05
 
Fees for alcoholic beverage businesses
 
111.10


2005-05
 
5-16-05
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2005-06
 
5-16-05
 
Yard sale permit requirements and regulations
 
115.01 - 115.05, 115.99


2005-07
 
6-20-05
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2005-08
 
6-20-05
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2005-09
 
6-20-05
 
Street encroachment permit requirements
 
91.01 - 91.05


2005-10
 
6-20-05
 
Construction/reconstruction minimum requirements
 
91.10 - 91.12


2005-11
 
6-20-05
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2005-12
 
7-18-05
 
Street vending business requirements
 
119.01, 119.02, 119.99


2005-13
 
9-19-05
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2005-14
 
9-19-05
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2005-15
 
9-19-05
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2005-16
 
8-15-05
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 -38.33


2005-17
 
11-21-05
 
Establishing flood damage prevention regulations
 
153.01 - 153.13, 153.20 - 153.22, 153.30 - 153.36, 153.40


2005-18
 
11-22-05
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2006-01
 
2-20-06
 
Prohibition against noise pollution
 
131.01 - 131.05, 131.99


2006-02
 
2-20-06
 
Providing for the continuity of municipal government
 
36.02


2006-03
 
2-20-06
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2006-03
 
2-20-06
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2006-04
 
6-19-06
 
Annexing certain territory
 
T.S.O. I


2006-05
 
6-19-06
 
Annexing certain territory
 
T.S.O. I


2006-06
 
6-19-06
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2006-07
 
6-20-06
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2006-08
 
7-18-06
 
Speed limit for certain roadways
 
71.29


2006-09
 
8-21-06
 
Amending flood damage prevention regulations
 
153.07


2006-10
 
9-18-06
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2006-11
 
9-18-06
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2006-12
 
9-18-06
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2006-13
 
9-18-06
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2006-14
 
9-18-06
 
Ad valorem taxes - public services companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2006-15
 
11-20-06
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2006-16
 
11-20-06
 
Vacation leave policy
 
39.23


2006-18
 
12-4-06
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2007-01
 
2-19-07
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2007-02
 
2-19-07
 
Amending zoning regulations
 
Not Included


2007-03
 
2-19-07
 
Vacation leave policy
 
39.23


2007-04
 
3-19-07
 
Repealing Ord. 90-07 and Ord. 01-02 regarding occupational license requirement
 
110.20 - 110.32, 110.99


2007-05
 
5-21-07
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of Willabrook Court, Brook Court, and Willabrook
Drive as a public way maintained by the city
 
Not Included


2007-06
 
7-16-07
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2007-07
 
6-18-07
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2007-08
 
6-18-07
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2007-09
 
7-16-07
 
Proposing annexation of property
 
T.S.O. I


2007-10
 
8-20-07
 
Establishing a job classification and wage scale for various employees of the
city
 
Not Included


2007-11
 
9-24-07
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2007-12
 
9-17-07
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2007-13
 
9-17-07
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2007-14
 
9-17-07
 
Ad valorem taxes - public services companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2007-15
 
10-15-07
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2007-16
 
11-19-07
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2007-17
 
11-19-07
 
Flashing lights mounted in/on police vehicles
 
71.05


2007-18
 
12-17-07
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2008-01
 
2-18-08
 
Proposing annexation of property
 
T.S.O. I


2008-02
 
3-17-08
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2008-03
 
2-27-08
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2008-05
 
4-23-08
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2008-06
 
6-16-08
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2008-07
 
6-16-08
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2008-08
 
6-16-08
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2008-09
 
7-21-08
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2008-10
 
9-15-08
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2008-11
 
9-15-08
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2008-12
 
9-15-08
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2008-13
 
9-15-08
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2008-14
 
10-20-08
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2008-15
 
12-15-08
 
Speed limit for dead end streets
 
71.29


2009-01
 
2-16-09
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2009-02
 
2-15-09
 
Repealing Ord. 00-12 changing date of Martin Luther King, Jr. birthday holiday
 
39.22


2009-03
 
3-16-09
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2009-04
 
5-18-09
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2009-05
 
6-15-09
 
Probationary period for police officers
 
39.04


2009-06
 
6-15-09
 
Amending annual budget
 
Not Included


2009-07
 
6-15-09
 
Adopting annual budget
 
Not Included


2009-08
 
7-20-09
 
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator position established
 
31.39


2009-09
 
9-8-09
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2009-10
 
9-8-09
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 37.17, 38.19


2009-11
 
9-8-09
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.19


2009-12
 
9-8-09
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2009-13
 
9-21-09
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2009-14
 
12-21-09
 
Guidelines for solicitors
 
111.01 - 111.09, 111.99


2009-15
 
1-18-10
 
Regulations regarding alcoholic beverages
 
Repealed


2010-01
 
4-19-10
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2010-02
 
4-19-10
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2010-03
 
3-29-10
 
Wastewater user charges
 
Not Included


2003-24A
 
4-19-10
 
Mandatory pick up of garbage
 
52.01


2010-04
 
5-11-10
 
Approving a lease
 
T.S.O. VI


2010-05
 
5-11-10
 
Approving a lease
 
T.S.O. VI


2010-06
 
6-21-10
 
Amending annual budget for FY 2009 - 2010
 
Not Included


2010-07
 
6-21-10
 
Adopting annual budget for the FY 2010 - 2011
 
Not Included


2010-08
 
6-28-10
 
Authorizing the issuance of bonds
 
Not Included


2010-09
 
6-28-10
 
Fixing the time and place of City Council meetings
 
32.21


2010-10
 
6-28-10
 
Limiting the application of civil service
 
Not Included (Editor’s Note Ch. 37)


2010-11
 
8-16-10
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2010-12
 
9-20-10
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2010-13
 
9-20-10
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2010-14
 
9-20-10
 
Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles
 
38.18


2010-15
 
9-20-10
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2010-16
 
10-18-10
 
Amending yard sale regulations
 
115.01 - 115.05, 115.99


2010-17
 
9-20-10
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2010-18
 
9-20-10
 
Adopting a modern and accurate legal description of previously annexed
ordinances
 
T.S.O. I


2010-19
 
10-18-10
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


2010-20
 
10-18-10
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


2011-01
 
6-20-11
 
Amending annual budget for FY 2010 - 2011
 
Not Included


2011-02
 
6-20-11
 
Adopting annual budget for the FY 2011 - 2012
 
Not Included


2011-03
 
7-18-11
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2011-04
 
7-18-11
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2011-05
 
9-19-11
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2011-06
 
9-19-11
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2011-07
 
9-19-11
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property and motor vehicles
 
38.15 - 38.19


2011-08
 
9-19-11
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2011-09
 
10-17-11
 
Rezoning certain property
 
T.S.O. IV


2011-10
 
10-17-11
 
Adopting the 2011 S-11 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


2011-11
 
11-21-11
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2011-12
 
11-21-11
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2011-13
 
11-21-11
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2012-01
 
2-20-12
 
Amending license fee schedule
 
110.10


2012-02
 
6-18-12
 
Amending annual budget for FY 2011 - 2012
 
Not Included


2012-03
 
6-18-12
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 2012 - 2013
 
Not Included


2012-04
 
6-18-12
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2012-06
 
8-20-12
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2012-07
 
9-17-12
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2012-08
 
9-17-12
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2012-09
 
9-17-12
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property and motor vehicles
 
38.15 - 38.19


2012-10
 
9-17-12
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2012-11
 
10-15-12
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2012-12
 
10-15-12
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2012-14
 
12-17-12
 
Rezoning
 
T.S.O. IV


2012-15
 
12-17-12
 
Election procedure for city officials
 
31.20


2012-16
 
1-21-12
 
Curfew for minors
 
130.01


2013-01
 
3-18-13
 
Proposing an annexation
 
Not Included


2013-02
 
3-18-13
 
Proposing an annexation
 
Not Included


2013-03
 
4-15-13
 
Zoning regulations
 
Not Included


2013-04
 
6-17-13
 
Amending annual budget for FY 2012 - 2013
 
Not Included


2013-05
 
6-17-13
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 2013 - 2014
 
Not Included


2013-06
 
7-15-13
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2013-07
 
7-15-13
 
Annexing certain property
 
T.S.O. I


2013-08
 
8-19-13
 
Alcoholic beverages regulations
 
113.30 - 113.46, 113.60 - 113.62, 113.99


2013-09
 
8-19-13
 
Amending license fee schedule regarding insurance premiums surcharge
 
110.10


2013-10
 
9-16-13
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2013-11
 
9-16-13
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2013-12
 
9-16-13
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property and motor vehicles
 
38.15 - 38.19


2013-13
 
9-16-13
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2014-01
 
2-17-14
 
Joint Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Ordinance
 
154.01


2014-02
 
2-17-14
 
Joint Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff Ordinance
 
155.01


2014-03
 
3-17-14
 
Adopting 2013 S-13 Supplement
 
Adopting Ordinance


2014-04
 
4-21-14
 
Setting compensation for mayor
 
31.02


2014-05
 
4-21-14
 
Setting compensation for council
 
31.02


2014-06
 
6-16-14
 
Amending annual budget for FY 2013 - 2014
 
Not Included


2014-07
 
6-16-14
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 2014 - 2015
 
Not Included


2014-08
 
8-25-14
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2014-09
 
8-25-14
 
Ad valorem taxes - tangible personal property
 
38.15 - 38.16, 38.19


2014-10
 
8-25-14
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property and motor vehicles
 
38.15 - 38.19


2014-11
 
8-25-14
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2014-12
 
9-15-14
 
Alcoholic beverages regulations
 
113.31, 113.40 - 113.42


2015-01
 
3-16-15
 
Limited use of firearms; hunting on city property prohibited
 
130.03, 130.05, 130.99


2015-02
 
6-15-15
 
Amending annual budget for FY 2014 - 2015
 
Not Included


2015-03
 
6-15-15
 
Adopting annual budget for FY 2015 - 2016
 
Not Included


2015-04
 
7-20-15
 
Zoning change
 
TSO IV


2015-05
 
7-20-15
 
Releasing a drainage easement
 
Not Included


2015-07
 
9-28-15
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01 - 38.07


2015-08
 
9-21-15
 
Ad valorem taxes - tangible personal property
 
38.15 - 38.17, 38.19


2015-09
 
9-21-15
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property and motor vehicles
 
38.15 - 38.19


2015-10
 
9-21-15
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30 - 38.33


2015-11
 
12-21-15
 
Monthly public caucus meeting
 
36.03


2016-01
 
2-15-16
 
Permit for Fencing, Driveways
 
150.25


2016-02
 
2-15-16
 
Rezoning
 
TSO IV


2016-03
 
3-21-16
 
Monthly business meetings
 
32.21


2016-04
 
4-18-16
 
Temporary fireworks sales
 
93.06


2016-05
 
3-21-16
 
License fee on insurance companies
 
120.01-120.06


2016-06
 
3-21-16
 
Rezoning
 
TSO IV


2016-07
 
4-1-16
 
Flood damage prevention
 
153.07


2016-08
 
4-4-16
 
Planning and zoning schedule of fees
 
Not Included


2016-09
 
4-4-16
 
Animal control
 
90.01-90.08, 90.99


16-10
 
4-18-16
 
Bonds
 
Not Included


2016-11
 
5-2-16
 
Occupational license tax
 
110.22


2016-12
 
5-2-16
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2016-13
 
6-20-16
 
Budget
 
Not Included


2016-14
 
6-20-16
 
Budget
 
Not Included


2016-15
 
7-18-16
 
Rezoning
 
TSO IV


2016-16
 
8-15-16
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2016-17
 
8-1-16
 
Code Enforcement Board
 
37.50-37.65


16-17
 
8-1-16
 
Summary of 2016-17
 
Not Included


2016-18
 
8-15-16
 
Nuisances
 
92.01-92.05, 92.99


2016-19
 
8-15-16
 
Noise pollution
 
131.02, 131.05, 131.99


2016-21
 
10-17-16
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2016-22
 
9-21-16
 
Ad valorem taxes- real property
 
38.01-38.07


2016-23
 
9-21-16
 
Ad valorem taxes- personal property
 
38.15-38.17


2016-24
 
9-21-16
 
Ad valorem taxes- motor vehicles
 
38.15-38.19


2016-25
 
9-21-16
 
Ad valorem taxes- public service companies
 
38.30-38.33


2016-26
 
10-17-16
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2016-27
 
11-7-16
 
Prohibiting operation of businesses in residential zones
 
110.50, 110.51, 110.99


2016-28
 
1-16-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2016-29
 
1-4-17
 
Rezoning
 
TSO IV


2017-01
 
2-6-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-02
 
2-6-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-03
 
3-6-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-04
 
3-20-17
 
Zoning map change
 
TSO IV


2017-05
 
5-15-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-06
 
5-15-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-07
 
6-5-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-08
 
6-5-17
 
Energy project assessment
 
Not included


2017-09
 
6-21-17
 
Budget
 
Not included


2017-10
 
6-21-17
 
Budget
 
Not included


2017-11
 
7-17-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-13
 
9-18-17
 
Ad valorem taxes
 
38.01-38.07


2017-14
 
9-18-17
 
Ad valorem taxes
 
38.15-38.19


2017-15
 
9-18-17
 
Ad valorem taxes
 
38.15-38.19


2017-16
 
9-18-17
 
Ad valorem taxes
 
38.30-38.33


2017-17
 
10-16-17
 
Sale of distilled spirits
 
113.30, 113.32


2017-18
 
11-6-17
 
Sign regulations
 
150.30-150.43


2017-19
 
10-2-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2017-20
 
10-16-17
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2018-01
 
2-5-18
 
Zoning map change
 
TSO IV


2018-02
 
2-19-18
 
Speed limit regulations
 
71.29


2018-03
 
3-5-18
 
Annexation
 
TSO I


2018-04
 
3-19-18
 
Zoning map change
 
TSO IV


2018-05
 
3-19-18
 
Zoning map change
 
TSO IV


2018-07
 
6-18-18
 
Budget
 
Not included


2018-08
 
6-18-18
 
Budget
 
Not included


2018-09
 
8-6-18
 
Establishing a job classification and wage scale for various employees of the
city
 
Not Included


2018-10
 
8-20-18
 
Nuisances
 
92.01, 92.02


2018-11
 
9-17-18
 
Street construction
 
71.29


2018-12
 
9-17-18
 
Ad valorem taxes - real property
 
38.01-38.07


2018-13
 
9-17-18
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15-38.19


2018-14
 
9-17-18
 
Ad valorem taxes - personal property
 
38.15-38.19


2018-15
 
9-17-18
 
Ad valorem taxes - public service companies
 
38.30-38.33


2018-16
 
10-15-18
 
Approving a lease
 
TSO IV


2018-17
 
1-7-19
 
Business meeting
 
32.21


ZONING REGULATIONS
FOR BULLITT COUNTY AND THE CITIES OF HILLVIEW, LEBANON
JUNCTION, MOUNT WASHINGTON & SHEPHERDSVILLE
BULLITT COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
REVISED APRIL 1987
Recorded in Fiscal Court Order
Book 23 Page 107
Recorded in County Ordinance
Book 1 Page 517
Note:
The zoning ordinance that is included in the body of this document is the zoning
ordinance as approved by Bullitt County Fiscal Court and in effect for unincorporated Bullitt
County. These regulations may or may not be in effect in all cities.
Amendments proposed to change the local zoning ordinances must be approved by
each local legislative body in order to become law. Oftentimes the amendments are
approved by some jurisdictions, but not by all.
For clarity and ease of reading the text included in the body of this document is the
zoning ordinance as approved by Bullitt County Fiscal Court. Any section that is not
consistent among all jurisdictions will be marked by an asterisk (*). The reader will be
referred to Appendices A and B to determine what language is in effect for each jurisdiction.
C O N T E N T S PAGE
ARTICLE 1 LEGAL STATUS & GENERAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 1
Section 1.100 – Title ……………………………………………………….. 1
Section 1.200 – Authority ………………………………………………….. 1
Section 1.300- Purpose and Intent ………………………………………… 1
Section 1.400 – Jurisdiction ………………………………………………... 2
Section 1.500 – Conflict or Inconsistency
with State Law ……………………………………………. 2
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS ………………………………………………………... 3
Section 2.100 – Interpretations ……………………………………………… 3
Section 2.200 – Words and Terms Defined ………………………………..... 3
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES ……………………………………… 13
Section 3.100 – Zones……………………………………………………….. 13
Section 3.200 – Official Zoning Map ……………………………………….. 15
Section 3.300 – Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries ………………. 16
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL REGULATIONS ………………………………………… 18
Section 4.100 – Application of Regulations ……………………………….. 18
Section 4.200 – Nonconforming Lots, Uses
and Structures ……………………………………………… 19
Section 4.300 – General Lot, Yard and Court
Requirements ………………………………………………. 22
Section 4.400 – Provisions of Water and Sewerage
Systems …………………………………………………….. 24
Section 4.500 – Public Utility Use or Structure …………………………….. 25
Section 4.600 – Use of Flood Areas ………………………………………. ... 25
Section 4.700 – Mineral Extraction and Regrading …………………………. 27
Section 4.800 – Off-Street Parking & Loading ……………………………… 30
Section 4.900 – Signs ………………………………………………………... 37
ARTICLE 5 ZONE REGULATIONS ………………………………………………. 44
Section 5.100 – Format of Zone Regulations ……………………………...... 44
Section 5.200 – Types of Application Review ……………………………… 44
Section 5.300 – Table of Type of Application
Review by Zone …………………………………………… 45
Section 5.400 – All Zones …………………………………………………... 54
Section 5.500 – Rural Zones ………………………………………………... 55
Section 5.600 – Residential Zones ………………………………………….. 58
Section 5.700 – Business Zones ……………………………………………. 67
Section 5.800 – Industrial Zones …………………………………………… 74
Section 5.900 – Planned Unit Development
Residential and Highway Business ……………………….. 83
ARTICLE 6 TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW …………... 89
Section 6.100 – Site Plan Review …………………………………………. . 89
Section 6.200 – Conditional Use ……………………………………………. 93
ARTICLE 7 ADMINISTRATION ………………………………………………….. 96
Section 7.100 – Administration and Enforcement:
Building Permits and Certificate of Zoning Compliance…… 96
Section 7.200 – The Board of Adjustments Procedure ……………………… 97
Section 7.300 – The Board of Adjustments: Powers and Duties …………… 98
Section 7.400 – Duties of Administrative Official ………………………….. 102
Section 7.500 – Penalties for Violation ……………………………………... 102
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS ……………………………………………………… 103
Section 8.100 – Amendment Application Procedure ………………………. 103
Section 8.200 – Text Amendment ………………………………………….. 103
Section 8.300 – Map Amendment ………………………………………….. 104
Section 8.400 – Planning Commission Recommendation
and Fiscal Court Decision ………………………………..... 105
ARTICLE 9 REGULATIONS PROVISIONS …………………………………….... 107
Section 9.100 – Interpretation ……………………………………………….. 107
Section 9.200 – Separability Clause ………………………………………… 107
Section 9.300 – Repeal of Conflicting Regulations ………………………… 107
Section 9.400 – Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses …………………. 107
Section 9.500 – Effective Date ……………………………………………… 113
APPENDIX A STATUS OF AMENDMENTS……………………………………... 114
APPENDIX B TEXT AMENDMENTS ……………………………………………. 116
ARTICLE 1 LEGAL STATUS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.100 Title
Section 1.200 Authority
Section 1.300 Purpose and Intent
Section 1.400 Jurisdiction
Section 1.500 Conflict or Inconsistency with State Law
ARTICLE 1 LEGAL STATUS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.100 Title
These regulations shall be known and referred to as the “Official Zoning Regulations of
Bullitt County and the Cities of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and Mount
Washington, Kentucky, 1982,” and may be cited as the County/City Zoning Regulations.
Reference to County, or Bullitt County, shall signify the county including the four above
mentioned political divisions, unless otherwise stated. (Note- This section was amended in
1991-see page 119 for the amended text)
Section 1.200 Authority
These zoning regulations are adopted in accordance with the authority granted by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes, Chapter 100, the Bullitt County Planning Commission and Fiscal
Court, and the City Councils of the above-mentioned political divisions, having fulfilled the
requirements set forth as a pre-requisite to the adoption of these regulations.
Section 1.300 Purpose and Intent
These zoning regulations are adopted by the Fiscal Court of Bullitt County, Kentucky, and
the City Council of each of the four above-mentioned political subdivisions for the following
purposes:
1.301 To promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of
Bullitt County.
1.302 To help guide the future growth and development of Bullitt County in accordance with
a comprehensive plan of land use and population density that provides for beneficial and
convenient relationships among the residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, and
public areas within the county, to the best interest of the general public.
1.303 To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for future development, to secure safety
from fire, flood, and other dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
concentration of the population.
1.304 To regulate, maintain, and protect residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural
areas from encroachment of incompatible uses, and to protect residential areas specifically
against hazards of fire, offensive noise, smoke, odors, vibration, glare or other objectionable
influences.
1.305 To reserve land most suited for agricultural use, restricting forms of development
which would interfere with agricultural activities, or inflict permanent damage to the
county’s natural resources.
-1-
1.306 To provide for the reservation of sufficient sites for future industrial development.
1.307 To provide a guide for public action in the orderly and efficient provision of public
facilities and services, and for private enterprise in building development, investment, and
other economic activity throughout the county.
1.308 To promote creative plans and designs allowing innovations and diversification in
residential and other types of developments in deviation from the typical and rigid layouts.
Section 1.400 Jurisdiction
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all lands within Bullitt County, including
lands within any of its political subdivisions.
Section 1.500 Conflict or Inconsistency with State Law
Should any of these regulations conflict or be inconsistent with any provision of the
Kentucky State Law, including Kentucky Revised Statutes Chapter 100, such provisions of
the State Law shall apply.
-2-
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS
Section 2.100 Interpretations
Section 2.200 Words and Terms Defined
Section 2.100 Interpretations
For the purpose of these regulations certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall
be interpreted as follows: words in the singular include the plural and plural the singular; the
word ‘building’ includes the word ‘structure’, the word ‘shall’ is mandatory and not
directory; the word ‘occupied’ or ‘used’ shall be considered as though followed by the words
‘or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied’.
Section 2.200 Words and Terms Defined
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: Any purpose for which a building or tract of land may
be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied, which is customarily incidental and
subordinate in the areas extent or purpose to the principal building or use which it serves and
which is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use.
AGRICULTURAL USE: Land containing at least ten (10) acres which is used for raising
and harboring livestock or agricultural products, including farm buildings and the storage of
agricultural equipment; riding, livery and boarding stables, kennels and veterinaries; and as
an accessory use the sale of agricultural products raised on the property. Under this term, the
sale from roadside stands is limited to agricultural products and the products of home
industry which have been produced on the farm where located.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL: Any department, employee, or advisory elected or
appointed body which is authorized to administer any provision of the zoning regulations,
subdivision regulations, and if delegated, any provision of any housing or building
regulations or any other land use control regulations.
ALLEY: A dedicated public right-of–way other than a street, that affords a secondary means
of access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION: Any change, rearrangement, or addition to a building, its supporting
members, or its foundation other than repairs, and any modification in construction or in
building equipment.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MAJOR: Repair of motor vehicles or trailers, including
rebuilding or reconditioning of engines and/or transmissions; collision services including
body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop and vehicle
steam cleaning.
-3-
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental minor repairs, upholstering, replacement of
parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one half (1 ½)
tons capacity, but not including any operation named under ‘Automotive Repair,
Major,’ or any other similar thereto. Cars or trucks being repaired or under repair shall not
be so stored outside the building for more that 48 hours.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING: The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles, or
the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENTS: That portion of a building located partially underground but having more
that one half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of adjoining
ground.
BOARD: The Board of Adjustment having jurisdiction unless the context indicates
otherwise.
BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling or part there of occupied by a single
housekeeping unit where more than three people are sheltered for profit.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any covered structure for the support, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals or moveable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to
the land.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average contact ground level at
the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip
or gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story level of a
building, and set at a distance which all or any part of the building is to be set back to from
said right-of –way, except as otherwise provided by these regulations.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the authorized officer allowing a proprietor or his
agent to construct, alter, or remove a building, etc., or engage in similar activity which would
alter the character of the building or lot in question.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building, including any permanently covered space such as
porches and carports, and attached garages in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In a residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the
principal building on its lot.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, ZONING CERTIFICATE, OR ZONING
PERMIT: A certificate issued by the authorized officer, before use or occupancy of any
building or land stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the
-4-
requirements of these zoning regulations. This shall apply to any building, premises, or land,
or combination (except for the raising of crops and other agricultural activities)
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its
use or structure.
COMMISSION OR PLANNING COMMISSION: Bullitt County Planning Commission.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is essential to or would promote the public health,
safety, or welfare in one or more zones, but which would impair the integrity and character of
the zone in which it is located, or in adjoining zones, unless special restrictions on location,
size, extent, and character of performance are imposed in addition to those imposed in the
zoning regulations.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued
by the Administrative Official pursuant to authorization by the Board of Adjustments,
consisting of two parts; (a) A statement of the factual determination by the Board of
Adjustments which justifies the issuance of the permit; and (b) A statement of the specific
conditions which must be met in order for the use to be permitted.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: An establishment which provides full-time
convalescent or chronic care or both for three (3) or more individuals who are not related by
blood or marriage to the operator and who by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are
unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services
shall be provided in such a home; hospital or sanitarium shall not be construed to be included
in this definition.
COURT: An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building or a group of buildings.
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE: A departure from the terms of the zoning regulations
pertaining to height or width of structures and size of yards and open spaces, where such
departure will not conflict with the public interest; and where, owing to conditions peculiar to
the property only because of its size, shape, or topography, and not as a result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.
DWELLING, OR DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof with one, or a suite
of two or more rooms occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residential
purposes, that is living and sleeping, by one family or housekeeping unit, and which includes
permanently installed cooking and lawfully required sanitary facilities. This definition shall
thus exclude a tent, cabin, trailer or trailer coach or other temporary or transient structure or
facility.
a. Single Family: A single independent building occupied or constructed to
to be occupied exclusively for residential purposes by one family or
housekeeping unit.
-5-
b. Two Family: a single independent building occupied or constructed to be
occupied exclusively by not more than two (2) families or housekeeping units.
c. Multi-Family: A building or portion thereof, or group of buildings on one lot
but containing separate living units, occupied or constructed to be occupied by
more than two (2) families or housekeeping units.
Note: See page 123 for a definition of construction.
DWELLING GROUP: A group of two (2) or more detached dwellings located on a parcel of
land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common.
FAMILY: One or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same premises as
a single housekeeping unit, provided that, unless all members are related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, no such single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding or lodging house, hotel or motel – shall contain more than five members.
*FARM: A place on which agricultural operations are conducted at any time under the
control or supervision of one person, partnership or a manager. Places of less than 10 acres
are counted as farms if the estimated sales of agricultural products for the year amounted or
normally would amount to at least $250.00.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed space for the storage of not more than four motor
vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building, and provided that no
business, occupation or service is conducted for profit therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or land available to the public to use, operated for gain, and
which is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, painting, servicing or equipping
motor vehicles.
GRADE, FINISH: The completed surfaces of ground, lawns, walks, paved areas and roads
brought to grades as shown on plans or designs relating thereto, or in existence at the time the
certificate of zoning compliance is issued.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use carried on in a dwelling unit or other structure
accessory to a dwelling unit, but in no case occupying more than twenty-five (25) percent of
the total floor area of the building or buildings, by a member or members of the bona fide
residents of the dwelling, except as permitted for a professional home occupation; and which
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, so
that the character thereof is not changed and it shall not have any exterior evidence of such
secondary use except as permitted in Section 4.900. Specifically, home occupation shall
include any of the following activities: dressmaking, home cooking, tutoring (limited to not
more that four (4) children simultaneously), musical instruction (limited to a single pupil at a
time) and the practice by an artist, insurance agent, musician, realtor, beauty parlor limited
to one license, one operator) photographer, or the sale of antiques. Also included and
*See Appendices A and B -6-
provided that no more than two (2) persons not bona fide residents of the dwelling are
engaged to perform related work. Home Occupation shall not be interpreted to include any
of the following: barber shop, commercial stables and kennels, animal hospitals, restaurants
or eating places, musical instructions to groups, convalescent homes, mortuary
establishments, garages or premises for the repair of motor vehicles on profit basis, TV radio
or electrical appliances.
HOSPITAL: Includes sanitarium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home,
house for the aged and any other place for observation, diagnosis, treatment or care of two or
more individuals suffering from illness, injury, deformity or abnormality or from any
condition requiring medical services.
HOUSING OR BUILDING REGULATIONS: Any regulations incorporating any housing,
building, or safety code including, but not limited to such codes as plumbing, electrical,
elevator, boiler, fire safety, and minimum housing, or any other regulations.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: The owner of the property, his wife, their children, and the parents
of the owners of such farm.
INDUSTRY: The processing of products or raw materials. The two categories of industry
are defined according to the following performance standards:
GENERAL INDUSTRY: That industry in which processing of products results in the
emission of any atmospheric pollution, visible light flashes or glare, odors, or noises or
vibration which may be heard or felt off the premises of that industry which constitutes a fire
or explosion hazard.
LIGHT INDUSTRY: That industry in which processing of products results in none of the
conditions described for above type industry.
JUNK YARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof of 200 square feet or more, used
primarily for the collecting, storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles
not in running condition and /or for the sale of parts thereof.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The chief body with legislative power, whether it is a city council
or the county’s fiscal court depending on the location of zoning subject of concern.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings and accessory buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading of unloading merchandise or materials, and which
-7-
abuts on a street, alley or other appropriate means of access, occupied or to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, if any, together with such open spaces as are required,
having not less than the minimum area, width, and depth required for a lot in the zone in
which such land is situated, and having frontage on a street, or other means of access as may
be determined by the Planning Commission to be adequate as a condition of the issuance of a
building permit for a building on such land.
LOT AREA: The total area within the property lines excluding any part thereof lying within
the boundaries of a public street, or proposed public street.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the
intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a
corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect
at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite
rear line measured at right angles to a straight front lot line, or the tangent to the middle of
the arc if it is a curved front line.
LOT FRONTAGE: The distance along the front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line separating the lot from the street right-of-way, and in this
respect it constitutes a portion of the street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line other than front or side lot lines contributing to the definition
of property boundaries.
LOT LINE, SIDE: A lot line starting from a point along the front lot line and other than a
rear lot line and contributing to the definition of property boundaries.
LOT WIDTH: The straight horizontal distance measured between the opposite two points of
the intersection of the building line with the two opposite site lot lines.
*MOBILE HOME: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation as one
or two units after fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbeds or other
trailers, and arriving at the site as one or two units where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and minor
assembly operations, connections to utilities and the like. Removal of the wheels and/or
chassis and /or placement on a temporary or permanent foundation does not exempt a mobile
home from all requirements applicable to mobile homes in these regulations. Likewise, the
joining of two mobile homes units to form a single dwelling does not exempt a mobile home
from all requirements applicable to mobile homes in these regulations. A structure
manufactured with a serial number and requiring a license receipt for transporting is
presumed to be a mobile home under this definition.
*See Appendices A and B -8-
Excepted from this definition and not considered mobile homes are modular homes as
defined in these regulations, and travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any parcel of land developed, used or designed to be used for the
location, either temporary or permanent, of mobile homes, on rental basis.
MOTEL: A series of attached, semi-attached or detached sleeping or living units, each with
at least a bedroom and a bathroom, for the temporary accommodation of automobile transient
guests, said units having convenient access to off-street parking spaces, for the exclusive use
of the guests or occupants.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building grouping a number of rooms or suite of rooms
with an independent entrance for each from outside or from a common hallway, and
consisting of at least one (1) habitable room, together with a kitchen or kitchenette and
sanitary facilities per each such room or suite of rooms.
NON-CONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: An activity or a building, sign, structure or
a portion thereof which lawfully existed before the adoption or amendment of the zoning
regulations, but which does not conform to all of the regulations contained in the zoning
regulations which pertain to the zone in which it is located.
OPEN SPACE: Parks, common greens, other recreation space or generally open areas
available to the public or yards or other open areas provided in connection with the
residential buildings occupied by more than two families per lot which are intended for the
sole use of the occupants of such buildings and their guests.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A visible, immobile contrivance or structure in any shape or
form, the purpose of which is to advertise any product or service, campaign, event, etc.
PARKING SPACE: An off-street space used for the temporary location of one licensed
motor vehicle, which is at least two hundred (200) square feet in area and nine feet wide, not
including driveway, and having direct access to street or alley.
PERMIT: Refers to a written official document permitting an action relating to the use,
development, or improvement of land or building. Permit shall include the certification
indicating compliance with the requirements of these regulations as well as certification
permitting occupancy and/or use of the land or building in question.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land controlled by a single landowner and
developed as a single entity for a number of dwellings, the plan for which does not
necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling unit, density, lot coverage or
required open space to any other residential or commercial zone.
PLAT: The map of a subdivision, recorded with the county courthouse.
-9-
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: A city within the county.
PREMISES: A lot or other tract of land under one ownership and all structures on it.
PROCESSING: Manufacturing, reduction, extraction, packaging, repairing, cleaning, and
any other similar original or restorative treatment applied to raw materials, products, or
personal property. Processing does not refer to the fabrication of structures, however.
PROFESSION, OR PROFESSIONAL: A business in which gain or livelihood depends on
and requires specialized knowledge and often long intensive academic preparation; and
usually follows a line of conduct and required adherence to technical or ethical standards.
Included in this definition, but not limited, are the following professional business activities:
accounting, chiropractry, dentistry, practice of medicine, landscape architecture, land
surveying, practice of law, optometry, osteopathy, physiotherapy, podiatry, professional
planning, architecture, engineering, or psychology.
PROFESSIONAL RESIDENCE OFFICE: A residence in which the occupant has a
professional office which is clearly secondary to the dwelling use for living purposes and
does not change the residential character thereof, and where not more that three persons are
working.
PUBLIC FACILITY: Any use of land whether publicly or privately owned for
transportation, utilities, or communications, or for the benefit of the general public,
including, but not limited to libraries, streets, schools, fire or police stations, county
buildings, municipal buildings, recreational centers including parks, and cemeteries.
RETAIL SALES: Sale of any product of merchandise to customers for their own personal
consumption or use, not for resale.
SALES AREA: AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, OR TRAILER: An enclosed or open
area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles,
mobile homes, trailers, or boats in operable condition, and where no repair work is done.
SERVICE AREA: Includes those parts of any lot which are used primarily to provide access
for servicing the use on the lot, including land used for delivery of goods, storage and
collection of wastes and provision for maintenance.
SLEEPING ROOM: A single room rented for dwelling purposes but without the amenities
for separate and independent housekeeping.
SIGN: A structure, building or part thereof, or pennant, for visual communication that is
used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public. A sign
does not include the flag or insignia of any nation, state or city; nor any political, education,
charitable, philanthropic, religious advertising campaign, provided that such
advertising shall not be displayed for a period exceeding thirty days.
-10-
STABLE: A building in which horses are kept for public or private use, renumeration, hire
or sale.
STATION, FILLING OR GASOLINE: An area of land, together with any structure thereon,
used for the retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such as
lubricating and hand washing of motor vehicles, and the sale, installation or minor repair of
tires, batteries, or other automobile accessories, but not for painting or major repairs.
STORAGE OR STORAGE SPACE: Land or enclosed building used for the keeping of
goods, wares, supplies or equipment.
STORY: That part of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next to it, or if there be no floor above it then the ceiling above it.
STREET: An improved public right-of–way fifty (50) feet or more in width which provides
a public means of access to abutting property consisting of more than one lot in more than
one ownership; or any such right-of-way more than thirty (30) feet and less than fifty (50)
feet in width provided it existed prior to enactment of these regulations and provided such
street has been accepted by Bullitt County or any of its political subdivisions. The term
street shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or
any other similar terms.
STREET, CENTER LINE OF: The line which is usually at an equal distance from both
street lines, and right-of –way lines.
STREET GRADE: The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of that street shall be taken as the
street grade.
*STRUCTURE: See “Building” above.
SUBDIVISION: A division of real property, improved or unimproved, or a portion thereof
shown, on the last preceding tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units, into two or more
parcels, lots, plots, sites or other division of land, with or without streets, for the purpose of
immediate or future sale, transfer of ownership, or building development, except that the
division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than ten (10) acres not involving
any new streets or easement of access shall be exempted from the application of this term.
*See Appendices A and B
-11-
THEATER, DRIVE-IN: Open land with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the
showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, to patrons seated in automobiles or on
outdoor seats.
TOURIST HOME: Same as “Boarding or Lodging House” above except where the
overnight accommodation is provided for compensation for transient type of guests.
TRAILER,TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis and not
exceeding a gross weight of four thousand five hundred (4500) pounds when factory
equipped for the road or an overall length of thirty (30) feet and designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
VARIANCE: A modification from the literal provisions of these regulations by the Board of
Adjustments in cases where a literal enforcement of its provisions would result in
unnecessary hardship due to circumstances unique to the individual property or use for which
the variance is granted.
WILDLIFE RESERVE: Includes bird sanctuary, zoo, forest reserve, game reserve, botanical
garden.
YARD: That portion of the lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky and extends from a
lot line to its related yard line.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending along the full length of the front lot line.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full length of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along the side lot line or lines from the required
front yard to the required rear yard.
YARD LINE: A line drawn parallel to the corresponding lot line at a distance specified for
the required depth of yard in each respective case.
YARD LINE, FRONT: The line which bounds the front yard and is parallel to
the front lot line.
YARD LINE, REAR: The line which bounds the rear yard and is parallel to the rear
lot line.
YARD LINE, SIDE: The line or lines which bounds the side yard and is parallel to
the side lot line or lines.
ZONE: An established area within the community in which the provisions of these
regulations are applicable.
-12-
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 3.100 Zones
Section 3.200 Official Zoning Map
3.201 Changes in Zoning Map
3.202 Replacement of the Official Zoning Map
Section 3.300 Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 3.100 Zones
For the purpose of these regulations, the area of Bullitt County including the incorporated
areas of its political subdivisions is divided into the following thirteen (13) zones, or
zoning districts:
Rural Zones
A – Agricultural
C – Conservation
SR – Stream Valley Reserve
Residential Zones
R1 – Single-family
R2 – Single-family
R3 – Multi-family lower density
R4 – Multi-family higher density
Business Zones
B1 – Highway Business
B2 – Central Business
Industrial Zones
IL – Light industrial
IG – General and Extractive Industrial
Planned Unit Development Zones
PR – Planned Unit Development, Residential
PB – Planned Unit Development, Highway Business
-13-
Earth Products Zone
EP – Earth Products (see page 14A)
-14-
The City of Hillview has established an EARTH PRODUCTS zone. This zone was
created by Text Amendment Number 95T-01. The text amendment also made changes to
the following sections of the regulations:
Section 2.200 Words and Terms Defined
Section 3.100 Zones
Section 4.700 Mineral Extraction and Regrading
Section 4.701 Procedure for Mineral Extraction Operations
Section 4.702 Development Standards
Section 4.703 Rehabilitation Requirements
Section 5.301 Natural Resources Uses
Section 5.303 Business Uses
Section 5.305 Public and Semipublic Uses
Section 5.800 Industrial Zones
Section 5.802 General Industrial, IG
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges & Expenses
The following sections were added:
Section 5.950 Earth Products Zone
A copy of the text amendment, showing deletions and additions to the text of these
regulations, is available upon request.
-14ASection
3.200 Official Zoning Map
The above zones are bounded and defined as shown on each of the maps titled ‘Official
Zoning Map, Bullitt County, Kentucky’; ‘Official Zoning Map City of Shepherdsville’;
and ‘Official Zoning Map, City of Lebanon Junction, Kentucky’; and ‘Official Zoning
Map, Mount Washington, Kentucky’ and ‘Official Zoning Map, Hillview, Kentucky’.
In addition to its title, the Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
County Judge, or the respective City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the county or the
respective city under the following words: ‘This is to certify that this is the Official
Zoning Map referred to in Section 3.200 of regulations Number ---- of ---- (Bullitt
County, Kentucky, or respectively, the City of Shepherdsville, the City of Lebanon
Junction, City of Hillview, or the City of Mount Washington), adopted by the ---- (Fiscal
Court of the County of Bullitt, or respectively, the City Council of Shepherdsville,
Lebanon Junction, Hillview, or Mount Washington).
Section 3.201 Changes in Zoning Map
If, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and Kentucky Revised Statutes,
changes are made in zoning boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, such changes shall be made by the local governing body together with an entry on
the Official Zoning Map (brief description of nature of change), which entry shall be
signed by the County Judge or Mayor of the city concerned and attested by the County
Clerk or the City Clerk concerned. The amending regulation shall provide that such
changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly entered
upon the Official Zoning Map of the subject political area. No amendment to these
regulations which involves matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become
effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map.
No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown
thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth herein. Any unauthorized
change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of these
regulations and punishable as provided under Section 7.500 herein.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may
from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located
in the office of the Bullitt County Clerk or the respective City Clerk for the area under his
jurisdiction shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings,
and other structures within the county.
-15-
Section 3.202 Replacement of the Official Zoning Map
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the legislative body
having jurisdiction may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall
supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning regulations or any
subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the
signature of the County Judge or the Mayor of the city concerned, attested by County
Clerk or the City Clerk of the city concerned and bearing the seal of the county or city
concerned under the following words; ‘This is to certify that this Zoning Map supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced)
as part of regulation Number ---- of ---- (the County of Bullitt, Kentucky, or, respectively,
the City of Shepherdsville, City of Lebanon Junction, City of Mount Washington,
Kentucky or Hillview, Kentucky).
Section 3.300 Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
a- Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
b- Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following city limits;
c- Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following platted lot lines;
d- Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks;
e- Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, valleys, ditches, gulleys, or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow such center lines;
f- Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features listed in
Numbers ‘a’ through ‘e’ above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
-16-
g- Where physical or cultural features existing on ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by
‘a’ through ‘f’ above, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall interpret the zone
boundaries.
h- If, after use of the above rules and the map, the zone classification of any
land is in question, it shall be deemed to be in the most restrictive of the adjoining
zones.
-17-
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 4.100 Application of Regulations
4.101 Conformity with Regulations
4.102 Bulk and Density
4.103 Separability of Purposes Required
4.104 Minimum Lot and Yard
Section 4.200 Nonconforming Lots, Uses, and Structures
4.201 Nonconforming Lots of Record
4.202 Nonconforming Uses of Land
4.203 Nonconforming Structures
4.204 Nonconforming Uses of Structures
4.205 Repairs and Maintenance
4.206 Conditional Uses Not Nonconforming Uses
Section 4.300 General Lot, Yard and Court Requirements
4.301 Lot for Every Building
4.302 Subdivision of a Lot
4.303 Lot Access Requirement
4.304 Lots in Two or More Zones
4.305 Front Yards for Corner and Through Lots
4.306 Measurement of Front Yard Depths
4.307 Projections Into Yard Space
4.308 Fences, Walls, Hedges and Vegetation
4.309 Visibility at Intersections in Residential District
4.310 Court Requirements
Section 4.400 Provision of Water and Sewerage Systems
4.401 Approved Water and Sewerage Systems Required
4.402 Minimum Lot Area When Water and/or Sewage Facilities are Lacking
Section 4.500 Public Utility Use or Structure
Section 4.600 Use of Flood Areas
4.601 Types of Flood Areas
4.602 Uses Permitted in Floodways
4.603 Typical Uses that May be Allowed in Floodways
4.604 Uses Permitted in Floodway Plain
Section 4.700 Mineral Extraction and Regrading
4.701 Procedure for Mineral Extraction Operations
4.702 Development Standards
4.703 Rehabilitation Requirements
Section 4.800 Off-Street Parking and Loading
4.801 Application Procedure
4.802 Design of Parking Areas
4.803 Location of Parking Areas
4.804 Review and Approval by Commission Required
4.805 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
4.806 Off-Street Loading Space
4.807 Modification of Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 4.900 Signs
4.901 General Provisions
4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs
4.903 Signs Permitted Without a Zoning Certificate
4.904 Limitations
4.905 Number and Area of Signs
4.906 Sign Design
4.907 Business Signs
4.908 Outdoor Advertising Signs
4.909 Condemnation for Removal of Signs
4.910 Municipal Signs
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 4.100 Application of Regulations
The regulations established herein within each zone shall be minimum regulations and
shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure of land, except as hereinafter
provided and particularly:
Section 4.101 Conformity With Regulations
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or
structure of part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for
the zone in which it is located.
Section 4.102 Bulk and Density
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
a- To exceed the height;
b- To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
c- To occupy a smaller lot area;
d- To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other
open spaces
than herein required, or in any manner contrary to the provisions of these regulations.
Section 4.103 Separability of Purposes Required
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required
about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with these
regulations shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading
space similarly required for any other building.
Section 4.104 Minimum Lot and Yard
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of these regulations shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of these regulations shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established herein.
-18-
Section 4.200 Nonconforming Lots, Uses, and Structure
Within the zones established by these regulations, or amendments that may later be
adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use,
which were lawful before these regulations were adopted or amended, but which would
be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of these zoning regulations or
future amendment. It is the intent of these regulations to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are
declared by these regulations to be incompatible with permitted uses and required
standards in the zones involved. It is further the intent of these regulations that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone. The
Board of Adjustment shall not permit change from one nonconforming use to another
unless the new nonconforming use is in the same or a more restrictive classification.
Such new nonconforming use shall not be reverted to the earlier nonconforming use or
any other nonconforming use of lesser restrictions. A nonconforming use of a structure, a
nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of these regulations by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition
of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited in the zone involved. The Board of
Adjustment shall not allow the enlargement of extension of a nonconforming use beyond
the scope and area of operation at the time these regulations, which make such use
nonconforming, were adopted. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in these regulations
shall be deemed to require a change in the plants, construction, or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations and upon which actual building construction
has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner; except that where demolition or removal of a existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be
deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until
completion of the building involved.
Section 4.201 Nonconforming Lots of Record
Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations, in any zone
in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations. Such lot must be in separate ownership and
not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall
apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that
are generally applicable in the zone, provided that yard dimensions and requirements
other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the zone in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall
be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment. In the event two or more
-19-
lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of these regulations, and if
all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by
these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of these regulations and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which
does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall
be division of the parcel be make which leaves remaining any lot with width or area
below the requirements stated in these regulations.
Section 4.202 Nonconforming Uses of Land
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, lawful use of
land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of these regulations as enacted or
amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
a- No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations.
b- No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of these regulations.
c- If any such nonconforming use of land is discontinued for any reason for a
period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by these regulations for the zone in
which such land is located.
Section 4.203 Nonconforming Structures
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these
regulations that could not be built under the terms of these regulations by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or
its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a- No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.
b- Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction as
determined by the Administrative Official, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
-20-
c- Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is
located after it is moved.
Section 4.204 Nonconforming Uses of Structures
If a lawful use of a structure or of structure and premises in combination exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, that would not be allowed
in the zone under the terms of these regulations, the lawful use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a- No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by these regulations in
the zone in which it is located, except dwelling, shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except
in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which
it is located.
b- Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for use at the time of
adoption or amendment of these regulations, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.
c- If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the zone than
the existing nonconforming use, and is more restrictive. In permitting
such change, the Board of Adjustments may require appropriate conditions
and safeguards in accord with the provisions of these regulations.
d- Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the zone in which such structure is located,
and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
e- When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or
for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
-21-
f- Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
Section 4.205 Repairs and Maintenance
On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be
done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of non bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not
exceeding 10 percent of the current replacement value of the building, provided that the
cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of these
regulations shall not be increased. In no case shall these regulations be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.
Section 4.206 Conditional Uses Not Nonconforming Uses
Any nonconforming use for which a conditional use is permitted as provided in these
regulations shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be
deemed a conforming use in such zone.
Section 4.300 General Lot, Yard and Court Requirements
The following requirements are in addition to any regulations incorporated in any
adopted Subdivision Regulations. In the case of any inconsistency or conflict, the more
restrictive requirements shall govern.
Section 4.301 Lot for Every Building
Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined. In any zone,
except as permitted in a Planned Unit Development Zone, only one main structure
housing a permitted use my be erected on a single lot, unless yard and other requirements
of these regulations shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.
Section 4.302 Subdivision of a Lot
Where a lot is formed hereafter from part of a lot already occupied by a building, such
separation shall be affected in such manner as not to impair conformity with any of the
requirements of these regulations with respect to the existing building and all yards and
other required spaces in connection therewith, and no permit shall be issued for the
establishment of a land use or the erection of a building on the new lot thus created unless
it complies with all the provisions of these regulations, and subdivision regulations as
they may be adopted.
-22-
Section 4.303 Lot Access Requirement
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or
with access to an approved public street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street
parking. In a Planned Unit Development, the lots may face on a common open space,
provided that the plan of such development is approved by the Planning Commission.
This requirement shall not apply to farm buildings.
Section 4.304 Lots in Two or More Zones
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more zone boundary lines,
the regulations for the less restrictive zone may extend not more than fifty (50) feet into
the more restricted portion.
Section 4.305 Front Yards for Corner and Through Lots
In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided and a
second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the zone shall be
provided on the other frontage. In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages,
the Administrative Official shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to the
following limitations: 1) at least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth
required generally in the zone; 2) no other front yard on such lot shall have less than half
the full depth required generally. In the case of through lots, i.e., two frontages on
opposite sides, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates
otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of the front yards
that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing
yard pattern, the Administrative Official may waive the requirement for the normal front
yard and substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the
average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
Section 4.306 Measurement of Front Yard Depths
Front yard depths, and side yards for corner lots, shall be measured from the road rightof-
way line. For purposes of such measurement, no local road shall be considered as
having a right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet wide and no major state road less than sixty
(60) feet wide. This provision shall not be construed as requiring the dedication of any
property to the state. After adoption of an official detailed plan by the state or county for
road widening or relocation, the right-of-way so established shall apply.
Section 4.307 Projections Into Yard Space
Steps, terraces, decks, carports, bay windows, fire escapes, balconies, open porches, and
other unenclosed architectural features, may extend into required yard areas not more
than nine (9) feet, provided that no such projection shall be less than five (5) feet from a
-23-
side lot line. Enclosing of such projections into yard areas is prohibited.
(Note – see page 120 for the latest text amendment of this section.)
Section 4.308 Fences, Walls, Hedges and Vegetation
In any required front yard, no fences or walls shall be permitted which materially impede
vision across such yard above the height of 30 inches. Except in required front yards, as
indicated above, fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in a yard or along the edge of the
yard. In Planned Unit Developments, requiring site plan review, the Planning
Commission may permit fences, walls, or hedges above 30 inches in the front yard when
the site and buildings are designed to accommodate such enclosure, or when required by
the Planning Commission as a condition for approval.
Section 4.309 Visibility at Intersections in Residential District
On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or
allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between two and a half
(2-1/2) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area
bounded by the intersecting street centerlines for a distance of ninety (90) feet from their
point of intersection and the diagonal line joining the end points along existing trees,
provided that no branches are located closer than six (6) feet to the ground.
Section 4.310 Court Requirements
When an enclosed court is provided for the purpose of furnishing light and air to rooms in
which persons are to work, live, or sleep, the minimum court dimensions shall be as
follows:
a- Minimum Width: For residential buildings other than a single-family
dwelling, the minimum width shall be the sum of the heights of the opposite
building walls, but not less than forty (40) feet. For non-residential
buildings, two-thirds the sum of opposite building walls, but no less than
thirty (30) feet.
b- Minimum Depth: One and one-half times the width.
Section 4.400 Provision of Water and Sewerage Systems
The following requirements are in addition to any provisions incorporated in any adopted
Subdivision Regulations. In the event of inconsistency or conflict, the more restrictive
provisions shall govern.
Section 4.401 Approved Water and Sewerage Systems Required
Any new development in Bullitt County is to be provided with approved water and
sewage disposal systems, either through:
-24-
a- Connection with public utility systems;
b- Connection with approved private systems; or
c- Use of an approved individual water supply (wells), and, in other than
Planned Unit Development zones, individual sewage disposal facilities,
(septic tanks or similar method).
No zoning improvement permit shall be issued until the applicant indicates that sufficient
provision has been or will be made for water supply and sewage disposal, and that these
provisions have been approved by the Bullitt County Health Department. No zoning
certificate is to be issued until the Health Department certifies that approved systems for
water supply and sewage disposal have been provided.
Section 4.402 Minimum Lot Area When Water and/or Sewage Facilities are Lacking
Any lot to be served by an individual water supply (wells) and/or individual sewage
disposal system (septic tank) is to have a minimum area of 14,000 square feet and a
minimum frontage of 100 feet, or the minimum of such requirements set by the Bullitt
County Health Department. The minimum lot areas shall be increased to include any
additional area deemed necessary by the Bullitt County Health Department to insure
potable water supply and/or adequate sewage disposal. The Administrative Official shall
not issue zoning permits until adequate lot area and frontage is provided.
Section 4.500 Public Utility Use or Structure
Water, sewer, electric, gas and communications lines, and necessary incidental equipment
such as repeaters, transformers, switches, pumps, and regulators (when such equipment is
located on the lines) but not administration, construction, maintenance or storage use, are
permitted in all zones and shall not be subject to lot, yard, height, and lot coverage
requirements. All other public utility facilities not permitted in the zone regulations are
permitted only as conditional use in any zone when approved by the Board of Adjustment
which shall provide for adequate safeguards to the adjoining properties.
Section 4.600 Use of Flood Areas
Notwithstanding other provisions of these regulations, the use of land subject to flooding
shall be regulated so as to minimize flood damage and reduce danger to life. Before
issuing permits in such areas as defined hereunder, the Administrative Official shall refer
the application to the Planning Commission. The Commission shall discuss and may
review detailed plans before recommending design improvements, if needed, or issuance
of permits.
-25-
Section 4.601 Types of Flood Areas
‘Floodways’ are the flood areas that may be covered by two or more feet of water and
which are located in the main stream flood-plain where water velocities are likely to be
high enough to become dangerous. ‘Floodway Plains’ are the areas which lie outside the
open ‘floodway’ but within the fifty-year floodplain. In this Floodway Plain, flood
waters ‘pond’ but do not do serious damage by sheer velocity or force.
Section 4.602 Uses Permitted in Floodways
Uses permitted in floodways must always be those which do not endanger human life or
increase flood damage by raising water heights or increasing flood velocities. Sound
foundations and footings and adequate deviations to minimize flood damage are required
for any structure allowed in the floodway and no earth fills may be permitted which
would have the effect of raising flood heights elsewhere. The Administrative Official
may refer applications for a permit to build in a floodway to the Soil Conservation
District or other appropriate agencies for reports on floodway proposals. In cases where
uncertainty exists as to whether or not a use should be allowed in a floodway, the
applicant shall have prepared an engineering analysis by a licensed engineer before a
permit shall be issued.
Section 4.603 Typical Uses that May be Allowed in Floodways Include:
a- Open land uses such as parking lots, loading berths, airport landing strips, fish
and wildlife preserves, and open recreation uses;
b- Storage uses for equipment and material not seriously affected by floods and
which will not create additional danger by being dislodged;
c- Most agricultural uses, but not transient labor camps or any kind of temporary
residences, or structures housing farm animals.
Section 4.604 Uses Permitted in Floodway Plain
Floodway plain areas are not required for the passage of floodwaters and therefore most
kinds of structures can be permitted as long as they are built high enough and
substantially enough to withstand the flood. The following rules shall apply:
a- No building shall be allowed in the floodway plain area unless its main
floor is at least five (5) feet above the elevation of the maximum expected
flood.
b- Filling of land is permitted, provided that filling will not have the effect of
raising flood heights elsewhere.
-26-
c- Foundations and footings of all structures shall be designed to withstand
flood conditions.
d- Whenever possible, the site plan shall be designed so that principal
buildings will be located outside of flood plains, and, whenever necessary,
floodway plain uses shall be limited to accessory buildings.
In any cases where uncertainty exists as to whether or not proposed foundations or
footings are adequate to withstand flood conditions, or whether or not proposed filling
operations will increase floodway hazards, the applicant shall have prepared an
engineering or structural analysis by a licensed engineer before a permit shall be issued.
Section 4.700 Mineral Extraction and Regrading
The excavation of natural materials or filling of land shall be permitted without a
conditional use permit only to a degree necessary to permit construction of buildings,
streets, or accessory uses for which a zoning permit has been granted. Materials used for
fill shall be natural materials only, such as sand, gravel, or dirt, and shall not consist of
rubbish, refuse, garbage, or decomposable animal or vegetable materials. Regrading
shall be undertaken at a time which is customary to the overall construction timetable of
similar-type projects. Any excavation or filling which is not clearly necessary and
incidental to an approved construction project shall require a conditional use permit.
Section 4.701 Procedure for Mineral Extraction Operations
In addition to the conditional use permit requirements, two (2) copies of the following
information shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment with the application.
a- Name of the owner or owners of land from which removal is to be made.
b- Name of the applicant making request for such a permit.
c- Name of the person or corporation conducting the actual mining
operations.
d- Location, description and size of the area from which the removal is to be
made.
e- Location of the processing plant to be used and any accessory or kindred
operations that may be utilized in connection with the operation of the
processing plant by the mining processor or any other firm, person or
corporation. The processing plant shall be located as to minimize the
problems of dust, dirt and noise, insofar as reasonably possible.
f- Type of resources or materials to be removed.
-27-
g- Proposed method of removal and whether or not blasting or other use of
explosives will be required.
h- General description of the equipment to be used.
i- Method of rehabilitation and reclamation of the mined-out area, including
a grading plan showing existing contours in the area to be excavated and
the proposed future contours showing the topography of the area after
completion. Such plan shall include the surrounding area within five
hundred (500) feet of the property boundary line, drawn to an appropriate
scale with contour lines at intervals of five (5) feet or less.
Section 4.702 Development Standards
The following required development standards shall be observed:
a- No mining of sand and gravel shall be carried on, or any stock pile placed
closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line, or such greater distance as
specified by the Board of Adjustment. Where such is deemed necessary
for he protection of adjacent property, except that this distance
requirement may be reduced by the written consent of the owner or
owners of abutting property, but in any such event, adequate lateral
support shall be provided for said abutting property.
b- In the event that the site of the mining operation is adjacent to the right-ofway
of any public street or road, no part of such operation shall take place
closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest line of such right-of-way.
c- Any excavated area adjacent to a right-of-way of any public street or road
shall be back-filled for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
right-of-way line.
d- Fencing or other suitable barrier, including the planting of mutiflora rose,
shall be erected and maintained around the entire site or portions thereof
where, in the opinion of the Board, such fencing or barrier is necessary for
the protection of the public safety and shall be of a type specified by the
Board.
e- All equipment and machinery shall be operated and maintained in such
manner as to minimize dust, noise and vibration. Access roads shall be
maintained in a dust-free condition by surfacing or other treatment as may
be specified by the Board.
-28-
f- Quarrying shall not be carried out closer than three hundred (300) feet to
any adjoining property line unless the written consent of such adjoining
property owner has first been obtained.
g- The Board is authorized to impose such requirements with respect to
providing adequate barriers as it may feel necessary to protect the public
safety.
Section 4.703 Rehabilitation Requirements
All mined-out areas shall, within a reasonable length of time, be reclaimed and
rehabilitated and the Board, at its discretion, may fix a bond in a reasonable amount to
assure that such rehabilitation and reclamation will be carried out. The Board shall be
guided by the following standards with respect to rehabilitation and reclamation of
mined-out areas:
a- All excavation shall be made either to a water producing depth, such depth
to be not less than five (5) feet below the water mark, or shall be graded or
back-filled with non-noxious noncombustible and nonflammable solids to
secure:
1. That the excavated area shall not collect and permit to
remain therein stagnant water; or,
2. That the surface of such area which is not
permanently submerged is graded or back-filled as
necessary so as to reduce the peaks and depressions
thereof so as to produce a gently rolling surface that
will minimize erosion due to rainfall and which will
be in substantial conformity to the adjoining land
area.
b- The banks of all sand and gravel excavations in a water producing
excavation, and to the pit bottom in a dry operation, shall be sloped to the
water line, at a slope which will not be less than three (3) feet horizontal to
one foot vertical and said banks shall be restored with vegetation in a
manner set forth in paragraph ‘c’.
c- Vegetation shall be restored by the spreading of sufficient soil and by
appropriate seeding of grasses or planting of shrubs and trees in all parts
of said mining area where the same is not submerged under water.
d- Proper drainage shall be provided for the mined-out area.
e- All equipment and structures shall be removed from the mined-out area
within six (6) months of the completion of the mining there from.
-29-
f- The Board may impose such other reasonable conditions and restrictions
as it may deem necessary for the protection of the public and to encourage
the mining and processing of the sand and gravel from the authorized area.
g- Due to the inherent difficulties in reclaiming and rehabilitating areas from
which stone has been quarried, the Board is hereby empowered, in the
issuance of a conditional use permit for quarrying operations, to impose
such reasonable standards for reclamation as may be necessary to protect
the public interest, without unduly restricting the operations of the mine
owner.
Section 4.800 Off-Street Parking and Loading
Permanent off-street automobile parking space and truck loading space shall be provided
for all new structures or uses and any enlargement of existing structures or uses.
Structures and uses in existence or under construction on the date these zoning
regulations first become effective shall not be subject to parking and loading
requirements. However, any parking and loading facilities now existing to serve such
structures or uses shall not, in the future, be reduced except where they exceed such
requirements, in which case they shall not be reduced blow such requirements. When a
structure or use which existed prior to the effective date of these zoning regulations shall
undergo any increase in intensity of use in a number of dwelling units, floor area, seating
capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurements specified hereinafter for
required parking facilities or from other causes, and when the increase would result in a
requirement for additional parking or loading facilities through application of the
requirements of this section, additional parking and loading facilities shall be provided on
the basis of the total units of measurements of the new use, or of the alteration or
expansion of the existing use.
Section 4.801 Application Procedure
No application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be approved unless
there is included with the plan for such building, improvement, or use, a plot plan
showing the required space designated for off-street parking and loading, or that such
space is already provided, in accordance with these regulations. The plot plan shall
clearly show the size and location of parking and loading spaces, the width and
arrangement of access driveways, and arrangement of walls, fences and screen planting.
Section 4.802 Design of Parking Areas
Design of parking areas shall meet the following requirements.
a- Size of Parking Space: One automobile parking space shall consist of
two hundred (200) square feet of area, with a minimum width of nine (9)
feet. In addition, adequate interior driveways and entrance and exit
-30-
driveways shall be provided to connect each parking space into the
adjoining street. Parking spaces shall be clearly marked.
b- Setbacks and Landscaping: Parking areas shall be subject to the same
front yard requirements as a building in that zone, except that on the street
side of a corner lot, no side yard of more than ten (10) feet shall be
required for a parking area. The required yard areas shall be set off from
the parking area by a curb or bumper, and the yards shall be appropriately
landscaped.
c- Buffer Strips: When a parking area adjoins a residential zone, a
screening fence or wall at least five (5) feet high and ten (10) feet wide,
shall be maintained along the side and/or rear lot lines of the parking area.
d- Lighting: When lighting of such parking area is provided, installations
shall be arranged so as not to reflect or to cause glare into abutting
residential lots or adjacent streets.
e- Surfacing and Drainage: All parking areas shall be surfaced with
materials which will eliminate problems of dust and mud and shall be so
drained as to prevent erosion damage to abutting properties or streets.
f- Entrances: On corner lots, entrances to parking areas shall be set back at
least twenty (20) feet from the point of intersection of property lines. No
entrance or exit shall exceed twenty-five (25) in width.
Section 4.803 Location of Parking Areas
All automobile parking compounds shall be located on the site or conveniently near, and
in no case more than three hundred (300) feet distant from, the main building or use to
which parking facilities are appurtenant, except in the case of one and two-family
dwellings, where the required parking space shall be provided on the same lot as the
dwelling. However, industries employing five hundred (500) or more employees may
supply off-street parking at a distance greater than three hundred (300) feet from the main
industrial facilities served, upon approval of the Planning Commission. Land in any
residential zone adjacent to a commercial or industrial use may also be used for an
automobile parking area to serve these uses, provided that:
a- The land so used immediately adjoins or is directly across an alley or
street from the commercial or industrial zone for which such off-street
parking area is required;
b- No charge shall be made for the use of said parking area;
c- Only passenger vehicles (excluding buses) shall be permitted to use said
-31-
parking area;
d- No service of any kind shall be extended to persons occupying vehicles in
said parking areas; nor shall such area be used for automobile service or
repair;
e- When land in any residential zone used for off-street parking purposes
abuts the side and/or rear line of a lot in a residential zone, buffer strips
shall be provided as outlined above.
f- Additional protective conditions may be imposed in connection with the
use of such residential land for off-street parking when, in the judgment of
the Planning Commission, such are deemed necessary or desirable for the
protection, convenience, and quiet of surrounding properties.
Section 4.804 Review and Approval by Commission Required
The design of all off-street parking lots other than for one and two-family dwelling, and
means of access thereto shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
Section 4.805 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
The following off-street parking schedule indicates minimum requirements and may be
increased where necessary as a condition of site plan approval or conditional use permit
approval. Other uses operated in association with the uses listed must be provided for in
addition. The vehicle parking space on any lot as set forth and designated in these
regulations shall be deemed to be required open space on such lot, in addition to any yard
space required by the provisions of these regulations, and shall not be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner. In addition the following requirements shall be
observed:
a- Any vehicle parking space provided under those regulations in a
commercial or industrial zone shall be used for parking only. Any other
use of such space, including repair work or servicing of any kind other
than in an emergency or the requirement of any payment for the use of
such space shall be deemed to constitute a separate commercial use in
violation of the provisions of these regulations.
b- When the number of spaces calculated in accordance with these
regulations results in a number containing a fraction, the number shall be
rounded off to the nearest whole number.
c- The off-street parking requirements for two or more uses may be satisfied
by providing a common facility containing the sum of the number of
spaces required for each of the uses, except as provided in ‘e’ below.
-32-
d- Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for structures
and land uses which do not fall within the categories listed above, shall be
determined in each case by the Administrative Official to be comparable
to the requirements for uses of similar nature, after considering all factors
entering into the parking needs of each such use.
e- For integrated shopping centers, where the number of spaces required in a
common facility is five hundred (500) or more, the off-street parking
requirement may be reduced by one-fifth. Where the number of spaces
required is seven hundred fifty (750) or more, the off-street parking
requirement may be reduced by three-tenths.
NO. OF UNIT OF
USE SPACES MEASUREMENT
RESIDENTIAL USE:
ONE AND TWO- FAMILY ONE EACH DWELLING UNIT
DWELLINGS OR MIXED
OCCUPANCY
MULTIPLE DWELLING TWO EACH DWELLING UNIT
PUBLIC RESIDENTIAL USE:
TOURIST HOMES, CABINS ONE EACH SLEEPING ROOM
OR MOTELS OR SUITE INCLUDING THAT OF
THE OWNER OR MANAGER OF
RESIDENCE ON THE PREMISES
HOTELS* ONE EACH THREE (3) GUEST
SLEEPING ROOMS
PRIVATE CLUBS, ONE EACH TWO (2) GUEST
FRATERNITIES, BOARDING SLEEPING ROOMS OR
AND LODGING HOUSES EACH 200 SQUARE FEET OF
FLOOR AREA, WHICHEVER IS
GREATER
CULTURAL, HEALTH, AND RELIGIOUS USE:
HOSPITALS, SANITORIUMS, ONE EACH THREE (3) PATIENTS
CONVALESCENT HOMES +ONE EACH TWO (2) EMPLOYEES
FOR THE AGED OR AND STAFF MEMBERS
SIMILAR USE
-33-
ORPHANAGES OR ONE EACH TEN (10) BEDS
SIMILAR USE
COMMUNITY CENTERS, ONE EACH ONE HUNDRED (100)
LIBRARIES, MUSEUMS, SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA
POST OFFICES, CIVIC
CLUBS, ETC.
CHURCHES & SCHOOLS ONE EACH FOUR (4) SEATS IN A
PRINCIPAL AUDITORIUM,
OR EACH SEVENTEEN (17)
CLASSROOM SEATS,
WHICHEVER IS GREATER
SOCIAL AND RECREATIONAL USES:
THEATRES AND ONE EACH FOUR (4) SEATS,
AUDITORIUMS** (OTHER +ONE EACH TWO (2) EMPLOYEES
THAN INCIDENTAL TO
SCHOOLS)
DANCE HALLS, POOL AND ONE EACH ONE HUNDRED (100)
BILLIARD HALLS AND SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA
EXHIBITION HALLS USED FOR DANCING OR
WITHOUT FIXED SEATS ASSEMBLY
STADIUM OR SPORTS ONE EACH FOUR (4) SEATS
ARENAS**
BOWLING ALLEYS*** FIVE (5) PARKING SPACES FOR
EACH ALLEY
SALES AND SERVICE:
MORTUARIES OR ONE EACH FIFTY (50) SQUARE
FUNERAL HOMES FEET OF FLOOR SPACE IN THE
SLUMBER ROOMS, PARLORS,
OR INDIVIDUAL FUNERAL
SERVICE ROOMS
ESTABLISHMENTS FOR ONE EACH ONE HUNDRED (100)
SALE AND CONSUMPTION SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA
ON THE PREMISES OF +ONE EACH FOUR (4) EMPLOYEES
BEVERAGES, FOOD, OR
OTHER REFRESHMENTS
-34-
EXCLUDING DRIVE-IN
RESTAURANTS
MEDICAL OR DENTAL ONE EACH TWO HUNDRED (200)
CLINICS, BANKS, BUSINESS SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR
OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICE SPACE
BEAUTY PARLORS & TWO EACH BARBER AND/OR
BARBER SHOPS BEAUTY SHOP OPERATOR
ALL RETAIL STORES, NONE CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONE
INCLUDING DRIVE-IN
RESTAURANTS AND OTHER ONE HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS ZONE – EACH FOUR HUNDRED
EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE (400) SQUARE FEET OF
SPECIFIED HEREIN GROUND FLOOR AREA
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICE:
MOTOR VEHICLE ONE FIVE HUNDRED (500) SQUARE
SALESROOMS, REPAIR SHOPS, FEET OF FLOOR AREA
PUBLIC GARAGES
GASOLINE FILLING ONE 150 SQUARE FEET FLOOR
STATIONS AREA, BUT NOT LESS THAN 10
SPACES, EACH CAR SERVICE
RACK MAY BE COUNTED AS
ONE SPACE, BUT DRIVEWAY
AREAS AND SPACE AT
GASOLINE PUMPS MAY NOT BE
COUNTED
WHOLESALING AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
WHOLESALE ONE 300 SQUARE FEET FLOOR
ESTABLISHMENTS, AREA, OR ONE SPACE PER
WAREHOUSES, EACH TWO EMPLOYEES ON
INDUSTRIAL PLANTS THE MAXIMUM WORKING
SHIFT, WHICHEVER IS
GREATEST
*REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTAURANTS, BALLROOMS, AND OTHER PLACE
OF ASSEMBLY MUST BE PROVIDED FOR IN ADDITION.
-35-
**WHERE THERE ARE NO FIXED SEATS, ONE SPACE PER TEN (10) SQUARE
FEET OF FLOOR AREA AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.
***REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTAURANTS MUST BE PROVIDED IN ADDITION.
4.806 Off-Street Loading Space
Any building used for commercial, office, industrial or institutional purposes shall
provide indoor and outdoor space for the loading and unloading of goods and materials
according to the following requirements and schedule.
a- Each loading space shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a
minimum length of thirty-five (35) feet, and a minimum height, if covered,
of fourteen (14) feet. Adequate space shall be provided for driveways,
entrances, and exits. Access to an alley or street shall be provided.
b- Integrated shopping centers of five (5) acres or more may be excluded
from the requirements for minimum dimensions of loading berths and
from the requirements for minimum numbers of off-street loading spaces
listed hereunder, provided other satisfactory loading arrangements are
provided.
NO. OF FLOOR AREA
USE SPACES (SQUARE FEET)
HOSPITAL OR OTHER NONE FIRST 10,000
INSTITUTION ONE 10,001 TO 20,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 200,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
RETAIL SALES AND NONE FIRST 5,000
SERVICES ONE 5,001 TO 10,000
TWO 10,001 TO 40,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 150,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
OFFICE BUILDING NONE FIRST 10,000
INCLUDING BANKS ONE 10,001 TO 100,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 150,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
WHOLESALE OR NONE FIRST 3,000
WAREHOUSING ONE 3,001 TO 10,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 40,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
-36-
INDUSTRY OR NONE FIRST 5,000
MANUFACTURING ONE 5,001 TO 25,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 50,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
OTHER COMMERCIAL NONE FIRST 10,000
USES ONE 10,001 TO 100,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 100,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
Section 4.807 Modification of Parking and Loading Requirements
The following modifications are permitted only with the approval of the Board of
Adjustment.
a- Hardship: In cases of development or redevelopment of properties where
application of the Schedule of Parking Requirements or Loading
Requirements would create undue hardship, the applicant may appear
before the Board of Adjustment to present a modified plan for the
provision of off-street parking or loading space. The Board is authorized
to approve such plans, when appropriate, after referral to the Planning
Commission.
b- Joint Use of Parking Areas: In cases of development of properties where
several uses could effectively utilized the same parking area, because of
different periods of peak demand, the applicant may appear before the
Board of Adjustment to present a modified parking plan. An example
would be a church adjacent to a shopping center, where peak use hours
would not coincide. The Board is authorized to approve such plans, when
appropriate, after referral to the Planning Commission. The Board shall
require written evidence of an agreement for joint use and may impose any
necessary additional conditions.
Section 4.900 Signs
Section 4.901 General Provisions
No sign shall be erected, hung, placed, or painted in any zone, except as provided in this
section. No sign erected before the enactment of these regulations shall be structurally
altered or moved except in accordance with these regulations. No permit shall be
required for the repainting or repapering of a sign which conforms to the provisions of
these regulations, or having existed before the adoption of these regulations and are thus
established as a nonconforming use.
-37-
Section 4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs
No sign shall be erected or displayed until the sign has been approved by the
Administrative Official and a zoning certificate issued, except as permitted in Section
4.903. Application for certificate shall be submitted on forms provided at the office of
the Administrative Official. Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the
sign area, size, character, and color of letters; designs proposed; method of illumination,
if any; proposed location; and, if a projecting business sign, proposed method of
fastening such sign to the building or structure. The certificate number and date of
issuance shall be affixed to each sign in conspicuous manner. Signs erected without
conformance to these standards may be removed on order of the Administrative Official.
Section 4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs, Revised
No sign shall be erected or displayed, except as set forth in Section 4.910, until the sign
has been approved by the Administrative Official and a zoning certificate issued, except
as permitted in Section 4.903. Application for certificate shall be submitted on forms
provided at the office of the Administrative Official. Each application shall be
accompanied by plans showing the sign area, size, character, and color of letters; designs
proposed; method of illumination, if any; proposed location; and, if a projecting business
sign, proposed method of fastening such sign to the building or structure. The certificate
number and date of issuance shall be affixed to each sign in conspicuous manner. Signs
erected without conformance to these standards may be removed on order of the
Administrative Official.
Note: Section 4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs, Revised is in effect in the City of
Hillview only. This section was amended by Text Amendment 97T-01.
Section 4.903 Signs Permitted Without a Zoning Certificate
The types of signs listed below are permitted in any zone without a certificate, subject
only to the requirements outlined for each type of sign and the construction and lighting
standards of this section:
a- Incidental identification sign, indicating the name or number of the
building or premises or the accessory use of a dwelling for a home
occupation or for professional purposes. Such sign shall not exceed two
(2) square feet in area;
b- Farm signs, identifying the farm and advertising the sale of farm products
grown or produced on the premises. Such sign shall not exceed eight (8)
square feet in area and shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any public
right-of-way;
c- Construction signs, identifying the contractors, engineers, or architects on
-38-
building projects under construction, limited to a total area for all such
signs of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. The signs shall be
confined to the construction site and removed when construction is
completed;
d- Temporary real estate signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet for a tract
under two (2) acres, or fifty (50) square feet for a tract over two acres; and
in any case, they shall follow the requirements set forth in the following
table establishing a relationship between sign size and its distance from
property/right-of-way line.
DISTANCE FROM PROPERTY/
AREA IN SIGNS RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
12 SQUARE FEET OR LESS 12 FEET
13 TO 20 SQUARE FEET 50 FEET
21 TO 40 SQUARE FEET 100 FEET
41 TO 50 SQUARE FEET 150 FEET
e- Temporary subdivision identification signs, not exceeding fifty (50)
square feet in area, for each subdivision of five lots or more;
f- Temporary subdivision approach signs, not to exceed twenty (20) square
feet. Each subdivision limited to four such signs;
g- Political campaign signs to be removed within ten (10) days after last day
of the event;
h- Street banners advertising a public event to be removed within ten (10)
days after last day of the event;
i- Temporary business signs, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet, and not
to be displayed longer than fifteen (15) days;
j- Window signs, provided that such signs shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the glass area;
k- Direction and information signs of a public or quasi-public nature;
l- Zoning signs required by these regulations;
m- Project identification signs of a permanent nature identifying the name of
a subdivision or other residential development, not to exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet.
n- Integral signs, giving the name of the building, date of erection or the like,
when made an integral part of the structure;
-39-
o- Institutional signs, giving the name or announcement of any public,
charitable or religious institution. Such sign shall be set back at least
fifteen (15) feet from the property line and shall not exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area;
p- Private traffic direction signs, for directing traffic onto or within a
property. Such signs shall not include any advertising and shall not
exceed four (4) square feet in area for each sign;
q- Tourist home sign, for a tourist home permitted as a conditional use, shall
not exceed six (6) square feet in area;
r- Home occupation and small professional or announcement signs for
permitted activities in residential zones, shall not exceed five (5) square
feet in area. Such signs shall be located not closer than one (1) foot from
any street right-of-way line and so placed that they will not obstruct the
view of traffic in any way. Any illumination of such signs shall be shaded
so that they in no way interfere with the vision of motorists of adjoining
property owners.
Section 4.904 Limitations
Any individual person or firm erecting, placing or hanging any signs shall apply for a
zoning certificate showing that such sign is in conformance with the zoning regulations.
Loud speakers, juke boxes, public address systems and electric amplifiers shall be
permitted if the use of the same is for the occupants of the building only within which
such equipment is installed and does not create a nuisance and disturb the peace of other
persons or adjoining properties in its own or any other zone. Signs or other outdoor
advertising which involves lighting or motion resembling traffic or directional signals,
warnings such as ‘stop’ and ‘danger’ are prohibited. Additionally, no sign, outdoor
commercial advertising device constituting a nuisance because of light, glare, focus,
animation of flashing, or any illuminated signs of such intensity of illumination as to
unduly disturb the use of residential property shall be erected or continue in operation.
Section 4.905 Number and Area of Signs
For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single
display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed
to form a unit. The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area
within a regular geometric form or a simple combination of regular geometric forms
comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the
matter displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not
be included in computation of surface area. Only one side of a two face sign shall be
used for computing sign area.
-40-
Section 4.906 Sign Design
a- Lighting: Lighted signs shall not reflect or result in glare in adjacent
streets. Lighting or wording on a sign shall not be of a nature to be
confused with public traffic and directional signs.
b- Placement on Building: Signs shall not be erected on the roofs of
buildings and signs erected on the sides of buildings shall not extend more
than twelve (12) feet above the roof line. Signs shall not obstruct any
window, door, fire escape, stairway, or other opening intended to provide
light, air, ingress, or egress for any building or structure. Projecting signs
shall not project any more than sixty (60) inches, but in no case shall such
a sign extend closer than one foot to the vertical plane of the street curb
line. The bottom of a projecting sign shall be at least twelve (12) feet
above the finished grade of the sidewalk.
c- Construction and Maintenance: Signs shall be constructed to be
structurally sound and shall be maintained in good order. Whenever a
sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a building or
premises or the public safety, in the opinion of the Administrative Official,
he shall order that such sign be made safe or removed. Such order shall be
complied with within five (5) days of receipt thereof by the person, firm,
or corporation owning or using the sign or the owner of he building or
premises on which such unsafe sign is affixed or erected.
d- Location of Signs: No sign shall be located in a public right-of-way. No
sign shall be erected closer than fifty (50) feet to an intersection, with the
exception of public safety and directional signs and signs attached to
buildings.
Section 4.907 Business Signs
Business signs may be erected in Business and Industrial zones in accordance with the
following regulations:
a- Central Business Zone: The total area of signs on any one building shall
not exceed one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of principal frontage of
the building or lot, but in no case shall the total area of signs exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
b- Business Planned Unit Development: The total area of signs on any one
building shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of
principal frontage of the building or lot, but in no case shall the total area
of signs exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
-41-
c- Freestanding Sign: In addition to signs attached to buildings, each
separate commercial or industrial lot may have one freestanding
identification sign. The sign area shall not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet and the height of the sign structure shall not exceed thirty (30)
feet. Businesses or industries having frontage on more than one street
may have an additional freestanding sign for each street frontage.
d- Signs for Nonconforming Businesses: Signs for non-conforming
businesses shall be governed by the sign regulations for the Central
Business Zone.
Section 4.908 Outdoor Advertising Signs
The design and location of outdoor advertising shall conform to all state regulations, and
the following county regulations. Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted only in
Highway Business, Light, and General Industrial Zones. A zoning certificate shall be
required for all outdoor advertising signs, and shall meet the following design
requirements.
a- The maximum area of any outdoor advertising sign shall be one thousand
and two hundred (1,200) square feet, with a maximum height of twentyfive
(25) feet and a maximum length of sixty (60) feet, inclusive of cutouts
and extensions, but excluding border, trim, decorative bases, and structural
supports. The overall height of an outdoor advertising sign shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet. A sign may contain one or two advertisements per
facing, not to exceed the maximum area. Back-to-back or 1-type signs
will be permitted and shall be treated as one structure with an area of one
thousand and two hundred (1,200) square feet permitted for each facing.
b- An outdoor advertising sign shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from
any street or highway right-of-way line.
c- No two outdoor advertising signs shall be spaced less than three hundred
(300) feet apart on the same side of the highway. No outdoor advertising
sign shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to a public park,
school, or other public building; nor be located in any place where, in the
opinion of local officials, the sign would be a menace or hazard to
highway traffic safety.
Section 4.909 Condemnation for Removal of Signs
If any reaches a state of disrepair and is deemed unsightly or unsafe by the
Administrative Official or Building Inspector, and is not properly renovated, it shall be
condemned and an order issued for removal immediately at the expense of the sign or
building owner.
-42-
Section 4.910 Municipal Signs
Any sign which is leased, partially owned and/or owned by any government (Federal,
State, County, City) is exempt from the terms and/or requirements of these regulations,
and shall be exempt from obtaining any review and/or approval of the Bullitt County
Administrative Official and/or Bullitt County Planning Commission and/or Bullitt
County Board of Adjustments.
-43-
ARTICLE 5 ZONE REGULATIONS
Section 5.100 Format of Zone Regulations
Section 5.200 Types of Application Review
Section 5.300 Table of Type of Application Review by Zone
5.301 Natural Resources Uses
5.302 Residential Uses
5.303 Business Uses
5.304 Industrial Uses
5.305 Public and Semi-Public Uses
Section 5.400 All Zones
5.401 Uses Permitted Throughout
5.402 Accessory Use and Buildings
5.403 Uses and Buildings by Temporary Permits
Section 5.500 Rural Zones
5.501 Agricultural Zone, ‘A’
5.502 Conservation Zone, ‘C’
5.503 Stream Valley Reserve Zone, ‘SR’
Section 5.600 Residential Zones
5.601 Residential Zone, ‘R-1’
5.602 Residential Zone, ‘R-2’
5.603 Residential Zone, ‘R-3’
5.604 Residential Zone, ‘R-4’
Section 5.700 Business Zones
5.701 Highway Business, ‘B-1’
5.702 Central Business, ‘B-2’
Section 5.800 Industrial Zones
5.801 Light Industrial, ‘I-L’
5.802 General Industrial, ‘I-G’
Section 5.900 Planned Unit Development, Residential and Highway Business
5.901 Site and Plan Requirements
5.902 Procedure
5.903 Documentation Required for Planned Unit Development Application
5.904 Permitted Uses and Variations
ARTICLE 5 ZONE REGULATIONS
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be designed, erected, altered,
used or occupied except for the primary uses permitted for each of the several
following zones together with lawfully permitted home occupation and temporary
uses as listed below and permitted accessory uses.
Section 5.100 Format of Zone Regulations
In this article, the purpose of each zone is outlined, and the permitted principal uses,
accessory uses, conditional use together with development design standards, i.e.
heights, lot areas, frontage and yards, and maximum lot coverage are stated by zone.
These uses and requirements are subject to the General Regulations in Article IV.
Special provisions, when applicable, are outlined for each zone. Uses allowed in each
zone are listed in Section 5.300, Table of Zone Use Review Requirements.
Section 5.200 Types of Application Review
In the zoning process, each use requires some form of application review. For
purposes of establishing review procedures, uses are divided into the following three
main groups:
a- Permitted Use: A use permitted by right in the zone, subject to the zone
requirements and the General Regulations in Article IV. In the case of an
application for a permitted use, the Administrative Official will check the
application to see that its requirements have been met and, if so, will issue the
necessary permit. The Administrative Official is also empowered to issue
temporary permit not to exceed sixty (60) days for carnivals, fairs, and similar
temporary activities.
b- Site Plan Review Use: A use permitted by right in the zone, subject to the
zone requirements and the General Regulations in Article IV, but requiring
site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may require changes in the proposed site plan of the
development before directing the Administrative Official to issue a building
permit. Site Plan review procedures and requirements are outlined in Article
VI.
c- Conditional Use: A use permitted in a zone only under certain conditions,
after approval as a conditional use by the Board of Adjustment. All
conditional use applications are referred to the Planning Commission for site
plan review and recommendation before the public hearing by the Board of
Adjustment.
-44-
The Board is also empowered to grant temporary conditional use for certain
uses. General conditions for granting a conditional use are outlined in Article
VI.
Section 5.300 Table of Type of Application Review by Zone
In the following table this key shall apply:
P---Permitted Subject to Development Standards
S---Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review
C---Permitted as a Conditional Use
TC-Permitted as a Temporary Conditional Use
T---Permitted as a Temporary Use
Absence of the above letters for a use in a zone shall be interpreted that such use is
not to be permitted in any way in that zone.
-45-
46
5.301 NATURAL RESOURCES USES A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB I-L I-G
AGRUCULTURAL AND FORESTRY
Agricultural Uses P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Commercial Greenhouses and Nurseries P P C C C C C C S C S S
Storage and Processing of Agricultural
Products
P P C S S
Vacation Farm P P C C C C C C C C C C C
Forestry P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Sawmill C C C TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC S
MINERAL EXTRACTION
Mineral Extraction C C C C C C C C C C C C S
Mineral Processing and Related Uses C C C C C C C C C C C C S
Mineral Based Manufacturing S
5.302 RESIDENTIAL USES
STANDARD HOUSING
Single Family Dwelling P P C P P P P S
Vacation Dwelling P P C
Single Family Semidetached Dwelling P P S
*Two Family Dwelling P P P P S S S
Multiple-Family Dwelling P P S
Multiple-Family Group Development P P S
Mobile Home P P C P
Mobile Home Park C S
*See Appendices A&B
47
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
TRANSIENT HOUSING
Agricultural Labor Camp C C P
Boarding House C C C P P
Motel, Hotel, Tourist Camp S C S
Tourist Home C C C P P P
Travel Trailer Park C C C S S
Vacation Lodge or Camp C C C
5.303 BUSINESS USES
RETAIL TRADE
Antique Shop C C C S S S
Apparel Store S S S
Appliance Sales and Service S S S S
Auction House S S S S
Bakery Retail S S S
Boat Sales and Service S S S S
Books and Magazine Store S S S
Camera Shop S S S
Department Store S S S
Discount Store S S S
Drug Store S S S
Dry Goods Store S S S
Farm Equipment Sales S S S S
Feed and Grain Sales C C S S S S
Florist S S S
Food and Drink Sales Store S S S
Ice, Coal, Wood Sales S S S S
Furniture Sales and Repair S S S S
48
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB I IL IG
Garden Center C C C S S S
Gift Shop S S S
Hardware Store S S S
Hobby Shop S S S
Household Furnishings S S S
Jewelry Store S S S
Mobile Home Sales S S
Music and Record Store S S S
Newsstand S S S
Office Equipment S S S
Paint Store S S S
Pawn Shop S S S
Radio and TV Sales S S S
Shoe Store S S S
Specialty Shop S S S
Souvenir Shop S S S
Sporting Goods Store S S S
Stone Monument Sales S S S S
Tobacco Store S S S
Toy Store S S S
Variety Store S S S
Watch Sales and Repair S S S
Wayside Stand, Temporary P P P TC TC TC TC TC S TC S TC TC
BUSINESS AND PERSONAL SERVICES
Bank S S S
Barber and Beauty Shop S S S
Carpentry, Electrical, Plumbing, Sheet Metal
Printing, Upholstery and Similar Services
S S S S
Commercial or Business School S S S
49
Dance or Music Studio S S S
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Dry Cleaning, Retail S S S
Food Locker S S S S
Film Processing S S S S
Fortune Teller S S S
Funeral Home C C C C C S S S
Health Club S S S
Home Occupation P P P P P P P S
Laundry, Retail S S S
Laundromat S S S
Medical Clinic S S S
Office, Business S S S
Office, Professional S S S
Photography Studio C C C C C C C C S S S
Private Club, Commercial S S S
Restaurant S S S
Shoe and Luggage Repair S S S
Tailor, Dressmaker S S S
Tavern S S S
Bakery, Non-retail C C C S S S
Blacksmith Shop C C C S S C
Bottling Plant S S
Building Materials Storage Yard
Excluding Asphalt or Concrete Mixing
Including Asphalt or Concrete Mixing
S S
S
Bulk Materials Storage C C C S S
Carpet or Rug Cleaning S S
Catering Service S S S S
Contractors Storage Yard C C C S
Contractors Temporary Buildings TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Fuel Oil Storage Yard S S
50
Laboratory, Medical or Dental S S S S S
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Laboratory, Research, Experimental,
or Testing
C S S S S S
Laundry and Dry Cleaning, non –retail S S
Machinery Storage Yard C S S
Motor Rail Freight Terminal C S S
Stone Monuments Processing S S
Warehouse, Completely Enclosed C S S
Warehouse with Open Storage S S
Welding Shop C S S
Wholesale, Enclosed Building S S S
Wholesale, with Open Storage S S
AUTOMOTIVE AND RELATED
SERVICES
Accessory Sales, No Installation S S S
Accessory Sales, Installation C C C
Driving School S S S
Laundry (Carwash) C C C
Parking Garage or Lot C C C C C S S S S S
Rental S S S
Repairs (Body Shop) C C S
Sales S S S S
Service Station S S S
Showroom, no repairs S S S
Storage S C S S S
Truck Service Center S S S
ANIMAL SALES AND SERVICE
51
Animal Hospital C C C
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Animal Ranch C C C
Kennel C C C C C C C
Pet Store C C C
Riding Stable, Commercial C C C C
Veterinarian C C C C C C C C
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS
Amusement Park C C C C C
Billiard Parlor S S S
Bowling Alley S S S
Carnival, Circus TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Children’s Amusement Center C C C
Commercial Recreation Area C C C S S S
Commercial Sports Stadium or Area C C C C
Dance Hall C C C S S S
Go Kart Race Track C C C C
Golf, Driving Range TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Golf, Miniature C C C
Marina C C C
Race Track C C
Skating Rink S S S
Swimming Pool, Commercial C C C C C C
Theater, Drive-In C C C S
Theater, Indoor S S S
Theater, Summer or Tent C C C C C C
5.304 INDUSTRIAL USES
Light Industrial Use C S S
52
General Industrial Use C S
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL I IG
River –oriented Industrial Use C
Salvage Yard C S
5.305 PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC USES
Open Space Use
Airport or Heliport C C C
Cemetery C C C C C C C C
Country Club C C C C C C C C
Fairgrounds C C
Game Refuge P P P P P P P P
Golf Course C C C C C C C C
Park or Recreation Area S S S S S S S S S S S
Shooting Range C C C TC TC
Swimming Pool Community C C C C C C C C
Vacation Camps C C C
Public and Institutional Uses
Arena, Stadium C C C C C C C C C
Church S S C S S S S S S S S
Cultural Facility S S C S S S S S S S S
Fire and Police Stations S S C S S S S S S S S
Medical Care Institution
Hospital C C C C C C C C S C C
Nursing Home C C C C C C C C C C C
Sanitarium C C C C C C C C C C C
Private Club, Social C C C C C C C C C C C
Public Buildings S S C S S S S S S S S
53
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Schools
College or University C C C C C C C C C C C
Elementary or High School S S S S S S S S S S S
Nursery School C C C C C C C C C C C
Private School C C C C C C C C C C C
Tent or Temporary Meeting TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Public Utility Uses
Dump C C S S
Public Utility Use and Structures C C C C C C C C C C C S S
In the above table an attempt has been made to list the uses, individually or
collectively, that are likely to occur in Bullitt County; however, inevitably there will
always exist a chance that other uses may be applied for. In such case, the
Administrative Official shall decide the zone in which the use is permitted, and the
type of development review required.
Section 5.400 All Zones
The following applies to all zones:
Section 5.401 Uses Permitted Throughout
Public Park, playground, and other open public recreation areas not requiring any
permanent construction are permitted by right in all zones.
Section 5.402 Accessory Use and Buildings
Accessory uses and buildings are permitted in all zones, provided they comply with
all provisions contained herein. In Residential Zones, accessory building or use may
be located to within five (5) feet of the rear and side property line. In all other zones,
accessory buildings must comply with all land requirements established for the
principal permitted uses.
Section 5.403 Uses and Buildings by Temporary Permits
a- Temporary permits not to exceed six months, renewable for additional
periods of six (6) months for a total maximum of eighteen months (18)
months may be issued by the Administrative Official for site construction
needs, including non-commercial concrete-batching plant, and temporary
office and yard facilities for construction management purposes.
b- Non-renewable temporary permits not to exceed sixty (60) days may be
issued by the Administrative Official for carnivals, circuses, tent revival
meetings, and similar special event activities. Before issuing a temporary
permit, the Administrative Official shall determine that the site is adequate for
the proposed activity, and that the proposed use, including related traffic and
parking will not be detrimental to the surrounding area. Temporary dinners,
sales and similar activities by school, church, or civic groups shall not require
a permit.
c- Temporary conditional use permit may be authorized by the Board of
Adjustment for temporary wayside stands intended for the sale of farm
products grown or produced on the premises being permitted by right in rural
zones.
-54-
In all other zones, the Board of Adjustment may permit similar stands as
temporary conditional uses, for a period not to exceed six (6) months. The
wayside stand and display of all goods shall be located at least twenty-five
(25) feet form the edge of roadway pavement.
Section 5.500 Rural Zones
Three types of zones are included under this rural grouping: Agricultural, symbolized
by ‘A’, which covers prime areas for agricultural activities; Conservation, symbolized
by ‘C’, comprising woodland and land of topographic characteristics less favorable
for agricultural purposes, and possible potential for wildlife reserve; and Stream
Valley Reserve, symbolized by ‘SR’, being rivers and streams and their adjacent
areas, considered potential recreational resources for the count residents and
outsiders, and desirable to preserve in their natural river landscape condition. The
common theme in those zones is preservation of especially valuable assets to Bullitt
County against the anticipated urban and suburban types of development which are
occurring in the county.
Section 5.501 Agricultural Zone ‘A’
a- Principal permitted uses and structures are basically agricultural activities
including agricultural crop, dairying, and the raising of farm animals and
feeding, and nurseries together with their pertaining structures.
b- Accessory uses and structures permitted are:
1. Single-family dwelling occupied by the owner or operator of the farm and
such additional single-family dwellings as are necessary for occupancy by
the tenant farmers, provided that there shall be at least two (2) acres for
every dwelling unit.
2. One (1) mobile home is permitted on each farm for the use of the owner
or his tenant, and one (1) additional mobile home is permitted on each farm
for the use of each member of the owner’s immediate family, provided that
there shall be at least five (5) acres for every mobile home, and provided
that each shall conform to the section pertaining to mobile homes in these
regulations.
2 (a) Mobile home permits being granted under the above section shall be
subject to a 300 foot setback line from the following major roadways:
Kentucky Highway 44 and Kentucky Highway 61. Access from such
mobile homes unto the main road shall be through the access for the main
farm only onto the public right-of-ways.
-55-
3. Sale on the premises, and the pertaining needed structures for the sale of
agricultural products produced on the premises.
*c- To fulfill the purpose of the establishment of this zone, no division of land
into less than ten (10) acres for use as residential or uses other than listed in
Section 5.300 shall be permitted in an Agricultural Zone. A dwelling
constructed as an accessory use on a farm tract which is later subdivided must
meet the area requirements of the zone. Subdivision of land into lots of less
than ten (10) acres is permitted for non-residential uses permitted in the “A”
zone.
d- The only yard restriction in this zone is a minimum setback required for
any building of forty (40) feet from the right-of –way line.
e- No height restrictions are imposed on any structures of the principal and
accessory use categories.
f- Land which is used solely for agricultural farming, dairying, stock raising or
similar purposes shall have no regulations imposed as to building permits,
certificates of zoning compliance, height, yard, locations of court
requirements for agricultural buildings, except that:
1. A setback line of forty (40) feet or greater shall be required of all
buildings for the protection of existing and proposed streets and highways.
2. All buildings or structures in a designated floodway or floodway plain
which tend to increase flood height or obstruct the flow of flood waters
shall be regulated by the Planning Commission, and therefore require the
site plan review and approval of the Bullitt County Planning Commission.
Section 5.502 Conservation Zone ‘C’
*a- Principal permitted uses and structures include, in addition to those
agricultural activities regulated in ‘A’ zone, forestry, single-family, homes,
vacation-oriented services, vacation bungalows, and cabins. To fulfill the
purpose of the establishment of this zone, the division of property into less
than three (3) acres shall not be permitted.
b- Accessory uses and structures permitted include group eating facilities for
group lodging camps, and travel trailer parks, sale and roadside stands for the
sale of agricultural products grown on the premises, picnicking and rest
facilities.
*See Appendices A & B
-56-
c- Single-family homes on one (1) acre minimum. A single mobile home on a
three (3) acre lot minimum. Group lodging, camps, and travel trailer parks for
a temporary stay not exceeding three (3) months, are also permitted provided
they are located on a single tract of not less than ten (10) acres, and resulting
in an overall net density not exceeding five (5) units per acre.
d- Same setback and yard requirements regulating ‘A’ zone shall apply.
e- No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or
thirty five (35) feet in height.
f- Special development standards: no roofed building or buildings shall cover,
individually or collectively, more than twenty (20) percent of lot area.
Vacation dwellings, used only on a seasonal basis may be exempted from the
requirements of direct access to a public road; however, the Planning
Commission shall require appropriate design features for vacation home
subdivisions as these may become permanent dwellings.
Section 5.503 Stream Valley Reserve Zone ‘SR’
a- Principal permitted uses are similar to those regulated in the ‘A’ zone, and
public and private open space recreation areas which are being defined to
include only recreation land retained primarily in the natural state and used
only as picnic areas, trails, and similar uses which do not change the natural
landscape pattern. Construction of recreation buildings or other related
intensive development (swimming pools, parking lots, and paved game areas)
which materially changes the natural landscape shall require a conditional use
permit. This shall include vacation lodges and camps and their accessories,
research laboratories and non-polluting water oriented industries.
b- Accessory uses and structures are the same as those regulated by a ‘C’
zone.
c- To fulfill the purposes of establishing this zone, in any and all cases where
construction of buildings is involved a minimum area of ten (10 acres shall be
required, except for industrial use, in which case a minimum of thirty (30)
acres shall be required. In any and all cases development shall not be allowed
where natural features, such as floodway plains or steep slopes, make such
development unsafe or undesirable. As a general policy, in sections of the
zone where level land borders a river or stream, permanent development shall
not be permitted closer than one hundred and fifty (150) feet to the normal
high water line, except for such facilities which must be located at the waters
edge, as docks or fishing jetties.
-57-
d- Same setback and yard requirements as regulated in ‘A’ zone shall apply.
e- Same height requirements regulating a ‘C’ zone shall apply.
f- Special development standards: same lot coverage restrictions. Vacation
home subdivision regulating a ‘C’ zone shall apply.
Section 5.600 Residential Zones
Four types of zones are included under this grouping, ‘R-1’, ‘R-2.’, ‘R-3’, and ‘R-4’.
Intensity of land utilization for residential purposes is permitted to intensify
progressively from the first zone to the last.
Section 5.601 Residential Zone ‘R-1’
a- Principal permitted uses are:
1. Single-family dwellings
2. Two-family dwellings
b- Accessory uses and structures permitted are:
1. Garage, or other buildings not used as a dwelling, and which is not for
rent by any outside non-bona fide resident of the dwelling unit.
2. Private swimming pools and other private recreational facilities.
3. Home occupation as defined in section 2.200.
c- The following area requirements shall apply:
1. Every single-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less
than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet in area. The minimum lot
width at the building line shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet.
2. Two-family dwellings or duplexes shall require a minimum lot size of
not less that seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet with a
minimum lot width measured at the building line of not less than one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
-58-
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall apply:
1. Front Yards: The minimum front yard setback line shall be fifty (50)
feet from the right-of-way line.
2. Side yards: There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
principal structure of fifteen (15) feet as measured from the property line
to the nearest such building. Accessory building or use may be located to
within five (5) feet of the side and rear property lines.
3. Rear Yards: There shall be a minimum rear yard building line of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the rear property line to
the nearest building or structure.
4. Corner Lot Yards: The minimum side yard line on any street not
having lots fronting upon it shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of –
way line. Where the street on the side of a corner lot has lots fronting
upon it within the same block and on the same side of the street, the side
yard on the corner lot shall be equal to the front yard requirements for lots
fronting on the street.
5. Yards for Public and Semi-Public Buildings: all public and semipublic
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall have the same front
yard required for all other buildings in the same zone. There shall be a
minimum side yard and rear yard for such buildings of fifty (50) feet from
any lot line.
e- No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or
thirty five (35) feet in height.
Section 5.602 Residential Zone, ‘R-2’
a- Principal permitted uses include, in addition to those regulated in R-1 zone,
tourist homes.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted are:
1. The same as regulated in R-1 zone.
2. Renting or sleeping rooms, three (3) being the maximum number of
people to be sheltered in such a building.
-59-
c- The following areas and lot width requirements shall apply:
1. Every single-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less
than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. The minimum required lot
width at the building line for single-family dwellings shall be seventyfive
(75) feet.
2. Two-family dwellings or duplexes shall be located on a single lot of
not less than eleven thousand (11,000) square feet. The minimum
required lot width at the building set back line for two-family dwellings
shall be one hundred (100) feet.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall be observed:
1. Front Yards: forty (40) feet setback shall be required from rightof-
way line.
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
building or structure of fifteen (15) feet measured from the side lot line to
the nearest building or structure, except that garages and accessory
buildings may extend an additional ten (10) feet into one side yard. (Note:
see page 116 for the latest text amendment of this section)
3. Rear Yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard building of not less
than twenty-five (25) feet, except that garages and other accessory
buildings and uses may extend up to within five (5) feet from rear property
line.
4. Corner Lot Yards: the minimum side yard line on any street not having
lots fronting upon it shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line
except that a garage or carport may extend an additional five (5) feet into
the side yard adjacent to the street. Where the street on the side of a
corner lot has lots fronting upon it within the same block and on the same
side of the street the building setback on the side of the corner lot shall be
equal to the front yard setback requirements of such street.
5. Yards for Public and Semi-Public Buildings: all public and semipublic
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall provide the same
front yard setback as required for all other buildings in this zone. There
shall be a minimum side yard and rear yard for such buildings of fifty (50)
feet wide from any lot line.
e- No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height.
-60-
Section 5.603 Residential Zone ‘R-3’
a- Principal uses permitted include, in addition to those regulated in ‘R-1’ and
‘R-2’ Zones, multi-family dwellings.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted are the same as those regulated in
‘R-2’ Zone.
c- The following minimum lot area required shall be provided:
1. Every single-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less
than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet for the first dwelling
unit. The minimum required lot width at the building line shall be sixty
(60) feet.
2. Every two-family and multi-family dwelling shall be located on a
single lot of not less that six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first
dwelling unit plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each
additional unit up to four (4). Each unit beyond four (4) in a multi-family
dwelling shall be located on a two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
foot lot. The minimum required lot width at the building line for twofamily
and multi-family dwellings shall be eighty (85) feet.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall be provided:
1. Front Yards: thirty (30) feet required from right-of–way line.
*2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum combined side yards lot line
equal to eighteen (18) feet. With one (1) side yard line being a minimum
of ten percent (10%) of the overall lot width and the remaining side yard
line being the difference between the opposite yard line but with both side
yard lines adding up to a combined eighteen (18) feet.
3. Rear Yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard building setback of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet; except that accessory buildings and uses
may extend up to five (5) feet from rear lot lines.
4. Corner Lot Yards: the minimum side yard on any street not having lots
fronting upon it shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line except
that a garage or carport may extend an additional five (5) feet into the side
yard adjacent to the street. Where the street on the side of a corner lot has
lots fronting upon it within the same block and on the same side of the
street, the building line on the side of the corner lot shall be equal to the
front yard line requirements of such street.
*See Appendices A & B -61-
5. Yards for Public and Semi-Public Buildings: all public and semi-public
buildings, including accessory buildings shall provide the same front yard
setback as required for all other buildings in this zone.
There shall be a minimum side yard line and rear yard line for such buildings
of fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
e. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five (45) feet in height.
*f. The following special development standards shall apply to Row House
Developments:
1. Subdivision requirements: A Row House Development shall be
submitted as a subdivision plat and if it is recorded in sections, each section
shall meet all requirements of this regulation. Each dwelling unit shall be
located on a separate lot of record fronting on a dedicated street.
2. Yard Requirements:
a. Front Yard: 30 feet from right-of-way line
b. Side Yard: For end developments a minimum of 9 feet
c. Street Side Yard: a minimum of 15 feet
d. Rear Yard: A minimum of 25 feet
3. Maximum building height: no building shall exceed three (3) stories or 45
feet in height.
4. Maximum area requirements:
a. No recorded lot in a Row House Development shall contain less than
1800 square feet.
b. Land area requirements:
2 units – 7500 square feet
3 units – 9000 square feet
4 units – 10,500 square feet
Each additional unit - add an additional 2500 square feet.
c. The difference between the total land area required for the entire Row
House Development and the total land area of the development’s
recorded lots for residential purposes shall be provided as an open lot
to be used for parking, recreational or scenic purposes. Any such open
space lot shall be owned in common and maintained by the owners of lots
in the Row House Development.
*See appendices A & B -62-
5. Lot size: The minimum width of interior lots shall be 18 feet and the
minimum width of end lots shall be 27 feet. The minimum depth of any lot
shall be 80 feet.
6. Other requirements:
a. No group of attached dwelling units in a Row House Development
shall be longer than 200 feet.
b. Maximum lot coverage shall be 60 percent.
c. A statement shall be included on the plat of the subdivision and in all
deeds of transfer of property of any land located therein, which will
prevent the subdivision and resubdivision of land into a greater number
of lots than originally approved.
d. a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided.
Section 5.604 Residential Zone, ‘R-4’
a- Principal permitted uses and buildings include:
1. Any Principal uses and buildings permitted in ‘R-3’.
2. Mobile homes on subdivisions for individual lot ownership, and
mobile home parks providing rental space. Mobile homes for
individual ownership shall comply with ‘R-3’ zone requirements and
any subdivision regulations as they may be adopted. No mobile home
development on a subdivision for ownership, or on lots made available as
rental space comprising less than five (5) mobile home units, shall be
permitted. Rental space for mobile home temporary parking for less
than six (6) months shall be prohibited. Mobile home parks with lots
available for rental shall comply with the requirements specified herein.
b. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal uses permitted above and complying with the
requirements specified herein. For mobile home parks, paragraph ‘f4’ shall be
observed.
c. Lot area requirements are as follows:
1. For those uses and buildings permitted in ‘R-3’ and individual mobile
homes, and other than mobile home parks for rental purposes, the same
requirements set for that zone shall apply.
-63-
2. No mobile home park shall be permitted on an area of less than three (3)
acres in size, although the developer shall be permitted to develop the
park in stages as long as he complies with an overall plan approved by
the Planning Commission for the entire tract. The number of mobile
homes permitted in the mobile home park shall not exceed a density of seven
(7) mobile homes per gross acre. Individual lots within a mobile home park
shall not be less than thirty-six hundred (3,600) square feet in area, and in no
instance shall more than one (1) mobile home be permitted on a
single lot. The minimum lot width shall be forty (40) feet.
d. Setback, yard and space requirements are as follows:
1. For those uses and buildings permitted in ‘R-3’, including individual
mobile homes, and other than mobile home parks, the same
requirements set for that zone shall apply.
2. No mobile home or accessory building or structure shall be located
closer to any street than the minimum front yard setback for
permanent residential structures along said street. Where the mobile
home park is not bounded by a dedicated street the minimum setback
shall be thirty (30) feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than
fifteen (15) feet to any building or street within the park or to any
property line of the park. All mobile home parks shall front on a
public street or road for at least one hundred (100) feet. In cases where
the mobile home park is removed from the public highway, an access
road with a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet shall be provided.
No mobile home shall be located within thirty (30) feet from another
mobile home, except that a minimum end-to-end clearance of not less
than ten (10) feet shall be permitted, and in instances where the sides
opposite the entrance of two (2) mobile homes face each other, the
amount of space between the two mobile homes may be reduced to
not less than twenty (20) feet.
e. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five (45) feet in height.
f. The following special development standards shall apply to mobile home park
development.
1. Street: All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a street, within the
mobile home park. All streets within the mobile home park shall have
a right-of-way of not less than twenty-five (25) feet and a pavement of
not less than twenty (20) feet. Each park shall have at least one street
which gives access to a public street. Such access streets in either a
single mobile park or adjoining parks, shall not be less than one
hundred (100) feet apart nor be less than one hundred twenty-five (125)
-64-
feet from an intersection of two or more public streets. All streets
within the park shall be hard-surfaced and well-lighted. No street rightof-
way within the mobile home park shall be within three (3) feet of
the property line. The owner of the mobile park shall maintain the
streets within the mobile home park.
2. Parking: One paved automobile parking area shall be provided on every
mobile home lot, plus one (1) parking space for each family’s mobile
home lot. This additional parking may be in a central location.
3. Utilities: All lots within the mobile home park shall be provided with
sewer, water, and electrical facilities meeting the standards specified by
local building regulations, and each mobile home shall be properly
connected with said utilities.
4. Accessory Uses and Buildings: Convenience commercial
establishments, including convenience food stores, laundry and
dry cleaning establishments, beauty and barber shops, and similar trades
and services shall be permitted as accessory uses and buildings. These
establishments and their related parking spaces shall not occupy more
than ten (10) percent of the mobile home park area and this area shall not be
included in calculations of the park density. They shall be subordinate to the
residential use and character of the park, shall be designed to serve only
the residents of the mobile home park, and shall present no visible
evidence of their commercial character from any area outside of the
park. No accessory structure including patios and pads shall be located within
five (5) feet from any mobile home lot line. The maximum floor area
shall be one hundred (100) square feet and the maximum height shall be
no greater that ten (10) feet. It shall be built in compliance with the
local building regulations.
5. Foundation: All mobile homes must have their wheels removed and placed on
concrete blocks. The bottom of the mobile home must not be more than four (4)
feet above the ground at any point. A solid form of a permanent material must be
built between the ground and the bottom outside edge of the mobile home.
6. Connecting Structures: Only porches, stairs, and other open structures
may be attached to a mobile home. This must be built in compliance with
the local building requirements and must be easily removed. No structure
for human occupancy or for storage shall be built to the mobile home.
g- The steps listed hereunder shall be followed:
1. Procedures: In applying for a building permit for a mobile home park,
the applicant shall submit his plan to the Planning Commission for its
-65-
approval of any adopted Subdivision Layout approval of any adopted
Subdivision regulations. The plan shall show the following information:
- Name and address of applicant
- Name and location of mobile home park
- Dimensions and locations of all lot lines, roads, and easements;
each mobile home lot shall be numbered
- Contour lines to indicate slope and drainage
- Location of all utilities, public and private water, sewerage, drainage, and
electrical facilities and easements.
- Public areas such as visitor’s parking, recreational areas, etc.
- Large-scale plan of one typical mobile home lot showing mobile home
locations, automobile parking space, etc.
- Location of planting for landscaping purposes or as required for protective
buffer purposes as a special condition
2. Issuance of Building Permit: The Planning Commission may require
reasonable modifications prior to its approval of a mobile home park and
may direct the Administrative Official to issue a building permit from the
State Department of Health, Division of Environmental Health, Sanitation
Program, Frankfort, Kentucky, as required by Kentucky Revised Statutes
219.150. The Administrative Official shall not issue the building permit
until he has received written authorization from the Planning Commission,
and until the valid construction permit is presented.
3. Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance: The Administrative
Official shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance only after he has
determined that the mobile home park has been prepared according to all
applicable regulations and special conditions and only after the applicant
presents a valid permit to operate from the State Department of Health as
required by Kentucky Revised Statutes 219.130.
4. Enforcement: The Administrative Official shall insure that all mobile
home parks maintain valid permits to operate and maintain conformance
with all applicable regulations of these zoning regulations and all special
conditions.
-66-
h- All existing mobile homes within Bullitt County which complied with all existing
regulations at the time of passage of these regulations shall be allowed to remain in
their present location as long as the mobile home is occupied by the present residents.
Should a present mobile home resident renter decide to move elsewhere or to replace
his present mobile home, the right to maintain a mobile home outside a mobile home
park shall terminate and the owner shall be required to move the mobile home into a
mobile home park before the mobile home can be re-occupied. No mobile home shall
be permanently re-located on another lot. It is further provided that the existing
mobile home parks legally operating at the time shall be required to maintain a lot
size of three thousand and six hundred (3,600) square feet per mobile home and
comply with other provisions of this regulation or be regarded and certified as a
nonconforming use. No future mobile homes shall be permanently located unless
complying with the provisions as prescribed in Sub-section 5.604, paragraph ‘a2’.
i – Exception: The Planning Commission may reject any proposed mobile home park
even though it meets all the above requirements if the Planning Commission
determines that existing mobile home parks are not fully occupied and /or utilized and
the development of more land to this use is not the public welfare of the community.
j – The regulations shall not be constructed so as to prohibit the location or storage of
a single mobile home on a lot in addition to a principal building, provided the mobile
home is owned by or has permission from the occupant of the principal building or
dwelling unit on the lot and provided the mobile home is parked on the rear of the lot
and the setback and yard requirements for an accessory building in the zone are
observed, and provided that the mobile home is not connected to any service utility
nor used for sleeping purposes for more that two (2) weeks, per year.
Section 5.700 Business Zones
Two types of zones are included under this grouping: Highway Business, symbolized
by ‘B-1’, is a zone established to provide locations for businesses oriented primarily
towards serving the motoring public and for those businesses which due to their
nature are best suited to locations along major streets or highways; and Central
Business, symbolized by ‘B-2’, is a zone established to provide for the development
of commercial and related activities serving an urban center and its neighborhoods
and the adjoining parts of Bullitt County. Uses permitted in this zone will serve
daily shopping needs of adjacent neighborhoods and their outlaying areas.
Section 5.701 Highway Business, ‘B-1’
a- Principal permitted uses and structures pertaining, as examples but not limited to
the following activities:
1. Agricultural implement sales and service.
-67-
2. Animal hospitals, kennels or pounds, provided the kennel structure and
runs are fifty (50) feet from any ‘B’ district.
3. Antiques.
4. Appliance sales and service.
5. Art and school supplies.
6. Auction house.
7. Automobile accessories.
8. Automobile and truck sales, new and used.
9. Automobile rental and lease.
10. Automobile repair garages.
11. Automobile service stations and laundries.
12. Bakeries, retail.
13. Banks and financial institutions.
14. Barber and beauty schools.
15. Barber and beauty shops.
16. Bicycle sales, rental, repair.
17. Billiard rooms.
18. Blue printing, photo copying and photo finishing service.
19. Boat and marine equipment sales, rental, and service.
20. Book stores and card shops.
21. Bowling alleys.
22. Bridal consultants.
23. Business machines, sales and service.
-68-
24. Cameras – photo supplies.
25. Carpet and floor covering.
26. Catering services.
27. China, glassware.
28. Clothing stores and shoes.
29. Community centers.
30. Dancing studios.
31. Delicatessen.
32. Department stores.
33. Dressmaking, seamstress.
34. Driver training schools.
35. Drug stores.
36. Dry Cleaning and Laundromats (self service).
37. Dry Goods.
38. Data processing centers.
39. Eating places.
40. Eating places (carry out).
41. Eating places (drive-in).
42. Equipment rental services (but not including automobiles, trucks and
Trailers.
43. Exterminating services.
44. Florists.
45. Food stores.
-69-
46. Frozen food lockers.
47. Furniture and home furnishings.
48. Furniture and upholstery repair.
49. Garden stores, garden centers, greenhouses and nurseries.
50. Gifts and novelties.
51. Hardware.
52. Hay, grain and feed stores.
53. Health studios.
54. Heating, air conditioning, electrical and plumbing sales.
55. Heating, air conditioning, electrical and plumbing service and repair.
56. Hobby shops.
57. Hospitals.
58. Hotels and motels.
59. Indoor recreation (wholly enclosed places of recreation or amusement
not heretofore appearing as a permitted use).
60. Lawn mower sales.
61. Magazine distribution agency.
62. Mail order catalogue store.
63. Mobile Home sales, rental and service.
64. Motorcycle sales and service.
65. Music, musical instruments.
66. News-stand.
67. Office furniture and supplies.
-70-
68. Outdoor recreation (nonenclosed places of recreation or amusement not
heretofore appearing as a permitted use).
69. Paint, glass and wallpaper.
70. Party supply.
71. Pet sales and supplier.
72. Photo studios.
73. Radio and television sales and services.
74. Research and development laboratories.
75. Schools and educational services.
76. Sporting goods.
77. Taxidermists.
78. Theaters, including drive-in theaters.
79. Trading stamp redemption stores.
80. Utility trailer sales and rentals.
81. Veterinarians offices provided that offices shall be housed in a
completely enclosed and soundproof building.
*82. Single family dwellings and multiple family dwelling if combined with a
B-1 Commercial use.
*See Appendices A & B
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
c- 1. Where not serviced by sanitary sewers a minimum of one (1) acre for each lot
and no lot shall be developed for highway business use which is less than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet wide at the building line.
2. Where serviced by sanitary sewers, a minimum of 6,000 square feet for each lot
and no lot shall be developed for highway business use which is less than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet wide at the building line.
-71-
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall be provided:
1. Front Yards: the front yard building line for all building and accessory
buildings shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way line of any street or road. In case of service stations, all gas pumps,
gas pump islands, grease pits or racks and other similar facilities shall be located
no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a street of highway right-of-way line.
2. Side Yards: a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required for
all structures in the B-1 Highway Commercial Zone as measured from the side
property line to the nearest building or structure.
3 Rear Yards: a minimum rear yard of thirty (30) feet shall be required for all
structures in the B-1 Highway Commercial Zone as measured from the rear
property line to the nearest building or structure.
e- No building shall exceed two and one half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
f- Special development standards: where the property lines separate a Business Zone
from a Residential one, a visual and mechanical barrier a minimum of six (6) feet in
height shall be provided along the common lines, which may consist of any of the
following:
1. An evergreen hedge with a chain link fence not less than three (3) feet in
height.
2. A fence of non-deteriorating material
3. A masonry wall
*g- When residential uses are mixed with other uses on the same lot in business
zones, the density requirements of the R-3 zone as stated in Section 5.603 (c) (2) shall
be used to determine the number of allowable units on each lot.
*See Appendices A & B
Section 5.702 Central Business, “B-2”
a- All types of retail sales and services excluding automobile repair garages, service
stations, drive-in theaters, drive-in restaurants, and bait shops, but including and not
necessarily limited to the following:
1. All types of financial institutions.
2. All types of offices and office buildings.
-72-
3. Department stores, variety stores, clothing stores, and other similar stores and
shops.
4. Recreation and entertainment facilities, except drive-in theaters.
5. Theaters except as otherwise specified.
6. Restaurants and other food establishments except drive-in eating places.
7. Souvenir shops, gift shops.
8. Commercial parking lots.
*9. Single family dwelling and multiple family dwelling if combined with B-2
Commercial use.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
c- There shall be no minimum area or lot width requirements within the “B-2” zone.
d- There shall be no minimum front, side or rear yard requirements in this zone
e- There shall be no height limitations in this zone.
f- Special development standards: where the property lines separate a Business Zone
from a Residential one, the same requirements for a visual and barrier separation shall
be required as regulated under the sub-section 5.701, paragraph “f”.
g- No off-street parking facilities are required only for retail sales and retail service
establishments of less than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area within this ‘B-
2’ zone. All similar uses of larger floor area and other structures including public and
semi-public uses and structures shall comply with the parking requirements
established in Section 4.800.
*h- When residential uses are mixed with other uses on the same lot business zones,
the density requirements of the R-3 zone as stated in Section 5.603 (c) (2) shall be
used to determine the number of allowable units on each lot.
-73-
Section 5.800 Industrial Zones
Two types of zones are included under this industrial grouping; Light Industrial,
symbolized by ‘IL’, the purpose of which is to provide for industrial uses with limited
objectionable external effects in areas that are suitable for industrial development by
reason of location, topography, soil conditions and the availability of adequate
utilities and transportation systems. The intent is to permit most manufacturing,
wholesaling and warehousing activities that can be operated in a clean and quiet
manner, subject only to those regulations necessary to prohibit congestion and for the
protection of adjacent residential and business activities. The second industrial zone
is the General and Extractive Industrial, Symbolized by ‘IG’, the purpose of which is
to provide for industrial and other uses that by virtue of their external effects, noise,
glare, fumes, smoke, dust, odors, truck and/or rail traffic should be isolated from
residential uses. These perform essential functions for the community, are best suited
for industrial development by reason of location topography, soil considerations and
the availability of adequate utilities and transportation systems.
Section 5.801 Light Industrial, ‘IL’
a- The following are examples of principal permitted uses in this ‘IL’ Zone:
1. Assembly plants except automobile assembly plants or plants of a similar
nature.
2. Automobile repair, but no commercial wrecking, dismantling or salvage yard.
3. Auto service station.
4. Automobile, truck, boat sales.
5. Bottling works.
6. Builders’ supply store.
7. Building and trades, including contractor’s yard and utilities storage yard.
8. Carpet Cleaning, dry cleaning and dyeing, laundry.
9. Cold storage plant.
10. Commercial greenhouses.
11. Dairy products manufacture.
-74-
12. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of food
products and condiments excluding fish products, slaughterhouses and
rendering and refining or fats, oils, fish, vinegar, yeast and sauerkraut.
13. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of cosmetics, drugs,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals and toiletries.
14. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, horn, leather, paint, paper,
plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wood and yarn.
15. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of musical
instruments, toys, novelties, rubber or metal stamps.
16. Fabrication, processing, and packaging and/or manufacture of ice, cold
storage plant, bottling plant.
17. Farm implements and contractor equipment sales and service.
18. Foundry casting light weight nonferrous metals, or electric foundry, not
causing noxious fumes or odors.
19. Fuel or Coal Company.
20. Furniture reupholstering and repair.
21. Industrial research laboratories.
22. Inflammable liquids, underground storage only.
23. Lumber Yards including incidental millworks: coal, brick, stone.
24. Monument sales including incidental mechanical operations.
25. Motor freight depot or trucking terminal: provided the truck entrances and
exits are onto streets whose pavements width is at least thirty (30) feet
between curbs.
26. Painting, varnishing shops.
27. Plumbing supply and contracting shops including storage yards.
28. Cattle, sheep, swine, and poultry killing and dressing.
-75-
29. Public garages, motor vehicle and bicycle repair shops, auto paint and body
shops.
30. Publishing and printing.
31. Railroad freight stations, but not including switches, storage freight yards,
siding or maintenance or fueling facilities.
32. Repair, rental and servicing for appliance and equipment.
33. Sign Contractor.
34. Stone grinding, dressing and cutting.
35. Storage yard for building supplies and equipment, food, fabrics, hardware and
similar goods when located entirely within a building, provided such buildings
shall not be used for wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles.
36. Television and radio broadcasting towers.
37. Theatre (drive-in).
38. Tin and sheet metal shop.
39. Tool and die shop, wrought iron shop, blacksmith or machine shop, excluding
punch presses over twenty tons rated capacity, drop hammers and screw
machines.
40. Trailer rental and sales.
41. Truck terminal.
42. Used car lot.
43. Veterinary clinics or kennels, animal hospital, provided that all animals are
housed in buildings or enclosures which are at least one hundred (100) feet
from any residential zone.
44. Warehouses.
45. Wholesale distributors.
-76-
46. Uses similar to the above uses and any other manufacturing or industrial
enterprise, operation or process whether making, assembling, repairing,
buffing, finishing, plating, polishing, tempering, packing, shipping or storing;
provided, that any resulting cinders, dust flashing, fumes, gas noise, odor,
refuse, matter, smoke, vapor or vibration is no greater or more detrimental to
the neighborhood than the proposed use as determined by the Board of
Adjustments as similar in character to one of the specified uses in the section.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
c- A minimum lot size of one (1) acre shall be required for any industrial use in this
‘IL’ zone. No lot shall be less than one hundred (100) feet in width at the building
line.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall apply:
1. Front Yards: the front yard building setback line shall be a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from any existing right-of-way line of any street or road.
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
building or structure of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the side lot line to
the nearest building. Where said use abuts any residential zone, there shall be
a side yard setback on the side abutting the residential district of fifty (50)
feet. Such space shall remain open and unoccupied by any building or
accessory building or use, except that any portion of a side yard in excess of
twenty-five (25) feet from a side property line must be included in the
required parking space.
3. Rear yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard as measured from the rear
property line to the nearest building of twenty-five (25) feet, except where the
property abuts a residential zone, and then such rear yard shall be not less than
fifty (50) feet wide. Such space shall not be occupied by any building or
accessory use.
e- No building shall exceed three stories or forty (40) feet in height; provided an
additional one foot of building height may be permitted for each foot the building is
set back from all required yard lines.
f- Special development standards: inasmuch as all industrial uses permitted in this
industrial zone require a site plan review by the Planning Commission, or if they are
applied for in another zone, they shall be subject to a review by the Board of
Adjustments as a application for a conditional use permit, no zoning certificate shall
be issued for a ‘IL’ use, until the applicant shall have Certified to the Administrative
Official and the reviewing body that:
-77-
1. The industrial activity will be conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, except for automobile service stations, drive in restaurants
and theaters, equipment rentals services, including automobiles, truck and
trailers; truck and motor freight terminals and hauling services.
2. No noise from any operation conducted on the premises, either continuous
or intermittent, shall cause any nuisances to the immediately neighboring
properties so that there shall be no emission of odors or odor causing
substances, nor vibrations which can be detected without the use of
instruments at or beyond the lot lines.
3. No emission of toxic or noxious matter, which is injurious to human
health, comfort or enjoyment of life and property or to animal or plant life,
shall be permitted. Where such emissions could be produced as a result of
accident or equipment malfunction, adequate safeguards considered suitable
for safe operation in the industry involved shall be taken.
4. Where the property lines separate an industrial zone from a residential
zone, a visual and mechanical barrier, a minimum of six (6) feet in height,
shall be provided along the common lot line, which may consist of any of the
following:
- An evergreen hedge used with a chain link fence, not less than three
(3) feet in height.
- A fence of a nondeteriorating material
- Masonry wall
*5. All activities involving the use and/or storage and/or disposal of
flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors
or gases shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against
hazards of fire and explosion, as well as with adequate fire fighting and
suppression equipment and devices standard to the industry involved. All
above ground storage shall be enclosed fireproof vaults. The storage
utilization or manufacture of flammable radioactive and explosive materials
and products which decompose by detonation is prohibited in the ‘IL’ Zone.
*6. The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted on any lot
in accordance with the following table:
*See appendices A & B
-78-
Total Permitted Quantities Closed Cup Flashpoint in
Of Flammable Materials in Degrees F
Gallons
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted 20,000 Below 100 Degrees F
Class II Class II
1,000 40,000 Above 100 Degrees F and
Below 140 Degrees F
Class III Class III
5,000 80,000 Above 140 Degrees F
Section 5.802 General Industrial, ‘IG’
a- Principal permitted uses in this ‘IG’Zone include as examples, but not limited to
the following:
1. Any use first permitted in IL Light Industrial Zone.
2. Acetylene, oxygen manufacture.
3. Acid manufacture including all corrosive acids and materials.
4. Alcohol manufacture.
5. Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
6. Animal black, lamp black or graphite manufacture.
7. Asphalt products, manufacture or refining.
8. Automotive wrecking, junk or salvage yard, if in a completely enclosed
building, or the premises on which such use is conducted is entirely enclosed
within a solid fence or masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height.
9. Automotive, tractor, trailer, farm implement assembly or manufacture.
10. Battery, manufacture, tire recapping or retreading.
11. Bleaching, cleaning and dying plant.
-79-
12. Boiler shops, machine shops, structural steel fabricating shops, metal
working shops.
13. Celluloid or proxyline products, manufacture or storage.
14. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster manufacture.
15. Cement products manufacture, including ready-mix concrete batching
plants.
16. Coke ovens.
17. Crematory.
18. Creosote manufacture or treatment.
19. Dexatrine, starch or glucose processing.
20. Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood or bones.
21. Electric power manufacture.
22. Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacturing.
23. Enameling, lacquering or japanning.
24. Explosives manufacturing or storage.
25. Extractive industry, gravel or sand.
26. Flour or grain mill.
27. Fat rendering.
28. Fertilizer, compost, manufacture or storage.
29. Fish curing, smoking or packing.
30. Fish oil manufacture or refining.
31. Forging plants.
32. Glass products, pottery, figurines or manufacture of similar products using
previously pulverized clay.
-80-
33. Glue manufacture.
34. Gelatin manufacture.
35. Landfill or incinerator.
36. Livestock feeding yards or market.
37. Paint, linseed oil, shellac, turpentine, lacquer, or varnish manufacture.
38. Petroleum or inflammable liquids production, refining.
39. Rock crushing.
40. Sanitary landfill for refuse disposal in conformance with the standards set
forth in the Kentucky Department of Health Manual, ‘Recommendations for
the Disposal of the Refuse by the Sanitary Landfill Methods’. Approval of the
sanitary landfill by the State Board of Health shall also be obtained.
41. Sodium compounds manufacture.
42. Slaughtering of animals.
43. Smelting.
44. Wholesale storage of petroleum, gasoline, oil.
45. Wire rod drawing, nut, screw or bolt manufacturing.
46. The Board of Adjustment may allow any use similar in character to one of
the specified uses listed above if such use is equally in harmony with the
character of the district as a permitted use.
b- Accessory uses or buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses.
c- A minimum lot size of two (2) acres shall be required for any industrial use of the
above categories or types in this ‘IG’ zone. No lot shall be less than one hundred
(100) feet in width at the building line.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall apply:
1. Front Yards: the front yard building setback line shall be a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet from any existing right-of-way line of any street or
road.
-81-
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
building or structure of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the side lot line to
the nearest building. Where said use abuts any residential zone, there shall be
a side yard setback on the side abutting the residential district of one hundred
(100) feet. Such space shall remain open and unoccupied by any building or
accessory building or use, except that any portion of a side yard in excess of
twenty-five (25) feet from a side property line may be used and included in
the required parking space.
3. Rear Yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard as measured from the rear
property line to the nearest bldg. of twenty-five (25) feet except where the
property abuts a residential zone, and then such rear yard shall not be less than
fifty (50) feet wide. Such space shall not be occupied by any building or
accessory use.
e- There shall be no building height limitations.
f- Special development standards: inasmuch as all industrial uses permitted in this
industrial zone require a site plan review by the Planning Commission, or if they are
applied for in another zone, they shall be subject to a review by the Board of
Adjustment as an application for a conditional use permit, no zoning certificate shall
be issued in this ‘IG’ zone until the applicant shall have verified to the reviewing
body and the Administrative Official the same items 1 through 4 in paragraph ‘f” of
Subsection 5.801 and that:
4. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted only if said
materials or products are stored, utilized or manufactured within completely
enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected
throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
5. All activities involving the use and/or storage and/or disposal of flammable
liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gasses
shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against hazards
of fire and explosion, as well as with adequate fire fighting and suppression
equipment and devices standard to the industry involved. All above ground
storage shall be in enclosed fireproof vaults.
*6. The storage and utilization of flammable liquids, or of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gasses shall be permitted on any lot
in accordance with the following table.
*See appendices A & B
-82-
Total Permitted Quantities of Closed Cup Flashpoint in
Flammable Materials in Gallons Degrees F
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted Unlimited Below 100 Degrees F
Class II Class II
Unlimited Unlimited Above 100 Degrees F and
Below 140 Degrees F
Class III Class III
Unlimited Unlimited Above 140 Degrees F
Section 5.900 Planned Unit Development, Residential and Highway Business
This section is intended to permit creation of new Residential and Highway Business
Planned Unit Development Zones. Such zones are to be permitted as amendments to
the Zoning Maps, on application and approval of specific and detailed plans, where
tracts suitable in location and character for the uses and structures proposed are to be
planned and developed as integrated units. A Planned Unit Development may be
referred to and cited hereafter as a Planned Development or Development.
Regulations set forth herein are adapted to unified planning and development in such
zones. Nothing herein should be construed to mean that the land owner has the
inherent right to develop a Planned Unit Development. The Planning Commission
has the power to decide whether or not to allow Planned Unit Development based on
their experience, public hearing and the standards set forth herein. Applications for
Planned Unit Development rezoning will be granted only when the plan for the
project is such that the public health, safety and morals will not be jeopardized by a
departure from the restrictions on corresponding uses in the standard zone. In
addition, the purposes of this section is: to permit a more varied, efficient, attractive
and economical residential development pattern; to increase the flexibility in the
location and arrangement of homes; to provide a more usable pattern of open space;
to provide an opportunity to preserve areas of natural values; to provide for different
for different types of dwellings in the same general area; to allow for increased
residential densities; and, to encourage innovations in developmental designs.
-83-
Section 5.901 Site and Plan Development
The legislative body having jurisdiction shall not approve an application for a
Planned Unit Development unless the Planning Commission has recommended such
approval after it had, in each specific case, made specific findings of fact directly
based upon the particular evidence presented to it, which shall provide proof of
meeting the requirements and support the conclusions set hereafter, while remaining
subject to all other provisions of this sections:
a- The property for which the application for a reclassification to a Planned Unit
Development is located only in an R-2 zone for a residential type of such
development, or in a B-1 zone for a business type of development.
b- The property applied for measure a minimum of ten (10) acres for a residential
development, and five (5) acres for a business development, provided that such
acreage is under a single ownership.
c- No building permit shall be issued for any structure in any portion of a Planned
Development unless and until the final Subdivision Plat for that portion has been
approved by the Planning Commission and recorded.
d- The site will be accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic
that will be imposed upon by the proposed Development and the streets and the
streets and driveways on the site of the proposed Development will be adequate to
serve the residents or occupants of the proposed Development. Traffic control signals
will be provided without expense to Bullitt County or the political subdivision
concerned when the Planning Commission or its assigned planner or engineer
determines that such signals are required to prevent traffic hazards or congestion in
adjacent streets.
e- The Development will not impose an undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection.
f- The Development plan contains such proposed covenants, easements and other
provisions relating to the proposed development standards, as reasonably are required
for the public health, safety and morals.
-84-
g- The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and
appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses, and any part
of a Planned Development not used for structures, parking and loading areas, or
accessways, shall be landscaped or otherwise improved. When business structures or
uses in a Planned Development Zone abut a Residential Zone, screening shall be
provided as provided in Sub-section 6.105 Paragraph‘d’ and by the requirements of
the Planned Unit Development Zone in question. In no event shall a business
structure in a Planned Development Zone be located nearer than one hundred (100)
feet to a residential building.
h. The Planned Unit Development can be substantially completed within the period of
time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the developer and
approved by the Planning Commission.
Section 5.902 Procedure
The following procedure shall be followed in placing land in a Planned Unit
Development Zone.
a- The owner(s) or lessee(s) of a tract of land meeting the requirements set in Subsection
5.901 may request that the Zoning Map be amended to include such tract in a
Planned Unit Development Zone.
b- The applicant is encouraged to engage in informal consultations with the Bullitt
County Planning Commission or its assigned planner or engineer prior to preparing
his final plans, it being understood that no statement or representation by a member of
the Commission or its representative planner shall be binding upon the Planning
Commission or upon any zoning body.
c. The request shall then be referred to the Planning Commission for formal review
before being forwarded with the Commission’s recommendations to the legislative
body having jurisdiction for final action.
d. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
Development Plan as provided by KRS 424 and Sub-section 3.201 and Article VIII,
of these regulations. Such public hearing shall consider all aspects of the
Development plan including all proposed stages and/or units of development. Within
thirty days after the last public hearing on such plan, the Commission shall prepare
and transmit to the legislative body having jurisdiction and to the applicant specific
findings of fact with respect to the extent to which the Planned Development
complies with the standards set out in this section and the zone for which the change
has been requested, together with its recommendations to the Fiscal Court or City
Council concerned with respect to the action to be taken on the application for the
-85-
Planned Development. The Commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or
approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions. Copies of the findings and
recommendations of the Commission shall be made available to any other interested
persons.
e. The legislative body having jurisdiction shall have a period of sixty (60)
days to reject or approve by resolution, a residential or business Planned Unit
Development Zone application. If the application is rejected, the written reasons for
such rejection shall be made available. The final decision of the legislative body
having jurisdiction may be appealed directly to the Board of Adjustment. If
approved, such resolution shall incorporate the Development plan, including any
condition or restriction that may be imposed by the legislative body having
jurisdiction. In any case, approval of all applications shall be based on conformance
of the Planned Development to the stated intentions and objectives of this section.
f- The approval of a single stage Development shall become null and void and the
land shall revert to its former zoning classification, unless within two (2) years the
Subdivision Plat shall have been recorded in the records of Bullitt County.
g- When the recording of the Subdivision Plat for the successive stages of a multistage
plan falls more than two (2) years behind the schedule submitted under Subsections
5.903 Paragraph ‘e’ the Planned Development shall become null and void as
to that portion of the tract for which no Subdivision Plat shall have been recorded;
and that portion of the tract shall revert to its former zoning classification.
h- An extension of the time limit or the modification of the approved Planned
Development may be approved by the legislative body having jurisdiction. Such
approval shall be given upon a finding of the purpose and necessity for such
extension or modification, and evidence of reasonable effort toward the
accomplishment of the original Planned Development. Such modification shall
follow the procedure of Article VIII of these regulations.
Section 5.903 Documentation Required For Planned Unit Development Application
Two (2) copies of a Planned Unit Development plans shall be submitted with the
application and shall include in text and map form:
a- A survey of the tract that is to be developed showing of all existing features of the
property including streets, alleys, easements, utility lines, existing land use, general
topography and physical features.
b- A site plan showing the location and arrangement of all existing and proposed
structures, the proposed traffic circulation pattern within the Development, the areas
to be developed for parking, the points of ingress and egress, including access streets
-86-
where required, the relationship of abutting land uses and zoning districts, proposed
lots and blocks, if any, and proposed public or common open space, if any, including
parks, playgrounds, school sites, and recreational facilities.
c. A statement of the anticipated land use density, and the percentage of the
development which is to be occupied by structures.
d- Preliminary sketches of the proposed structures and landscaping.
e- When a Planned Unit Development is to be constructed in stages or units, a
schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted.
No such stage or unit shall have a land density that exceeds by more than twenty (20)
percent of the proposed land use density of the entire Planned Unit Development.
When a Planned Unit Development provides for common open space, the total area of
common open space provided at any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear
the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire Planned Unit
Development as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire
Planned Development.
f- Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the tract to effect the
proposed plan, including a statement of all the ownership and beneficial interests in
the tract of land and proposed Development.
g- In the case of Business Planned Unit Development, a statement identifying the
principal types of official business uses that are to be included in the proposed
Development.
h- When a Planned Development included provisions for common open space or
recreational facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the
care and maintenance of such open space or recreational facilities. If it is proposed
that such open space be owned and/or maintained by any entity other than a
governmental authority, copies of the proposed Articles of Incorporation and By-laws
of such entity shall be submitted.
i- Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property
included in the Planned Unit Development Zone.
Section 5.904 Permitted Uses and Variations
In a Planned Unit Development, only those uses permitted in the original zone shall
be permitted in the new classification with the following variations allowed:
a- In a ‘PR’ residential type development, while the original ‘R-2’ zone permits
only single-family and two-family dwellings, a mixture of dwellings unit
types shall be permitted resulting in a maximum of fifty (50%) percent of the
-87-
units in multi-family or two-family type, with a minimum of fifty (50%) percent
in single-family type units.
b- Each single and two family dwelling lot area requirement in the original zone may
be reduced by one-fifth.
c- Multi family lot area requirements shall be those of ‘R-3’ with a permitted
reduction of one-fifth for each requirement.
d- a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total acreage of the property shall be left
as landscaped open space, other than streets, easements, and similar right-of-ways.
e- In a B-1 business type development twenty (20) percent increase shall be permitted
in the lot coverage allowed in the original B-1 zone if front yard requirements under
original zone are doubled while maintaining other yard requirements.
The resulting open space must be convenient to the dwellings, of reasonable
configuration and slope, and shall be appropriately designed as part of the
compliance.
-88-
ARTICLE 6 TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW
Section 6.100 Site Plan Review
6.101 Site Plan Review Limitation
6.102 Required Information
6.103 Procedure for Preparation
6.104 Procedure for Processing
6.105 General Standards for Site Plan Approval
6.106 Specific Standards and Conditions for Site Plan Approval
6.107 Appeal of Site Plan Review Decision
Section 6.200 Conditional Use
6.201 Special Exception Procedure
6.202 General Requirements for Granting a Conditional Use
6.203 Additional Provisions
6.205 Conditional Use – Off Street Parking (see page 120)
ARTICLE 6 TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW
This Article Outlines procedures and requirements for Site Plan and Conditional Use
Reviews.
Section 6.100 Site Plan Review
Routine administration of the Zoning Regulations is the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrative Official. However, sound future development of Bullitt County and its
political subdivisions requires that certain high intensity development, and development
in certain critical areas, receive special site plan review by the Planning Commission.
Site plan review and approval are required for uses which are not intrinsically
objectionable but which have inherent characteristics that, if not properly handled, have
the potential for yielding unsatisfactory results of some type. They are uses which
depend upon sound site planning and design to prevent them from becoming detrimental
to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public, or to neighboring land uses.
For uses and areas which require site plan review, no building or use shall be established
or continued except in conformity with a site development plan approved by the Planning
Commission, and no zoning certificate shall be issued until all of the requirements of this
section have been met. Continued conformance with such a plan and such requirements
shall be a condition of any zoning permit. The Administrative Official shall be
responsible for certifying that the requirements of this section have been met.
Section 6.101 Site Plan Review Limitation
Uses requiring site plan review are indicated in Section 5.300, Table of Types of
Application Review by Zone. Site plan review is required for all development in
business and industrial zones, for all uses requiring conditional use permits, and for
certain other uses which are listed in the table. Site plan review is intended only for
construction of buildings or other improvements on the land. After a site plan has been
approved and construction of the development has been completed in accordance with the
site plan, a permitted change in use which does not materially affect the design of the
development and which requires no new construction, other than minor remodeling and
changing of permitted signs, shall not require an additional site plan review by the
Planning Commission. Such a use change may be processed by the Administrative
Official. The Administrative Official may refer uncertain cases to the Planning
Commission. Any major expansion or modification of a use with an approved site plan
shall be subject to a new site plan review by the Planning Commission.
Section 6.102 Required Information
An application for a building permit requiring site plan approval by the Planning
Commission shall be made to the Administrative Official and shall be accompanied by
the following information:
-89-
a- Map of applicant’s entire holding at a convenient scale;
b- Vicinity map at a scale of six hundred (600) feet or more to the inch
indicating the location of the property with respect to surrounding property
and streets. The map shall show all streets, easements, subdivisions, and
properties within one thousand (1,000) feet of the applicant in the area
shall be identified.
c- Topographic map of the property, at two (2) foot contour intervals, unless
otherwise specified by the Planning Commission, showing the existing
and proposed regarded surface of the land and the location of natural
features, such as streams, swamps, rock outcrops, and major trees.
d- A site plan showing location, proposed use and height of all buildings;
location of all parking and truck loading areas with access and egress
drives thereto; location of outdoor storage if any; location and type of
recreation facilities, if any; location of all existing or proposed site
improvements including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; the
proposed grading, landscaping, and screening plans; description of method
of water supply and sewage disposal and location of such facilities;
location and proposed development of buffer areas and landscaping where
required; location and design of lighting facilities; and location, size and
type of all signs;
e- A computation of total lot area, of building floor area for each type of
proposed use, building coverage, roads, and parking;
f- For commercial uses, specific uses proposed; number of employees for
which buildings are designed; type of power to be used, if any; type of
wastes or by-products to be produced; and proposed method of disposal of
such wastes or by-products.
Section 6.103 Procedure For Preparation
a- It is recommended that applicants acquaint themselves with the
Subdivision Regulations, as they may be adopted by Bullitt County and
any of the Cities of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and
Mount Washington, so that documentation for site plan review by the
Planning Commission, when required, may be prepared simultaneously.
b- Site plans or any portion thereof, involving engineering, architecture or
land surveying, shall be prepared and certified by an engineer, architect,
landscape architect, or land surveyor duly authorized by the State or
practice as such.
-90-
c- Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of not smaller than one-inch equals
one hundred feet; the sheet or sheets shall be twenty-four inches by thirtysix
inches, including a 1-1/2 inch margin for binding along left edge. A
site plan may be prepared in one or more sheets, in which case match lines
and an index sheet shall be provided.
d- Six clearly legible, blue or black line copies of a site plan shall be
submitted to the Administrative Official, accompanied by payment of all
site plan fees as established by the Fiscal Court, or the legislative body of
the city concerned.
Section 6.104 Procedure For Processing
Each application involving site plan approval, together with the required information
described in Sub-sections 6.102 and 6.103 above shall be submitted to the Administrative
Official for review. Action shall be taken by the Planning Commission and a decision
rendered thereon within sixty (60) days of the date the application is received by the
Administrative Official. The Administrative Official shall route copies of the application
to reviewing agencies and officials during the reviewing period.
a- Prior to approval of any site plan, there shall be executed by the owner or
developer and submitted with the site plan an agreement to construct such
required physical improvements as are made conditional to site plan
approval in form and substance as approved by the Planning Commission.
b- Approval of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this article shall
expire two years after the date of such approval unless construction has
begun at that time.
c- Any site plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved,
and any requirements of this article may be waived by the Planning
Commission in specific cases where such requirement is found to be
unreasonable and such waiver will not be adverse to the purpose of this
section.
d- Upon satisfactory completion of the installation of required improvements
as shown on the approved site plan or a section thereof, the developer shall
submit to the Administrative Official six copies of ‘as-built’ site plan,
certified by the engineer of surveyor, at least one week prior to anticipated
occupancy of any building, for the review and approval for conformity
with the approved site plan. The Administrative Official shall not process
the zoning use and certificate of zoning compliance until the appropriate
‘as-built’ site plan has been reviewed and approved.
-91-
Section 6.105 General Standards For Site Plan Approval
In acting upon any site development plan, the Planning Commission shall determine that
the proposed use, site layout and overall appearance of all building in the proposed
development are such that they will have a harmonious relationship with existing or
permitted development of contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods, and that the
proposed development is in harmony with the development policies outlined in the
‘Bullitt County Comprehensive Plan’, as it may be approved, and in these zoning
regulations. The Planning Commission shall seek to provide for the conservation of
woodland and the protection of water courses from erosion and siltation, and a maximum
of safety, convenience, and amenity for the residents or users of the proposed
development. To these ends, the Planning Commission shall consider the location of
buildings, parking areas, points of egress and ingress, and other features such as streams
and large trees, the efficiency, adequacy and safety of the proposed layout of internal
streets and driveways; the adequacy and location of open space; the adequacy, location,
and screening of the parking lots; and such other matters as the Planning Commission
may find to have a material bearing upon the stated intent of the site plan review
procedure. In reviewing individual development proposals in the mobile home, business
an industrial zones, the Planning Commission shall attempt to promote a modern,
harmonious development pattern such as is achieved through unified site planning in the
PR and PB Zones. The Planning Commission shall encourage such development by
promoting common frontage roads, development of shared parking areas, and
coordinated building arrangements, landscaping, and signing.
Section 6.106 Specific Standards And Conditions For Site Plan Approval
The following specific standards shall be met in site development plans, in addition to the
standards in other sections of these regulations.
a- No parking space shall be located within any required setback areas.
b- All lighting shall be so shielded that there will be no objectionable glare,
especially to residential areas, observable from surrounding properties or
streets.
c- The County Health Department shall certify that water and sewage
services are adequate to service the proposed development, or shall certify
the adequacy of any on-site water supply or sewage treatment proposal.
d- The Planning Commission may require screening along the property lines
when necessary, as a condition for site plan approval. Minimum standards
for all screening when required shall be a strip at least four (4) feet wide,
densely planted with shrubs or trees which are at least four (4) feet high at
the time of planting, and which are of a type which may be expected to
form a year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high within three (3)
-92-
years.
e- The capacities of existing streets shall be adequate for the volume of
traffic which the proposed development is expected to generate.
f- If the plan of development includes common areas, property, and/or
facilities, the Planning Commission as a condition of approval shall
establish such conditions on the ownership, use, and maintenance of such
lands or property as it deems necessary to insure the preservation of such
areas, property and facilities for their intended purpose.
Section 6.107 Appeal of Site Plan Review Decision
The applicant for a use involving site plan review shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Planning Commission to the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall
review the entire record of the application and may affirm, modify, or establish such
other or additional conditions to the decision as may seem appropriate, consistent with
the intent of the regulations.
Section 6.200 Conditional Use
The regulations of this Section deal with certain unusual uses which need special
consideration to achieve compatibility with existing or planned future development. The
effects of such uses on the surrounding environment cannot be foreseen until a specific
site has been proposed. They must be given special consideration and located properly
relative to the existing and planned future development pattern. They are not permitted
automatically, but are subject to the general regulations, and the conditions imposed in a
Conditional Use Permit issued by the Board of Adjustment under these regulations.
Section 6.201 Conditional Use Procedure
The Board of Adjustment has the authority to grant a conditional use permit after referral
of the conditional use application to the Planning Commission for site plan review and
recommendation, and the holding of a legally advertised public hearing. A conditional
use application shall therefore include the plans and data required for site plan review. In
addition, the requirements outlined in Article VII, Sub-section 7.302, and the procedures
outlined hereafter shall be followed. When approving a conditional use, the Board of
Adjustment shall incorporate the site planning recommendations of the Planning
Commission. The Board may add additional conditions.
a- A written application for a conditional use is submitted indicating the
section of these regulations under which the conditional use is sought and
stating the grounds on which it is requested.
-93-
b- The Planning Commission has reviewed application and has stated its
recommendations to the Board.
c- A public hearing has been held.
d- The Board determines that the conditional use requested meets the general
and specific conditions of these regulations.
e- Upon receipt of a notice of grant of conditional use permit, the
Administrative Official shall indicate the same in the proper place on the
Zoning Map by use of appropriate code number of symbol.
f- No use or activity permitted as a conditional use shall be enlarged or
extended beyond the limits authorized in the grant of conditional use
permit. All such enlargements or extensions shall require grants of
conditional use, as in the case of an original application.
g- If a grant of conditional use is denied, no new application for the denied
use on the same property shall be accepted by the Board of Adjustment
until one year after the date of hearing on the denied application.
h- Notice of action taken by the Board on each application for a conditional
use shall be transmitted to the petitioner and to the Planning Commission.
In cases where conditional use has been granted, the notice shall set forth
the conditions, standards, and rules to which the conditional use is subject.
*See appendix A & B
Section 6.202 General Requirements For Granting A Conditional Use
A grant of conditional use is basically a matter of development policy, rather than an
appeal based on administrative error or on hardship in a particular case. The Board of
Adjustment should therefore consider the relation of the proposed use to existing and
future development patterns. In general, a conditional use may be granted when the
Board finds that:
a- The proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of the
‘County Comprehensive Plan’, as it may be adopted, and of these zoning
regulations.
b- The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations
involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size of the site in
relation to it, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving
access to it, are such that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the zone in which it is located.
-94-
c- The location, nature and height of buildings, walls, and fences, and the
nature and extent of the landscaping on the site are such that the use will
not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent
land and buildings.
d- Operations in connection with any conditional use will not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibration, or
other characteristics, than would be the operations of any permitted use
not requiring a conditional use permit.
e- Parking areas will be of adequate size for the particular use, properly
located and suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and the
entrance and exit drives shall be laid out to achieve maximum safety.
f- Public utility service (electricity, sewerage, storm drainage and water) will
be adequate to service the proposed use and will have suitable access
thereto, and the proposal will not overburden existing facilities; or, any
on-site water supply, sewage treatment, or storm drainage disposal system
will be adequate to service the proposed use.
Section 6.203 Additional Provisions
A conditional use permit may be granted in accordance with the general and specific
requirements enumerated in the preceding sections. The Board may, and is herby
authorized, to add to the specific requirements any additional conditions that it may deem
necessary to protect adjacent properties, the general neighborhood, and the residents
and/or workers therein. Violation of such additional conditions, when made a part of the
terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
these regulations and may be grounds for termination of the conditional use permit.
Section 6.205 Conditional Use – Off Street Parking – see page 120
-95-
ARTICLE 7 ADMINISTRATION
Section 7.100 Administration and Enforcement: Building Permits and Certification of
Zoning Compliance
7.101 Administration and Enforcement
7.102 Certificate of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered, or Nonconforming
Uses and/or Structures
7.103 Construction and Use to be as provided in Applications, Plans, Permits, and
Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Section 7.200 The Board of Adjustment: Procedure
7.201 Meetings of Board; Quorum; Minutes; Bylaws
7.202 Procedure for all Appeals to Board
7.203 Public Notice of Appeal Hearing
7.204 Stay of Proceedings
Section 7.300 The Board of Adjustment: Powers and Duties
7.301 Administrative Review
7.302 Conditional Use Permits
7.303 Dimensional Variance
7.304 Procedure for all Appeals to Board
7.305 Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
7.306 Appeals from Commission or Board of Adjustment
Section 7.400 Duties of Administrative Official
7.401 Administrator of Zoning Regulations: Powers
Section 7.500 Penalties for Violation
ARTICLE 7 ADMINISTRATION
Section 7.100 Administration and Enforcement: Building Permits and Certification of
Zoning Compliance
Section 7.101 Administration and Enforcement
An Administrative Official designated by the Fiscal Court and with the approval of the
respective City Councils shall administer and enforce these regulations. He may be
provided with the assistance of such other persons as the respective legislative body may
direct. If the Administrative Official shall find that any of the provisions of these
regulations are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violations and ordering the action necessary to
correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal work being done: or shall take any
other action authorized by these regulations or KRS Chapter 100 to insure compliance
with or to prevent violations of their provisions.
Section 7.102 Certificate of Zoning Compliance For New Altered, or Non-Conforming
Uses and/or Structures
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or
wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use of structure until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall have been issued therefore by the Administrative Official stating that
the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of these
regulations. No non-conforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed,
or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the
Administrative Official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically
where-in the non-conforming use differs from the provisions of these regulations
provided that upon enactment or amendment of these regulations, owners or occupants of
non-conforming uses or structures shall have three (3) months to apply for certificates of
zoning compliance. Failure to make such application within three (3) months shall be
presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at the time of enactment or
amendment of these regulations. A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be
issued by the Administrative Official for a period not exceeding six (6) months during
alterations or partial occupancy of the building pending its completion, provided that
such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the
safety of the occupants and the public.
The Administrative Official shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning
compliance, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. Failure to obtain a
certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this regulation and punishable
under Section 7.500 of these regulations.
-96-
Section 7.103 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits,
and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved
by the Administrative Official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
forth in such approved plans and applications and any other use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this regulation
and as provided by Section 7.500 hereof.
Section 7.200 The Board of Adjustment: Procedure
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which shall consist of seven (7) members,
but, not more than two (2) of which shall be members of the Bullitt County Planning
Commission. Members shall be appointed pursuant to KRS 100.217. The County shall
have three (3) and the four cities within the County shall have one (1) member each on
the Board of Adjustment.
Section 7.201 Meeting of Board; Quorum; Minutes; Bylaws
a- The Board of Adjustment shall conduct meetings at the call of the
chairman who shall give written or oral notice to all members of the Board
at least seven days prior to the meeting, which notice shall contain the
date, time and place for the meeting, and the subject or subjects which will
be discussed.
b- A simple majority of the total membership of the Board of Adjustment as
established by regulation or agreement shall constitute a quorum. Any
member of the Board of Adjustment who has any direct or indirect
financial interest in the outcome of any question before the body shall
disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself from voting
on the question.
c- The Board of Adjustment shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of
business and shall keep minutes and records of all proceeding, including
regulations, transactions, findings, and determinations and the number of
votes for and against each question, and if any member is absent of
abstains from voting indicating the fact, all of which shall, immediately
after adoption be filed in the office of the Board. If the Board has no
office, such records may be kept in custody of an officer of the Board and
shall be available to the general public. A transcript of the minutes of the
Board of Adjustment shall be provided if requested by a party, at the
expense of the requesting party, and the transcript shall constitute the
record.
-97-
Section 7.202 Procedure For All Appeals to Board
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously
affected or aggrieved by an official action or decision of any zoning enforcement officer.
Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the appellant or his agent receives
notice of the action appealed from, by filing with said officer and with the Board a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and all
parties of record. Said Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and shall be
treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings. At any hearing by the
Board any interested person may appear and enter his appearance, and all shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.
Section 7.203 Public Notice of Appeal Hearing
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice in
accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as well as written notice to the appellant and the
Administrative Official at least one (1) week prior to the hearing, and shall decide it
within sixty (60) days from the date of appeal. The affected party may appear at the
hearing in person or by attorney.
Section 7.204 Stay of Proceedings
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Administrative Official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause eminent peril to life and property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, or on notice to
the Administrative Official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
Section 7.300 The Board of Adjustment: Powers And Duties
Section 7.301 Administrative Review
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide cases where it is
alleged by an applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, grant, or
refusal made by an Administrative Official in the enforcement of these zoning
regulations. Such appeal shall be taken within sixty (60) days.
Section 7.302 Conditional Use Permits
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for conditional use
permits to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which are specifically
named in the zoning regulations which may be suitable only in specific locations in the
-98-
zone and only if certain conditions are met:
a- The Board may approve, modify, or deny any application for a conditional
use permit. If it approves such permit it may attach necessary conditions
such as time limitations, requirements that one of more things be done
before the request can be initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature.
any such conditions shall be recorded in the Board’s minutes and on the
conditional use permit, along with a reference to the specific section in the
zoning regulations listing the conditional use under consideration. The
Board shall have power to revoke conditional use permits, or variances for
non-compliance with the condition thereof. Furthermore, the Board shall
have a right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at
the cost of the violator and may have judgment in personam for such cost.
b- Granting of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from
complying with all of the requirements of building, housing, and other
regulations.
c- In any case where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within
the time limit set by the Board, or within one year if no specific time limit
has been set, such conditional use permit shall not revert to its original
designation unless there has been a public hearing. Exercised, as set forth
in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the
main building or other improvement has been let; or in the absence of
contracts that the main building or other improvement is under
construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions
involving substantial investment shall be under contract, in development,
or completed. When construction is not a part of the use, exercised shall
mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions as set
forth in the permit.
d- The Administrative Official shall review all conditional use permits,
except those for which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at
least once annually and shall have the power to inspect the land or
structure where the conditional use is located in order to ascertain that the
landowner is complying with all of the conditions which are listed on the
conditional use permit. If the landowner is not complying with all of the
conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the Administrative Official
shall report the fact in writing to the chairman of the Board of Adjustment.
The report shall state specifically the manner in which the landowner is
not complying with the conditions on the conditional use permit, and a
copy of the report shall be furnished to the chairman of the Board of
Adjustment. The Board shall hold a hearing on the report within a
reasonable time, and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
furnished to the landowner at least one (1) week prior to the hearing. If
-99-
the Board of Adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report of the
Administrative Official are true and that the landowner had taken no steps
to comply with them between the date of the report and the date of the
hearing, the Board of Adjustment may authorize the Administrative
Official to revoke the conditional use permit and take the necessary legal
action to cause the termination of the activity on the land which the
conditional use permit authorizes.
e- Once the Board of Adjustment has completed a conditional use permit and
all the conditions required are of such type that they can be completely
and permanently satisfied, the Administrative Official, upon request of the
applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a determination that the
conditions have been satisfied, and enter the facts which indicate that the
conditions have been satisfied and the conclusion in the margin of the
copy of the conditional use permit which is on file with the County Clerk
or City Clerk concerned, as required in KRS 100.344. Thereafter said use,
if it continues to meet the other requirements of the regulations, will be
treated as a permitted use.
Section 7.303 Dimensional Variance
(See page 121 for the latest text amendment on this section)
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for dimensional
variances where, by reasons of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or unusual shape
of a site on the effective date of these zoning regulations or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or some other extraordinary situation or condition of that site, the
literal enforcement o the dimensional requirements (height or width of building or size of
yards, but no population density) of the zoning regulation would deprive the applicant of
reasonable capacity to make use of the land in a manner equivalent to the use permitted
other landowners in the same zone. The Board may impose any reasonable conditions or
restrictions on any variance it decides to grant. The following shall govern the granting
of a variance:
a- Before any variance is granted, the Board must find all of the following,
which shall be recorded along with any imposed conditions or restrictions
in its minutes and records and issued in written form to the applicant to
constitute proof of the dimensional variance.
1. The specific conditions in detail which are unique to the
applicant’s land and do not exist on other land in the same
zone.
2. The manner in which the strict application of the provisions
of the regulation would deprive the applicant of a reasonable
use of the land in the manner equivalent to the use permitted
other landowners in the same zone.
-100-
3. That the unique conditions and circumstances are not the
result of actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the
adoption of these zoning regulations.
4. Reasons that the variance will preserve, not harm the public
safety and welfare, and will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood.
b- The Board shall not possess the power to grant a variance to permit a use
of any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by the zoning
regulations in the zone in question, or to alter density requirements in the
zone in question.
Section 7.304 Procedure For All Appeals to Board
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously
affected or aggrieved by an official action or decision of any zoning Administrative
Official. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the appellant or his
agent receives notice of the action appealed from, by filing with said officer and with the
Board a notice of such appeal to any and all parties of record. Said officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken and shall be treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings.
At any hearing by the Board any interested person may appear and enter his appearance,
and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
for hearing the appeal and give public notice in accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as
well as written notice to the appellant and the Administrative Official at least one (1)
week prior to the hearing and shall decide it within sixty (60) days from the date of
appeal. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or by attorney.
Section 7.305 Decisions of The Board of Adjustment
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such
action is in conformity with the terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from;
and, may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made,
and to that end shall have powers of the Administrative Official from whom the appeal is
taken.
Section 7.306 Appeals From Commission or Board of Adjustment
Any appeal from Commission action may be taken in the following manner:
a- Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final
action of the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustment may appeal
from the action to the Circuit Court of the county. Such appeal shall be
-101-
taken within thirty (30) days after the final action of the Commission or
Board. Final action shall not include Commission’s recommendations
made to other governmental bodies.
b- All appeals shall be taken in the appropriate Circuit Court within thirty
(30) days after the action or decision of the Planning Commission or
Board of Adjustment and all decisions which have not been appealed
within thirty (30) days shall become final. After the appeal is taken, the
procedure shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure. When an
appeal has been filed, the clerk of the Circuit Court shall issue a summons
to all parties, including the Planning Commission in all cases, and shall
cause it to be delivered for service as in any other law action.
Section 7.400 Duties of Administrative Official
It is the intent of these regulations that all questions of interpretation and enforcement
shall be first presented to the Administrative Official, and that such questions shall be
presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the
Administrative Official, and that recourse from the decision of the Board of Adjustment
shall be to the courts as provided by law.
Section 7.401 Administrator of Zoning Regulations: Powers
An Administrative Official shall be designated by Bullitt County to administer the zoning
regulations, and, if delegated, housing or building or other related regulations. The
Administrative Official may be designated to issue building permits or certificates of
zoning compliance, or both, in accordance with the literal terms of the regulations, but
may not have the power to permit any construction, or to permit any use or any change of
use which does not conform to the literal terms of these zoning regulations.
Section 7.500 Penalties For Violation
Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS 100.201 to 100.347 and
100.991; or any of the regulations adopted pursuant hereunder for which no other penalty
is provided, shall upon conviction be fined not less than ten (10) dollars but no more than
five hundred (500) dollars for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
-102-
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
Section 8.100 Amendment Application Procedure
8.101 Qualified Applicants
8.102 Submission of Application
8.103 Public Hearing Required
Section 8.200 Text Amendment
Section 8.300 Map Amendment
8.301 Findings Necessary for Map Amendment:
Board of Adjustment Required
8.302 Application Format
Section 8.400 Planning Commission Recommendation and Fiscal Court Decision
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development
within Bullitt County and its political subdivisions these regulations or any part thereof,
and as here used the term regulations shall be deemed to include the official zoning maps
shall not be amended except as follows:
Section 8.100 Amendment Application Procedure
Section 8.101 Qualified Applicants
A proposal for amendment to any zoning regulation may originate with the Planning
Commission, with the Fiscal Court or legislative body which is a member of the planning
unit, or with the owner of the property in question.
Section 8.102 Submission of Application
Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, it shall be referred to the Planning
Commission before adoption. Applications for zoning text or map amendments shall be
submitted in duplicate to the Planning Commission, through the Administrative Official,
on forms supplied by the Planning Commission. The Administrative Official shall not
accept an application if it fails to conform to all applicable requirements of this Article,
including the payment of any fee established by the County Fiscal Court or the council of
the respective city concerned, nor if the application is for reclassification of the whole or
any part of land, the reclassification of which has been approved or denied on its merits
within twelve (12) months prior to the date of submission of the application.
Section 8.103 Public Hearing Required
Upon accepting an amendment application, the Planning Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing after notice as required by KRS Chapter 424 and make
recommendations to the legislative body having jurisdiction, and it shall take a majority
of the entire legislative body having jurisdiction to override the recommendation of the
Planning Commission. All procedures for public notice and publication as well as for
adoption shall be the same as for the original enactment of a zoning regulation.
Section 8.200 Text Amendment
Application for amendment of the zoning order text may be made by any interested
person or governmental agency. The application shall set forth the new text to be added
and the existing text, if any, to be deleted.
-103-
Section 8.300 Map Amendment
Section 8.301 Finding Necessary for Map Amendment:
Board of Adjustment Required
Before any map amendment is granted, the Planning Commission, and the legislative
body having jurisdiction must find that the map amendment is in agreement with the
community’s comprehensive plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of
the following apply and such finding shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the
Planning Commission and the legislative body or Fiscal Court.
a- That the original zoning classification given to the property was
inappropriate or improper.
b- That there have been major changes of an economic, physical or social
nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the
community’s Comprehensive Plan and which have substantially altered
the basic character of such area.
*c- The zoning regulations or map shall not be amended, changed, or
modified in such manner as to create a free-standing zone of less than five
(5) acres, except for B-1 Highway Commercial which may be as small as
three (3) acres.
*This acreage requirement for rezoning shall not apply within the
municipal boundary of any incorporated city within Bullitt County. The City
Council of each respective City shall have the authority to rezone property
containing less than the above stated acreage with their boundary.
Section 8.302 Application Format
The zoning map application shall be in duplicate in such a form as prescribed by the
Planning Commission, and shall include:
a- A written statement, specifying the following:
1. The location of the land proposed to be reclassified, including the
street number, if any;
2. A description by metes and bounds, courses and distances, of the land,
or if the boundaries conform to lot boundaries within a subdivision for
which a plat is recorded in the county land records, a lot, block, and
subdivision designation with appropriate plat reference;
3. The present classification and classification proposed for such land;
* See Appendices A & B -104-
4. The name and address of the owner of the land;
5. The area of the land proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet if
less than one (1) acre and in acres if one (1) acre or more.
b- An identification plat, prepared by a civil engineer, surveyor, or other
competent person, and certified thereon by him to be correct and in
conformity with this section, showing by metes and bounds, courses and
distances the land proposed to be reclassified, or if the boundaries conform
to boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded among the
county land records, then a copy of such plat, the land proposed to be
reclassified appearing in a color distinctive from that of other lands shown
on the plat.
c- A vicinity map, covering the area within at least one thousand (1,000) feet
of the boundaries of the land proposed to be reclassified showing the
existing zoning classification of all land appearing on the map.
Section 8.400 Planning Commission Recommendation and Fiscal Court Decision
After the public hearing the Planning Commission shall, by resolution, recommend or
reject the proposed zoning amendment and shall forward their recommendation to the
legislative body having jurisdiction. The Planning Commission shall also forward the
complete application record, including the transcript of the public hearing. At the
meeting of the legislative body having jurisdiction following receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning Commission, the legislative body having jurisdiction
shall proceed to consideration of the proposed zoning amendment. An application for the
Official Zoning Map or Text Amendment shall be decided on the basis of the evidence of
record. Such application shall be approved, denied, dismissed, withdrawn, or decided in
any manner as provided by Chapter 100 of Kentucky Revised Statutes. The legislative
body having jurisdiction may dismiss any such application if it finds that:
a- The application does not conform to any stated procedure requirement of
this Article;
b- The application is not acceptable for filing because filed within twelve
(12) months as hereinbefore provided, or;
c- The application is frivolous or filed for purposes of harassment.
-105-
If application is not dismissed or allowed to be withdrawn as herein provided, it shall be
approved, denied, or decided in any manner as provided by Chapter 100 of Kentucky
Revised Statutes. In any case, no application for the reclassification of all or any part of
the land which is the subject of the application shall be accepted for filing for twelve (12)
months following the date of such decision. No application for the Official Zoning Map
amendment shall be approved for a class of district other than that applied for. No
application for a map amendment shall be approved for a greater area than that applied
for, but an application may be approved for a smaller area than that applied for if the
reclassification of such smaller area is supported by the evidence or record and if such
smaller area is accurately delineated in the record. The decision of the Fiscal Court or
City Council concerned, on any application for an Official Zoning Map or Text
amendment shall be rendered within sixty (60) days of the original hearing (unless such
time is extended by resolution of the legislative body having jurisdiction) and shall be in
the form of a resolution adopted by the legislative body having jurisdiction in open
session by a majority of those voting on roll call by yeas and nays and appearing in the
minutes of the meeting. The resolution shall be promptly mailed by the Administrative
Official to the applicant and to all persons who appeared at the hearing as shown by the
hearing transcript.
-106-
ARTICLE 9 REGULATION PROVISIONS
Section 9.100 Interpretation
Section 9.200 Separability Clause
Section 9.300 Repeal of Conflicting Regulations
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses
Section 9.500 Effective Date
ARTICLE 9 REGULATION PROVISIONS
Section 9.100 Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, said provisions shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals
and general welfare. Wherever these regulations require a greater width or size of yards
or open spaces or require a lower height of building or less number of stories or require a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or require a lower density of population, or
require a more restricted use of land, or impose other higher standards than are required
in any other ordinance or regulation, private deed restrictions or private covenants, these
regulations shall govern, but if the requirements of the other ordinance, regulation,
private deed restriction or private covenant is more restrictive, then those requirements
shall govern.
Section 9.200 Separability Clause
If for any reason any one or more section, headings, clauses of parts of these orders are
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect, impair or
in validate the remaining provisions, but shall be confined to the specific section,
headings, clauses or parts held invalid and the invalidity of any section, heading, clauses
or part of these orders in any one or more instances shall not affect or prejudice in any
way the validity of the orders in any other instance.
Section 9.300 Repeal of Conflicting Regulations
The existing zoning regulations now in effect in Bullitt County, Kentucky and each of the
Cities of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and Mount Washington, and in
conflict with the zoning regulations as they are established herein, are hereby repealed.
However, all suits at law or in equity and or all prosecutions resulting from violation of
any zoning regulations heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any of the Courts
of the State of Kentucky or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by
reason of the adoption of these zoning regulations; but shall be prosecuted to their finality
the same as if these zoning regulations had not been adopted, and any and all violations
of existing zoning regulations, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may
be thereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in these zoning regulations shall be so
construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecuting now pending,
and/or which may have heretofore been instituted or prosecuted.
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges & Expenses
The Fiscal Court of the County of Bullitt and each of the legislative bodies of the Cities
of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and Mount Washington shall establish a
schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits,
certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to these
-107-
regulations. The schedule of fees listed below shall be posted in the office of the
Administrative Official, and may be altered or amended only by the local legislative body
having jurisdiction. No permit, certificate, conditional use permit, or variance shall be
issued unless or until such cost, charges, fees, or expenses listed below have been paid in
full, nor shall any action be taken or proceedings before the Board of Adjustment unless
or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES & EXPENSES
ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT: $50.00
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT:
A- $50.00 R2- $125.00 B2- $250.00
SC- $50.00 R3- $150.00 IL- $300.00
C- $50.00 R4- $200.00 IG- $400.00
R1- $100.00 B1- $225.00 PUD- $250.00
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
CONDITIONAL USE: $50.00
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE: $50.00
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
SITE PLAN REVIEW: Administrator Review: $50.00
Commission Review: $100.00
APPEAL EACH ADMINISTRATIVE STEP: $50.00
ZONING COMPLIANCE: $10.00
SIGN CERTIFICATION:
FREESTANDING AND ATTACHED BUSINESS:--$25.00
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING-----------------------------$50.00
WIRING PERMIT: $2.00
ZONING REGULATION BOOK: $10.00 each
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BOOK: $25.00
-108-
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
BUILDING PERMITS:
Over Less Than Over Less Than
$ 0 $ 10,000 - $ 15 $ 100,000 $ 150,000 - $175
$ 10,000 $ 25,000 - $ 50 $ 150,000 $ 250,000 - $250
$ 25,000 $ 50,000 - $ 75 $ 250,000 $ 500,000 - $350
$ 50,000 $ 75,000 - $ 100 $ 500,000 $1,000,000 - $500
$ 75,000 $100,000 - $150 $1,000,000 and up - $750
LATE FEE: (Note: See page 121 for the latest text amendment on this section.)
In addition to the regular building permit fee, there shall be a LATE FEE, assessed by the
Administrative Official, of $10.00 for all building permits purchased after construction
has started.
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses (Revised)
The Fiscal Court of the County of Bullitt and the legislative bodies of the Cities of
Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction, Mt. Washington, and Hebron estates, shall
establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for
building permits, zoning compliances, appeals, and other matters pertaining to these
regulations. The Schedule of fees listed below shall be posted in the office of the
Administrative Official, and may be altered or amended only by the local legislative body
having jurisdiction. No permit, zoning compliance, certificate, conditional use permit, or
variance shall be issued unless, or until such cost, charges, fees or expenses listed below
have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken or proceedings before the Board of
Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
Zoning Text Amendment: $200.00
Zoning Map Amendment:
The zoning map amendment fee for Agricultural, Conservation, Stream Reserve, R-1, R-
2, R-3 and R-4 zones are as follows:
Acreage Fee
.99 and under $100.
1.0 to 2.99 150.
3.0 to 4.99 200.
5.0 to 9.99 250.
-109-
10.0 to 14.99 300.
15.0 to 19.99 350.
20.0 to 24.99 400.
25.0 to 29.99 450.
30.0 to 34.99 500.
35.0 to 39.99 550.
40.0 to 44.99 600.
45.0 to 49.99 650.
50.0 to 54.99 700.
55.0 to 100.00 750.
100.0 to 149.99 800.
150.0 to 199.99 850.
200.0 and above $850. plus $10 per acre for
Every acre over 200
The zoning map amendment fee for B-1 Highway Business, B-2 Central Business, and
Planned Unit Development (PUD) zones are as follows:
Acreage Fee
.99 and under $200.
1.0 to 2.99 300.
3.0 to 4.99 400.
5.0 to 9.99 500.
10.0 to 14.99 600.
15.0 to 19.99 700.
20.0 to 24.99 800.
25.0 to 29.99 900.
30.0 to 34.99 1000.
35.0 to 39.99 1100.
40.0 to 44.99 1200.
45.0 to 49.99 1300.
50.0 to 54.99 1400.
55.0 to 100.00 1500.
100.0 to 149.99 1600.
150.0 to 199.99 1700.
200.0 and above $1700. plus $20. per acre for
each acre over 200
-110-
The zoning map amendment fee for IL Light Industrial, IG General Industrial and Earth
Products (EP) zones are as follows:
Acreage Fee
.99 and under $300.
1.0 to 2.99 450.
3.0 to 4.99 600.
5.0 to 9.99 750.
10.0 to 14.99 900.
15.0 to 19.99 1050.
20.0 to 24.99 1200.
25.0 to 29.99 1350.
30.0 to 34.99 1500.
35.0 to 39.99 1650.
40.0 to 44.99 1800.
45.0 to 49.99 1950.
50.0 to 54.99 2100.
55.0 to 100.00 2250.
100.0 to 149.99 2400.
150.0 to 199.99 2550
200.0 and above $2550 plus $30 per acre for
each acre over 200
Special Meetings:
Planning Commission: $1000.
Board of Adjustments: 600.
Printed Material:
Official Zoning Regulations $25.
Comprehensive Plan Book 25.
Subdivision Regulations 12.
Building Permit/Zoning Compliance:
New Buildings
Single family Dwelling $100.
Relocated single family dwelling 100.
Multi family dwelling 50. per unit
-111-
Building Permit/Zoning Compliance:
New Buildings
Row Houses 100. per unit
Mobile Home 100.
Garage/Accessory Bldgs. (attached and detached) 50.
Accessory Buildings (less than 200 sq. ft.) 25.
Commercial Building 400.
Industrial/Earth Products Buildings 500.
Public Facility 200.
Other (pools, carports, decks,dtc.) 15.
Additions or alterations to existing buildings, ½ the fee of a permit for a new building.
Sign Permits:
$1.00 per square foot of sign area
For signs exceeding 30’ in overall height, for which a variance has been granted by the
Board of Adjustments, the following fee schedule, based on height of the sign, will apply
in addition to the $1.00 per square foot of sign area.
Sign Height *Cost per linear foot of sign height
30.01’ to 50.00’ $100 per foot
50.01’ to 70.00’ $150 per foot
70.01’ to 85.00’ $200 per foot
85.01’ to 100.00’ $250 per foot
100.01’ and above $300 per foot
(*as measured from the finished grade of the earth,
immediately adjacent to the base, to the top of the sign face)
Plat /Survey Review Fee:
Plats/Surveys containing two tracts or less $25.00
Plats/Surveys containing 3 tracts or less $50.00
Plats containing 4 or more tracts $75.00 plus $10.00 per lot
Revision of Plat/Survey Review Fee:
Plats/Surveys containing two tracts or less $5.00
-112-
Revision of Plat/Survey Review Fee: (cont)
Plats/Surveys containing 3 tracts of less $10.00
Plats containing 4 or more tracts $25.00
Conditional Use Permits:
Conditional Use Permit application $125.00
Annual review fee for Conditional Use Permits $ 50.00
Temporary Conditional Use Permits $ 50.00
Dimensional Variance:
Variance applications fee $125.00
Appeals:
Appeal fee: $100.00
Site Plan Review Fee:
Site Plan Review fee $100.00
Late Fee and Penalty Fee:
In addition to the regular building permit and or compliance fee established herein, there
shall be a LATE FEE, assessed by the Administrative Official, for obtaining a building
permit and or compliance after construction has commenced of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) minimum plus and additional Penalty fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
per day for each day, after the first day occurs without a building permit and or
compliance being issued with the total sum of these Late Fees and Penalty Fees not to
exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1000.00).
(See Appendix B- This section was approved under text amendment 94T-01)
Section 9.500 Effective Date
These regulations shall take effect and be in force immediately after their adoption and
legal publication.
Certified by the Planning Commission.
-113-
APPENDIX A
STATUS OF AMENDMENTS
The table below summarizes the status of some amendments to the zoning ordinance text not in effect in
parts of Bullitt County because of pending action by the appropriate legislative body. Portions of text
related to these amendments are briefly stated.
ACTION BY THE LEGISLATIVE BODY
A--approved
D--disapproved
P--pending
U--uncertain
SECTION SUBJECT DOCKET #
5.801 Slaughter in I-L Zone D A P D P U T-14-77
2.200 Beauty Shop as D A U A P U T-39-78
Home Occup.
5.701 Min lot in B-1 A A P A P P T-39-78
w/ sewers
4.402 Min lot w/ septic tank U A U U U A U
9.400 Fee Schedule A A D D U A T-1-79
Amendment
5.301-305 Administrative A A A A A A T-1-80
Correction to chart
of permitted uses
2.200 Definition of Farm A D A D D D T-1-81
2.200 Definition of Mobile D D A A D A T-2-81
Home
7.500 Penalties A D A A A A T-3-81
-114-
Commission Action
Fiscal Court
Mt. Washington
Shepherdsville
Lebanon Junction
Hillview
SECTION SUBJECT DOCKET #
2.200 Definition of A A A A A A T-4-81
Immediate Family
5.501 (b) -2 Mobile Home on Farms A A A A A A T-4-81
5.603 Side yard setbacks D A D A A D T-5-81
5.701 Single Family dwellings A A D A A D T-1-82
with commercial use
5.702 Single Family dwellings A A D A A D T-1-82
with commercial use
5.302 Chart for two Family A A D A A D T-1-82
dwellings
8.301 (c) acreage requirements A D A A A A T-2-82
for any incorporated city
5.501 (c) Changing of the word A A A D D D T-4-83
“subdivision” to
“division”
5.502 (a) Changing of the word A A A D D D T-4-83
“subdivision” to
“division”
5.603 Adding Row House A A A A A D T-5-83
Development
8.301 (c) Acreage requirements A D A D D D T-2-84
in Agricultural to R-1
2.200 Definition of Mobile A A D D D D T-2-85
Home
-115-
Commission Action
Fiscal Court
Mt. Washington
Shepherdsville
Lebanon Junction
Hillview
Appendix A (con’t.)
Section Subject
Planning Commission
Fiscal Court
Lebanon Junction
Mt. Washington
Shepherdsville
Hillview
Pioneer Village
Hunters Hollow
Hebron Estates
Fox Chase
Docket
No.
6.201 Conditional Use Procedure A A U A A A U A A U 89T-05
1.100 Name of regulations A A A A A A A A A A 91T-01
4.307 Projections into yard space A U U U U A U A U U 91T-02
7.303 Dimensional Variance A A A A A A U A U A 91T-03
9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges
and Expenses
A A U A A A A A A A 94T-01
6.205 Conditional Use- Off
Street Parking
A A A A A A A A A A 94T-02
8.400 Planning Commission
Recommendation and
Fiscal Court Decision
A A U U A A A A A A 94T-04
2.200 Words and Terms Defined D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
3.100 Zones D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.700 Mineral Extraction and
Regrading
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.701 Procedure for Mineral
Extraction Operation
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.702 Development Standards D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.703 Rehabilitation
Requirements
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.301 Natural Resources Uses D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.303 Business Uses D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.305 Public and Semipublic
Uses
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.800 Industrial Zones D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.802 Permitted uses in IG zones D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
9.400 Schedule of Fee, Charges
and Expenses
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.950 Earth Products Zone (new
section)
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
2.200 Words and Terms Defined D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
3.100 Zones D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
4.700 Mineral Extraction and
Regrading
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
115A
4.701 Procedure for Mineral
Extraction Operation
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
4.702 Development Standards D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
4.703 Rehabilitation
Requirements
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.301 Natural Resources Uses D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.303 Business Uses D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.305 Public and Semipublic
Uses
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.800 Industrial Zones D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.802 General Industrial, IG D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.950 Earth Products Zone D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.951 Rehabilitation
Requirements in EPA
Zone (new section)
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.802 General Industrial, IG A U U A A A U U U U 2002T-01
5.801 Permitted uses in IL
zones
A U U A A A U U U U 2002T-01
5.801 Quantities of Flammable
Materials in Gallons
A A U U A U U U U U 2008T-01
5.801(f)(5)
5.801(f)(6)
5.802(f)(6)
5.802(f)(7)
(DELETED) Use, Storage
and Disposal of
Flammable Liquids or
Materials.
(Created new section
5.404)
A A U U U D D U D D 2009T-01
2.200 Words and Terms
Defined “Structure”
A A A A A A A A A A 2011T-02
115B
APPENDIX B
TEXT AMENDMENTS
The following amendments are in effect in certain incorporated cities in Bullitt County.
Please refer to Appendix A for status of these amendments.
Section 2.200 Definition of FARM (T-1-81)
A distinct bounded parcel of land containing ten (10) or more acres which is used for
farming operations.
In effect in: Mt. Washington
Section 2.200 Definition of MOBILE HOME (T-2-81)
A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation as one or more units after
fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and
arriving at the site as one or more units where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and minor assembly
operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundation, connections to
utilities, and the like. Mobile homes are built on a permanent, integral chassis and can be
used with or without a permanent foundation. Removal of the wheels and placement on a
foundation does not exempt a mobile home from all requirements applicable to mobile
homes of these regulations. Likewise, the joining of two or more units to form a single
dwelling does not exempt a mobile home from all requirements applicable to mobile
homes of these regulations. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home.
In effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington, Shepherdsville
Section 7.500 Penalties (T-3-81)
Note: This amendment merely corrected an improper citation of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes. It is in effect throughout the county, and is included in the body of the text.
Section 5.603 (d) (2) Side Yard Setbacks (T-5-81)
Side yard – There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any building or structure
of 10 feet measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure except that
garages or carports and accessory buildings and uses may extend an additional five (5)
feet into one side yard.
In effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington -116-
Section 5.701 Single Family Dwellings with Commercial Use (T-1-82)
Note: Sections 5.701 (a) (82) and 5.701 (g) as found in the main text were not approved,
and therefore are not in effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington.
Section 5.702 Single Family Dwellings with Commercial Use (T-1-82)
Note: Sections 5.702 (a) (9) and 5.702 (h) as found in the main text were not approved,
and therefore are not in effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington.
Section 5.302 Chart for Two Family Dwellings (T-1-82)
Note: Section 5.302 as found in the main text permits two family dwellings in B-1 and
B-2 districts upon approved site plan review. This amendment was not approved, and
therefore is not in effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington.
Section 8.301 Acreage Requirements for Cities (T-2-82)
Note: The last two sentences of Section 8.301 (c) were added by amendment and
approved by all the cities, although denied by Fiscal Court. Since Fiscal Court’s denial
had no effect on the enforcement of the new regulation (since it deals entirely with city
regulations), the amendment has been included in the main text.
Sections 5.501 and 5.502 Changing the word “subdivision” to “division” (T-4-83)
Note: Sections 5.501 (c) and 5.502 (a) of the main text refer to the “division of land” and
the “division of property” respectively. This amendment was not approved by all
jurisdictions. The previous phrases “subdivision of land” and “subdivision of property”
are still in effect in: Hillview, Lebanon Junction, Shepherdsville.
Section 5.603 Adding Row House Development (T-5-83)
Note: Section 5.603 (f) was added by amendment. This amendment was not approved,
and is not in effect in: Hillview.
-117-
Section 8.301 (c) Acreage Requirements in Agricultural to R-1 (T-2-84)
The zoning regulations or map shall not be amended, changed, or modified in such
manner as to create a freestanding zone of less than five (5) acres, except for B-1
Highway Commercial which may be as small as three (3) acres and except for
amendments from A Agricultural to R-1 Residential which may be as small as one (1)
acre where the Planning Commission finds that such an amendment is harmonious with
the surrounding land use and, thus in agreement with the community’s comprehensive
plan.
This acreage requirement for rezoning shall not apply within the municipal boundary of
any incorporated city within Bullitt County. The City Council of each respective City
shall have the authority to rezone property containing less than the above stated acreage
within their boundary.
In effect in: Mt. Washington.
Section 6.201 (89T-05) Conditional Use Procedure
Section 6.201 is amended to remove the requirement of the Planning Commission to
review applications for Conditional Use Permits. See Section 6.201 for complete text
amendment.
In effect in: unincorporated areas of Bullitt County as well as the cities of
Shepherdsville, Mt. Washington, Hillview, Hunters Hollow, and Hebron Estates.
-118-
Text Amendment 91T-01
Section 1.100
These regulations shall be known and referred to as the ‘Official Zoning
Regulations of Bullitt County’ and all cities within its boundaries and may be
cited as the County / City Zoning Regulations. Reference to County, or Bullitt
County, shall signify the county including all municipal corporations within its
boundaries, unless otherwise stated.
Each Section of the City / County Zoning Regulations which sets forth the
original four political divisions is amended to include all municipal corporations
************************************************************************
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the cities of Shepherdsville,
Hillview, Lebanon Junction, Mt. Washington, Pioneer Village, Hunters Hollow, Fox
Chase, and Hebron Estates.
-119-
Text Amendment 91T-02
Section 4.307
Steps, terraces, decks, carports, bay windows, fire escapes, balconies, open
porches, and other unenclosed architectural features, may extend into required
yard areas not more than nine (9) feet, provided that no such projection shall be
less than five (5) feet from a side lot line. Enclosing of such projections into yard
areas is prohibited, except within the City Limits of the City of Hillview, which
shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 5.602 (d).
Section 5.602
d. the following setback and yard requirements shall be observed:
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of
any building or structure of fifteen (15) feet measured from the
side lot line to the nearest building or structure, except that garages
and accessory buildings may extend an additional ten (10) feet into
one side yard. This requirement the location of garages or carports
within the City Limits of the City of Hillview. This side yard
requirement within the City of Hillview on an addition which does
not extend into the side yard any further than the existing house
shall not require a variance; nor shall a garage or a carport which is
at least 18” from the side property line require a variance.
************************************************************************
This text amendment is in effect in the Cities of Hillview and Hunters Hollow.
-120-
Text Amendment 91T-03
Amendment to Section 7.303
Section 7.303 Dimensional Variance
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for dimensional
variances where, by reasons of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or unusual shape
of a site on the effective date of there zoning regulations or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or some other extraordinary situation or condition of that site, the
literal enforcement of the dimensional requirements (height or width of building or size
of yards, but no populations density) of the zoning regulation would deprive the applicant
of reasonable capacity to make use of the land in a manner equivalent to the use
permitted other landowners in the same zone. The Board may impose any reasonable
conditions or restrictions on any variance it decides to grant. The following shall govern
the granting of a variance:
a. Applications for building line variances, for buildings which have been
constructed, or on which construction has been commenced before the
variance is applied for shall be accompanied by an additional minimum fee of
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and Ten Dollars ($10.00) per inch of any
variance requested for more than Ten (10 inches). This fee is non-refundable
unless the variance request is withdrawn. Any variance requested for an
existing building which was completed prior to the adoption of this regulation
shall be exempt from this fee requirement.
b. Before any variance is granted, the Board must find all of the following,
which shall be recorded along with any imposed conditions or restrictions in
its minutes and records and issued in written form to the applicant to
constitute proof of the dimensional variance.
1. The specific conditions in detail which are unique to the applicant’s
land and do not exist on other land in the same zone.
2. The manner in which the strict application of the provisions of the
regulation would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land
in the manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the
same zone.
3. That the unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of
actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of these
zoning regulations.
121
Text Amendment 91T-03 con’t.
4. Reasons that the variance will preserve, not harm the public safety and
welfare, and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
c. The Board shall not possess the power to grant a variance to permit a use of
any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by the zoning
regulations in the zone in questions, or to alter density requirements in the
zone in question.
************************************************************************
This amendment is in effect in the unincorporated areas of Bullitt County and the cities of
Lebanon Junction, Fox Chase, Mt. Washington and Shepherdsville and Hillview, and
Hunters Hollow. No response from Hebron Estates, and/or Pioneer Village.
122
TEXT AMENDMENT 94T-01
SECTION 9.400 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES & EXPENSES
LATE FEE & PENALTY FEE:
In addition to the regular building permit and or compliance fee established
herein, there shall be a LATE FEE, assessed by the Administrative Official, for obtaining
a building permit and or compliance after construction has commenced of One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) minimum plus an additional Penalty Fee of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) per day for each day, after the first day construction has commenced, on which
addition construction activity occurs without a building permit and or compliance being
issued with the total sum of these Late Fees and Penalty Fees not to exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1000.00).
SECTION 2.200 WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED
The following section shall be added to this section:
Construction: The delivery, to the site, of materials which are to be incorporated
into subsequent improvements which are located on the site. This may include but is not
limited to; concrete, lumber, brick, steel, block/brick or other similar material.
************************************************************************
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the cities of Mt.
Washington, Shepherdsville, Hillview, Hunters Hollow, Fox Chase, Pioneer Village and
Hebron Estates.
123
TEXT AMENDMENT 94-T-02
ADDITION OF SECTION 6.205
SECTION 6.05 CONDITIONAL USE – OFF STREET PARKING
An off-street parking area may be allowed in a properly zoned area provided it
serves a demonstrable purpose benefiting the public welfare and when developed in
compliance with all the following listed requirements:
a. Walls, fences, or plantings shall be provided in a manner to provide
protection for and be in harmony with surrounding residential property.
b. The minimum front, street side, and side yards required in the zoning
district shall be maintained free of parking.
c. All driveways and the area used for the parking of vehicles shall be
surfaced with a hard and durable material and be properly drained.
d. All non-residential off-street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner
as to minimize interference with traffic movement and shall be so
designed and located that vehicles shall not back from or into a public
street. Non-residential off-street parking facilities designed for vehicles
backing from or into an alley may be allowed at the discretion of the
Board of Adjustment.
e. The parking areas and spaces required by these regulations shall not be
used for the display, advertisement, sale, repair, dismantling or wrecking
of any vehicles, equipment or materials.
f. Building or structures shall be permitted for shelters for guards, attendants
or watchmen.
g. All off-street parking areas, except for those serving detached single
family uses and agricultural uses, shall be of a hard and durable surface
which limits or precludes particulate air pollution. Examples of such
surfaces are: Asphalt, brick or concrete paving and interlocking paver
blocks including those that retain space for vegetation (“Grasscrete” – type
products) are acceptable paving materials.
124
Text Amendment 94T-02 con’t.
h. The approval of all plans and specifications for all entrances, exits, and
lights shall be obtained from the appropriate government which is
responsible for traffic engineering prior to the public hearing on the
conditional use permit.
************************************************************************
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the cities of Mt.
Washington, Lebanon Junction, Shepherdsville, Hillview, Pioneer Village, Fox Chase,
Hebron Estates and Hunters Hollow.
125
TEXT AMENDMENT 2002T-01
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 5.801 AND 5.802
Section 5.801 a-40
Trailer storage, rental sales, assembly and manufacturing plant.
Section 5.802 a-9
Automotive, tractor, motorized farm implement assembly or manufacture
This amendment was approved by the cities of Shepherdsville, Mt. Washington and
Hillview.
-126-
127
Text Amendment 2008T-01
Current
5.801 (f) (6)
The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or of materials that produce flammable
or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted on any lot in accordance with the
following table:
Total Permitted Quantities of Flammable Closed Cup Flashpoint in
Materials in Gallons in Degrees F.
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted 20,000 Below 100 Degrees F.
Class II Class II
1,000 40,000 Above 100 Degrees F. and
Below 140 Degrees F.
Class III Class III
5,000 80,000 Above 140 Degrees F.
Proposed
Total Permitted Quantities of Flammable Closed Cup Flashpoint
Materials in Gallons in Degrees F.
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted in A, B-1 20,000 Below 100 Degrees F.
B-2, IL and IG zones
subject to compliance
with the Kentucky Standards
of Safety administered by the
Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office
Class II Class II
1,000 40,000 Above 100 Degrees F. and
Below 140 Degrees F.
Class III Class III
5,000 80,000 Above 140 Degrees F.
TEXT AMENDMENT 2009T-01
AMENDMENT TO SECTIONS:
5.801 (f) (5), 5.801 (f) (6),
5.802 (f) (6) and 5.802 (f) (7)
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE FISCAL COURT OF BULLITT
COUNTY, KENTUCKY:
SECTION ONE: Sections 5.801 (f) (5), 5.801 (f) (6), 5.802 (f) (6) and 5.802 (f) (7) shall
be deleted in their entirety.
SECTION TWO: There shall be created a new section as follows:
SECTION 5.404. USE, STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR
MATERIALS.
(a) All activities involving the use, storage and/ or disposal of flammable
liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases
shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against
hazards of fire and explosion in accordance with the Kentucky Standards
of Safety administered by the Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office and with
any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. In addition,
adequate fire fighting and suppression equipment and devices in
accordance with applicable standards and regulations shall be provided.
(b) All above ground storage shall be in enclosed, fireproof vaults if so
required by and in accordance with the Kentucky Standards of Safety
administered by the Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office and with any other
applicable stated of local laws and regulations.
(c) The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable radioactive and/or
explosive materials and products which decompose by detonation is
prohibited in all zones except General Industrial, “IG”.
(d) The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted on a
single lot in each zone only in quantities as set forth in the following table:
128
Total Permitted Quantites
Of Flammable Materials in Gallons
Class I Class II Class III
Zones
Above
Ground
Below
Ground
Above
Ground
Below
Ground
Above
Ground
Below
Ground
A 500 20,000 1,000 6,000 2,000 10,000
C <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
SR <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-1 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-2 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-3 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-4 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
B-1 1,500 20,000 1,000 40,000 3,000 40,000
B-2 1,000 20,000 1,000 40,000 3,000 40,000
IL 3,000 20,000 5,000 40,000 5,000 80,000
IG 3,000 20,000 5,000 40,000 5,000 80,000
PR <50 <50 1,000 2,000 2,000 5,000
PB <50 <50 1,000 2,000 2,000 5,000
EP 1,000 20,000 5,000 40,000 5,000 80,000
Closed Cup Flashpoint in Degrees F
Below 100 Degrees F Above 100 Degrees F
&Below 140 Degrees F
Above 140 Degrees F
All Zones Subject to Compliance With the Kentucky Standards of Safety
Administered By the Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office.
SECTION THREE: This Ordinance shall take effect upon publication.
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the City of Shepherdsville.
This text amendment does not apply in any other cities in Bullitt County.
129
Text Amendment 2011T-02
The following definition of a “Structure” was added to Section 2.200 of the Official
Zoning Regulations of Bullitt County and All Cities within Its Boundaries. This
definition was taken from: KRS 100.111 (21).
“Structure” means anything constructed or made, the use of which requires a
permanent location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location in or on the ground, including buildings and signs
Bullitt Fiscal Court Approved
City of Hillview Approved
City of Lebanon Junction Approved
City of Pioneer Village Approved
City of Shepherdsville Approved
City of Mt. Washington Approved
City of Hebron Estates Approved
City of Fox Chase Approved

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
BULLITT COUNTY
KENTUCKY
MOUNT WASHINGTON, LEBANON JUNCTION,
SHEPHERDSVILLE AND HILLVIEW
BULLITT COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Authority and Jurisdiction for
Subdivision Regulations---------------------------------------------- 1
ARTICLE I
TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION,
AND SEVERABILITY
Section 100 Title ----------------------------------------------------------- 2
Section 101 Purposes ------------------------------------------------------ 2
Section 102 Interpretation ------------------------------------------------- 2
Section 103 Severability --------------------------------------------------- 2
Section 104 Subdivision Control ----------------------------------------- 3
ARTICLE II
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section 200 General ------------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 201 Exclusions --------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 202 Subdivision -------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 203 Streets -------------------------------------------------------- 5
Section 204 Other Terms ------------------------------------------------- 5
ARTICLE III
PROCEDURE
Section 300 Introduction ------------------------------------------------- 7
Section 301 Distribution of
Proposed Final Plat ------------------------------- 7
Section 302 Approval of Final Plat ------------------------------------- 7
Section 303 Offer of Dedication May Be
Noted in Record Plan -------------------------------------- 9
ARTICLE IV
DESIGN STANDARDS
Page
Section 400 Location and Arrangement of Street -------------------- 10
Section 401 Street Intersections ---------------------------------------- 10
Section 402 Street Widths and Building Setback Lines ------------- 11,12
Section 403 Street Names ----------------------------------------------- 13
Section 404 Alleys -------------------------------------------------------- 13
Section 405 Blocks ------------------------------------------------------- 13
Section 406 Lots ---------------------------------------------------------- 13
Section 407 Storm Drainage -------------------------------------------- 14
Section 408 Land Subject to Flooding --------------------------------- 14
Section 409 Requirements for Utilities -------------------------------- 14
ARTICLE V
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 500 Purpose ------------------------------------------------------ 15
Section 501 Responsibility for Subdivision Plans -------------------- 15
Section 502 Monuments and Pins --------------------------------------- 15
Section 503 Street Requirements ---------------------------------------- 15
Section 504 Storm and Surface Drainage ------------------------------ 16
Section 505 Water --------------------------------------------------------- 16
Section 506 Street Signs -------------------------------------------------- 16
ARTICLE VI
PLATS AND DATA
Section 600 General Subdivision Information ------------------------ 17
Section 601 Final Plat ---------------------------------------------------- 17
Section 602 A Certificate by the Engineer ---------------------------- 19
ARTICLE VII
FEES, VARIANCES AND PENALTIES
Section 700 Hardship ----------------------------------------------------- 20
Section 701 Conditions --------------------------------------------------- 20
Section 702 Enforcement and Penalties for Violations -------------- 20
Section 703 Conflict with Other Laws --------------------------------- 21
Section 704 General Repealer ------------------------------------------- 21
Appendix A Certificate of Accuracy ------------------------------------ 22
Appendix B Final Subdivision Plat Check List ------------------------ 23
Appendix C Adoption, Amendment, and Effective Date ------------- 24
Amendments to Subdivision Regulations --------------------------------- 25
Authority and Jurisdiction For
Subdivision Regulations
These subdivision regulations were adopted under the authority granted by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes, Chapter 100, Section 100.273 through 100.307. The Bullitt
County Planning Commission which was established in accordance with the Kentucky
Revised Statutes, Chapter 100, Section 100.133 through 100.181 has fulfilled the
requirements set forth in the applicable section of the Kentucky Revised Statutes as
necessary for the adoption of such regulations.
These regulations provide a procedure and minimum standards of design
construction by which the Bullitt County Planning Commission can equitably appraise all
future proposed plats, for land subdivision plat preparation, review, and approval
requirements.
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the boundaries of
Bullitt County, Kentucky, hereafter established; provided that if a developer has recorded
a subdivision plat prior to March 11, 1983, which is a part of a parcel of land owned by
that developer, he shall be permitted to develop remainder of said parcel as a subdivision
without complying with these subdivision regulations.
Any owner of land within Bullitt County who hereafter wishes to subdivide such
land or a portion there of shall submit a plat of the proposed subdivision to the Bullitt
County Planning Commission according to the requirements set forth in these
regulations.
1
ARTICLE I
TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION, AND SEVERABILITY
Section 100 TITLE
These Regulations shall be known, cited and referred to as the Bullitt County
Subdivision Regulations.
Section 101 PURPOSES
The Regulations is enacted in order to promote the orderly development of Bullitt
County and all cities therein: to improve the present health, safety, convenience
and welfare of its citizens and to plan for the future development of the area to the
end, that highway systems be carefully planned, that new community centers
grow only with adequate highway, utility, health, educational, and recreational
facilities: that the needs of agriculture, industry and business be recognized in
future growth: that residential areas provide healthy surroundings for family life:
and that the growth of the community is commensurate with and promotive of the
efficient and economical use of public funds.
Section 102 INTERPRETATION
The provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements to
meet the above stated purposes. Where the provisions of these Regulations
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or
regulations, the provisions of these Regulations shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of these Regulations, the provisions of such statute, ordinance, or
regulation shall prevail.
Section 103 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of these Regulations shall be severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held to unconstitutional, illegal, or
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not
affect the validity of any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, parts or
provisions of these Regulations.
2
Section 104 SUBDIVISION CONTROL
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected, no street,
sanitary sewer, storm, water main, or other facilities in connection therewith shall
be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon except in strict
accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
3
ARTICLE II
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section 200 GENERAL
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall
have for the purpose of these Regulations the meanings given in the following
clauses.
Section 201 EXCLUSIONS
1. For the purposes of these Regulations, words and terms used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
(a). Words used in the present tense include the future.
(b). The singular includes the plural.
(c). The plural includes the singular.
(d). The word “person” includes a corporation, unincorporated
association, or a partnership as well as the individual.
(e). The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel”.
(f). The term “shall” is always mandatory.
(g). The word “building” includes the word “structure,” and shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase “or part thereof.”
(h). The word “Commission” and the words “Planning Commission”
always means the Bullitt County Planning Commission.
(i). The word “street” means a public way for vehicular traffic,
whether designated as a court, boulevard, avenue, cul-de-sac,
expressway, highway, lane, and road, or however otherwise
designated.
(j). The word “city” always means any of the cities operating under the
Regulations including all the land area of Bullitt County.
(k). The word “watercourse” includes channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry
run, spring and stream.
Section 202 SUBDIVISION
“Subdivision” means the division of a parcel of land into three (3) or more lots or
parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sales, lease or building
development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land;
provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new street
shall not be deemed a subdivision.
The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate
to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision
of land into parcels of less than one acre occurring within twelve (12) months
4
following a division of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision within the
meaning of this section.
Section 203 STREETS
1. A right of way dedicated to public use, which affords the principal means of
vehicular access to abutting property. A street may be designated as a
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, street, road, avenue, land, drive,
place, or other appropriate name.
2. Street Types
a. Arterial- Highways that are designated or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic which connect two
major arteries.
b. Collector- Streets planned to facilitate the collection of traffic from
minor streets, and to provide circulation between neighborhood areas
providing convenient access to arterial highways.
c. Minor- Local streets designed primarily to provide access to abutting
properties and to carry limited volumes of traffic.
d. Marginal Access- Minor streets, parallel and adjacent to arterial
highways and serving to reduce the number of access points to the
arterial thereby increasing traffic safety.
Section 204 OTHER TERMS
1. Block: An area bounded by streets.
2. Building Setback Line: The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the minimum required front yard.
3. Lot: A parcel of land fronting on a street and created by the subdivision of
an existing lot or parcel of record.
4. Plat, Final: A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared for official
recording as required by statute, to define property rights, proposed
streets, rights-of-way, easements and physical improvements on and in the
land.
5. Right-of-Way Line: The dividing line between a street or road and a lot.
The right-of-way line is the same as the street line.
5
6. Subdivider: A person who is the owner, or authorized agent of the owner,
of land to be subdivided.
7. Yard, Front: An open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the street line at the nearest point of the building.
8. Zoning Ordinance: The Ordinance adopted by the Bullitt County Planning
Commission.
6
ARTICLE III
PROCEDURE
Section 300 INTRODUCTION
The procedures hereinafter specified provide for a procedure for approval of a
final plat.
Section 301 DISTRIBUTION OF PROPOSED FINAL PLAT
The Planning Commission Administrator shall submit copies to the interested
public agencies and utility companies and invite written comments on the plan
and any specific factors regarding the plan from the agency, company, or affected
municipality.
Agencies to receive copies:
1. Gas and Electric Companies
2. Health Department
3. Kentucky Department of Transportation
4. Telephone Company
5. Water Company
6. Municipalities, if located in city limits
Section 302 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
A plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall
not be recorded by the County Clerk unless and until it has first been approved by
the Planning Commission. The filing and recording of a plat involving the
subdivision of lands covered by these regulations shall be without legal effect
unless approved by the Commission: Provided, however, that failure to comply
with this Section shall not invalidate or affect the title to any land within the area
of such plat: And provided further, that if such plat shall bear the seal of the
Commission it shall be presumed to have been approved thereby.
A fee of $10.00 per lot with a maximum fee of $500.00 a minimum fee of $50.00
will be paid prior to the approval of the proposed final plat. The planning
Commission Administrator will review the material submitted for conformity to
these regulations and negotiations with subdivider on changes deemed advisable
and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him. The Planning
Commission Adminstrator may approve the proposed final plat conditionally and
require amendments to the plat before granting full approval. If the subdivider
does not submit an acceptable amended plat within ninety (90) days on
submission of the original plat, the plat shall be deemed to be disapproved by the
Commission.
7
1. The action of the Commission including any conditions determined shall be
noted on two (2) copies of the proposed final plat. One (1) copy of the action,
and the plat shall be returned to the Subdivider, and the other retained by the
Planning Commission.
2. The Commission will require the proposed plans be reviewed and certified by
a registered engineer or land surveyor.
3. Improvements or Guarantee thereof. Before approving any final plat for
recording, the Planning Commission shall either require that all facilities
specified in Article IV and V hereof shall have been installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Commission, or that
the Commission be assured by means of a proper contract and completion
guarantee, as set forth in this section, that the improvements will subsequently
be installed by the Subdivider.
4. Agreement to Complete Improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall not have
been installed prior to final approval in strict accordance with the standards
and specifications of the Commission, the Applicant shall enter into a written
agreement with the Commission in the manner and form approved by the
Commission, wherein Applicant shall agree, to the extent applicable:
a. To construct, or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all streets,
bridges, culverts, crosswalks, water systems, drainage facilities, street
signs, monuments, and other improvements shown on said subdivision
plan, all in strict accordance with standards and appropriate public
authority and within the time specified in said Agreement.
b. To make provision for qualified county official to inspect aforesaid
improvements to assure strict compliance with the City and County
standards and specifications.
c. The Subdivider shall provide a deed or subdivision covenant for the
maintenance of above mentioned improvements through a “maintenance
association” of owners in the subdivision or other guarantee until such
time as the City or County or other appropriate public authority shall
assume maintenance responsibility.
5. Conditional Approval of Final Plats. The Commission may approve a plat for
a subdivision in which the improvements and installations have not been
completed by the Applicant as required by these regulations provided that the
Subdivider enters into the Agreement described heretofore and provides a
property bond or agreement as specified in Section 302, Paragraph 4 which
shall:
8
a. Run to the city in which the subdivision is located or to the county if
located outside the corporate limits of a city.
b. Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to
complete the improvements and installations in compliance with these
Regulations; to reimburse the city or county for reasonable legal,
engineering and inspection fees, and to obtain the easements required by
Section 405 thereof.
c. Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission.
d. Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and installations.
Any funds received from these bonds shall be used by the City or County only for
completion of the improvements and installations for which they were provided,
and without prior appropriation.
DEDICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Section 303 OFFER OF DEDICATION MAY BE NOTED IN RECORD
PLAN
Streets and other public improvements shown on a subdivision plan to be
recorded may be offered for dedication to the City or an appropriate governmental
agency by notation thereof of the plan, or the Subdivider may note on the plan, or
the Subdivider may note on the plan if such improvements have not been offered
for dedication to the City or an appropriate governmental agency.
9
ARTICLE IV
DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 400 LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF STREETS
1. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the street design standards in Section 402 as adopted or
amended, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in
their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
2. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
3. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac), designed to be so permanently, shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of at least seventy (70) feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at
least one hundred (100) feet so the Planning Commission may approved an
alternate design such as a “T” or “Y” backround. Such streets shall be not be
longer that 1000 feet measured from its intersecting R.O.W. line to the outer
edge of the turnaround except where topographical or other conditions make
this limitation impractical. A suitable turnaround may be required by the
Planning Commission when a street is temporarily dead-ended over 150 feet
from its nearest intersection.
Section 401 STREET INTERSECTIONS
1. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet
shall be avoided when practicable.
2. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles wherever possible and in no
case shall they intersect with any other street at less than 75°.
3. Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
twenty-five (25) feet, or of a greater radius where the Planning Commission
may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
4. No cross intersections of centerlines of other than minor, marginal access, or
cul-de-sac streets shall be closer than 800 feet apart, unless the Commission
deems otherwise.
5. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be
avoided.
10
6. Grades at intersections shall be in conformance with Section 402, following.
7. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of streets. Measured
from the intersecting street lines, these shall be a clear sight triangle from the
point of intersection indicted on the plan and maintained free and clear of
shrubs, structures, signs and other visual obstructions.
8. The intersection should be designed and graded to allow for proper drainage.
Section 402 STREET WIDTHS AND BUILDING SETBACK LINES
1. Half streets or one-way streets shall be prohibited, except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the
other requirements of these Regulations. If circumstances render this
impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the
remaining half of the street shall be furnished by the Subdvider. Wherever
a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the
street shall be platted within such tract.
2 Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate
right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width of the new section shall
be dedicated to conform to the standards established in Section 402.
3. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography and shall be designed to produce usable lots and reasonable
grades.
4. Grades of streets shall be arranged to obtain as many building sites as
possible at or above the grade of the street(s) abutting the building.
5. A centerline street profile of all proposed streets to include proposed
drains and complying with the design standards of Section 402 shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission Administrator.
11
Section 402 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
Collector & Marginal
Street Classification Arterial Secondary Minor Access
Cul-de-
Sac
Minimum width of 60 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 100 feet
right-of-way:
Minimum width of 32 feet 20' width 20' width 20' width 70' width
pavement: 2' shoulder 2' shoulder 2' shoulder
2'
shoulder
Minimum radius of 400 feet 100 feet except 100 feet except
horizontal curves: for street inter- for street inter- ------- ------
section corners section corners
Minimum length of 200 feet, but 100 feet, but not 100 feet, but not 80 feet 70 feet
vertical curves as
not less
than less than 25 feet less than 25 feet
measured from center 50 feet for for crest curve for crest curve
line of right-of-way each 1% and 35 feet for and 35 feet for
algebraic sag curve for sag curve for
difference of each 1% algebraic each 1% algebraic
grade difference of difference of
grade grade
Minimum length of 300 feet 100 feet except 100 feet except 50 feet 50 feet
tangents between when excessive when excessive
reverse curves: grades may be grades may be
reduced to reason- reduced to reasonable
grades by able grades by
shortening tangent shortening tangent
Minimum allowable 5% 7% 12% * 12% * 12% *
grade:
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
for drainage:
Minimum site
over 300
feet 300 feet 100 feet 80 feet 80 feet
distance: as specific
case requires
*Grades greater than 12% will be permitted by the Planning Commission if recommended by Design Engineer. 12
Section 403 STREET NAMES
Subdivision streets shall be identified by proposed names. In case of proposed
streets which are clearly aligned with existing streets, these new streets shall bear
the name of the existing street. In no case shall they be duplicated.
Section 404 ALLEYS
1. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the
Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
2. The width of any alley shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. With minimum
pavement of 18 feet.
3. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end.
Section 405 BLOCKS
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
e. Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the
type of use contemplated.
f. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
g. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street
traffic.
h. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
Section 406 LOTS
1. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirement of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Every subdivided lot shall have adequate direct access to a public street.
3. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
4. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
13
5. The size, depth, and width of parcels laid out or reserved for non-residential
use shall be in conformance with all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 407 STORM DRAINAGE
1. Drainage facilities shall be provided:
a. To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses; and
b. To ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line of streets.
2. Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to Kentucky Department
of Transportation standards.
3. Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway and be designed to carry
expected flows.
Section 408 LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING
1. Where land is located in the flood plain, such area shall be clearly marked.
2. Where a sufficient portion of a lot is above the 100 year flood plain to allow
construction of a residential structure above the 100 year flood plain, then a
structure can be built.
Section 409 REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITIES
The subdivider is required to provide water, electric, and telephone utilities, in
and to the proposed subdivision where possible.
14
ARTICLE V
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 500 PURPOSE
1. The purpose of this article is:
a. to establish and define the public improvements which will be
required to be constructed by the subdivider as conditions for final
plat approval; and
b. to establish procedures for assuring compliance to these
requirements.
2. Every Subdivider shall be required to install the public and other
improvements listed in Sections 502 through 506 in accordance with the
public intent and the conditions and specifications noted.
Section 501 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SUBDIVISION PLANS
It shall be the responsibility of the Owner of every proposed subdivision, to have
prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, a set of subdivision
plans consisting of street centerline profiles and proposed drainage.
Section 502 MONUMENTS AND PINS
1. Concrete monuments at least thirty-six (36”) inches in length and four (4”)
inches in diameter or four (4”) inches square shall be set at least at the
point of beginning as shown on the plat.
2. Iron pin or iron pipe monuments not less that one-half inch in diameter
and not less that twenty-four (24”) inches in length shall be set at all lot
corners.
Section 503 STREET REQUIREMENTS
1. Grading: All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded by the
subdivider so that pavements can be constructed to the required
subdivision plans. In the case of electric transmission lines, the clearance
from the pavement to the nearest conductor shall meet the requirements of
the National Electrical Safety Code.
15
Section 503 Cont.
Preparation: Before grading is stated, the entire right-of-way area shall
be first cleared of all roots, brush, objectionable materials, all trees not
intended for preservation and stumps under paved material unless
adequate fill can be obtained. Such objectionable matter, as well as
similar matter from cuts shall be removed from the right-of-way and
disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in any
fills or be an obstacle in the way of drainage. Any fill material shall be
free from trash and unwanted foreign objects and be properly compacted.
2. The Subdivider shall provide for the complete construction of streets.
Where streets are proposed to be dedicated to the County or City, that
government is not required to accept said street until it has been inspected
by a qualified City/County Road Supervisor and approved.
3. Pavement: All streets shall have a concrete or asphalt type pavement
with no loose aggregate. Pavement width shall conform with the
dimension and data related to the street classification as described in
Section 402. The pavement specifications shall be designed to carry the
expected traffic loads and shall meet the following minimum standards—
2” compacted asphalt and 6” base of 6” concrete street. All subdivisions
with lots having less than five (5) acres must be paved with the
aforementioned asphalt or concrete standard; all other streets to have a
minimum of six (6) inch stone base.
Section 504 STORM AND SURFACE DRAINAGE
All drainage facilities shall be installed and the land graded for adequate drainage
as shown on the approved final plan, and Subdivision plan
Section 505 WATER
All water mains and lines shall conform to the appropriate utility system.
Section 506 STREET SIGNS
Street name signs shall be erected at all street intersections in all subdivisions.
16
ARTICLE VI
PLATS AND DATA
Section 600 GENERAL SUBDIVISION INFORMATION
General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing conditions
of the site and the proposed developments as necessary to supplement the
drawings required below. This information may include data on existing
covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and utilities;
and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential
lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas, protective covenants and
proposed utilities and street improvements.
Section 601 FINAL PLAT
1. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or equally durable
material that is twenty-four by thirty-six (24x36) inches and be at a scale
of one hundred (100) feet to the inch. Where necessary, the plat may be
on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections. Primary control points,
approved by the engineer, or descriptions and “ties” to such control points,
to which all dimensions, angles, bearing, and similar data on the plat shall
be referred as set forth in Section 502. The final plat shall show the
following.
a. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements, and
other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other
sites; with dimensions in feet and hundredths of a foot, bearing of
deflection angles, and raddi, arcs, and central angles of all curves.
b. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
c. Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements.
d. Number to identify each lot or site
e. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved.
f. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
17
Section 601 cont.
g. Location and description of monuments as devoted in Section 502.
h. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
i. Reference to previously recorded subdivision plats of the same
subdivision by record name, date, and number.
j. Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy of
survey and plat.
k. Name and address of the owner; certification of title showing that
the applicant is the land owner or his authorized agent.
l. Plat by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way and any sites for
public use.
m. Notation stating title, acreage, number of lots, north point, and
date.
n. Signature blocks for:
1. Certification of engineer, Form A
2. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or Chairman of the
Planning Commission.
3. Statement of available water service.
4. Easement Acceptance, Form B.
o. Vicinity Map. A vicinity map shall be prepared at a scale of twothousand
(2,000) feet to the inch, indicating the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to existing facilities which serve it, such as
roads. Such a sketch may be shown on a U.S.G. S. map of the area
and shall be placed in the upper right hand corner.
p. Final Subdivision Plat check list to be submitted. (Form in
Appendix B)
18
Section 602 A CERTIFICATION BY THE ENGINEER
A certificate by the developers engineer certifying that a Subdivider has complied
with a, b, or c of the following:
a. All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of
these regulations, or
b. An Agreement as drawn by the Planning Commission Attorney has been
executed as stated in Section 302.
c. The Subdivider shall provide a deed or subdivision covenant for the
maintenance of above mentioned improvements through a “Maintenance
Association” of owners in the subdivision.
19
ARTICLE VII
VARIANCES AND PENALTIES
Section 700 HARDSHIP
If it is found by the Planning Commission that strict enforcement of these
regulations would create an undue hardship because of the extraordinary or
unique physical conditions that exist on the property to be subdivided, and which
are not found usually within the area or jurisdiction of these Subdivision
Regulations; any variance shall be to the extent necessary to provide relief for the
undue hardship. Financial disadvantage to the property owner shall not be sole
proof of hardship within the purpose of these regulations.
Section 701 CONDITIONS
In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements so varied or modified.
Section 702 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
ENFORCEMENT
1. No plat or plan of a subdivision of land located within the jurisdiction of
the Planning Commission shall be admitted to the records of county or
received or recorded by the County Clerk until said plat has received final
approval in writing on the final plat by the Planning Commission or the
Administrative Official as provided in the Kentucky Revised Statutes,
Chapter 100.277.
2. If any section, clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of these
Regulations shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section,
clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of these regulations.
PENALTIES
1. Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS 100.201
through 100.347 and 100.991 (2) or any of the regulations adopted
pursuant hereunder for which no other penalty is provided, shall upon
conviction be fined not less than ten (10) but no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each conviction. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offence.
20
Section 703 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
Wherever the regulations made under authority of this article required higher
standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this article shall govern.
Whenever the provisions of nay other statute or local ordinance or regulation
impose other higher standards than are required by the regulations of this
ordinance, the provisions of such statute or local ordinance or regulation shall
govern.
Section 704 GENERAL REPEALER
All acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of this act are, to the
extent of their inconsistence, repealed.
21
APPENDIX A
A. Form “A” (on final subdivision plat)
CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct
survey to the accuracy established by the Kentucky State Board of Registration
For Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors for subdivisions and that the
monuments have been placed as shown hereon to the specifications.
____________ (date) ________, 200___
________________________________
(signature of registered engineer or surveyor)
22
APPENDIX B
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECK LIST
(to be filed with the Planning Commission Minutes)
Name of Subdivision ______________________________________________________
Name of Major Subdivision, Date of Approval of Final –Plan
_______________________________________________________________________
Name of Minor Subdivision, ___________________________________Fee__________
Location ________________________________________________________________
Owner(s)________________________________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________________Tel.__________
Engineer or Surveyor ______________________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________________Tel.__________
Date Submitted ___________________________________________________________
Meeting Date ____________________________________________________________
INFORMATION & DOCUMENTATION CHECK LIST
______ Construction of Improvements Completed or Security Posted
______ Fee Paid
______ Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
______ Certificate of Accuracy
______ Statement of Available Water Services
______ Original Plat and Six Copies Submitted
______ Approved Drawing Size of 24”x36”
______ Maps at Scale of 1” = 100’ or Larger
______ Name of Subdivision on Plat
______ Name and Address of Owner(s) on Plat
______ Name and Seal of Engineer or Surveyor on Plat
______ Acreage of Tract for Subdivision
______ Date
______ Graphic Scale
______ North Point
______ Boundary Lines and Dimensions
______ Lot Lines and Dimensions
______ Setback Lines
______ Bearing and Radii of Curves
______ Name of Streets
______ Lot Numbers and House Numbers if Available
______ Names of Adjoining Property Owner (s)
______ Protective Covenants
______ Identification of Monuments
______ Street Right-of-Ways and Dimensions
Approval Given_________________________________________________________________
Refused, and Grounds for Refusal___________________________________________________
Any Requested Variances Granted Subject to Approval by Zoning Board of Adjustments_______
Zoning Board of Adjustments Approval Received ______________________________________
Date of Action of Planning Commission______________________________________________
Planning Commission Administrator or Chairman of Planning Commission__________________
23
APPENDIX C
ADOPTION, AMENDMENT, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
1. Before adoption of these Subdivision Regulations or any amendments thereto, a
public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission. A public notice of the
time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city and county in accordance with the Kentucky Revised
Statutes.
2. The Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the legislative bodies of
Bullitt County and of the cities of Lebanon Junction, Mount Washington,
Shepherdsville and Hillview.
3. These Subdivision Regulations shall take effect and be in force immediately upon
their adoption by the legislative bodies and publication of a notice of such
adoption.
4. Approved copies of these regulations will be available for a fee of $15.00.
ADOPTED BY:
Bullitt County Mount Washington_____________
Mayor
________________, 200___ ________________, 200_________
_______________________ _____________________________
County Judge Attest: City Clerk
_______________________ Shepherdsville _________________
Attest: County Clerk Mayor
Lebanon Junction _________________, 200_________
_______________, 200____ ______________________________
Attest: City Clerk
_______________________ Hillview ______________________
Mayor Mayor
__________________, 200________
_______________________ ______________________________
Attest: City Clerk Attest: City Clerk
24
AMENDMENTS TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
OF BULLITT COUNTY, KENTUCKY
Authority and Jurisdiction for Subdivision Regulations (Page 1)
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the boundaries of Bullitt
County, Kentucky, hereafter established; provided that the developer has recorded a
subdivision plat of lots in the Bullitt County Clerk’s Office prior to March 11, 1983, he,
his assigns and successors, shall be permitted to develop the remainder of said parcel as
subdivision regulations. The recording of a subdivision plat of lots, on or before March
11, 1983, for one or more sections of a development purchased prior to March 11, 1983,
will remove any remaining unrecorded section(s) of that development from under the
purview of these regulations.
Section 302
3. Improvements or Guarantee Thereof. Before approving any final plat for
recording, the Planning Commission shall either require that all facilities
specified in Article IV and V hereof shall have been installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Commission, or that
the Commission be assured by means of a proper contract and completion
guarantee, as set forth in the section, that the improvements will be installed
by the Subdivider no later than three (3) years after approval of the final plat.
25

 
 
 
 
 
 




 


