CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF ARCADIA, LOUISIANA 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE TOWN 
____________ 
Adopted, May 11, 1982 
Effective, June 3, 1982 
____________ 
Originally Published by Order of the 
Mayor and Board of Aldermen in 1982 
____________ 
Reprinted in 1991 
Republished in 2006 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF ARCADIA, LOUISIANA 
AT THE TIME OF THE 1982 CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ray Dean Smith 
Mayor 
____________ 
Charles D. Butler, Jr. 
B. Harold Durrett 
Walter Hays 
Jessie Kelly 
Albert Rhodes 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Kay Watson 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
C. Glenn Fallin 
Town Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
ARCADIA, LOUISIANA 
AT THE TIME OF THE 2006 REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Eugene Smith 
Mayor 
____________ 
Frank Hill 
Maggie Roberson 
Billy Roy Cook 
Edward Mason, Jr. 
Gary Carlisle 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Lisa Fincher 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Jonathan Stewart 
Town Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code is a republication of the 1982 Code of Ordinances. Ordinances through Ordinance No. 2045, adopted December 22, 2004, were considered for inclusion in this republication. 
The page numbering system used in this republication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation that represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CODE 	CD1:1   
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CCT:1   
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1   
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1   
 
This republication was prepared under the supervision of A. Lawton Langford, Corporate President, and Linda Davis, Editor, with the able assistance of the MCC staff. The preface as it appears in the 1982 Code of Ordinances is reprinted herein as follows: 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the sixth section of Chapter 9 is 9-6. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-2 and 3-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-2.1, 3-2.2 and 3-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof, as provided in section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgements 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Bill Carroll, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Glenn Fallin, Town Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
May 1982 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1147 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
WHEREAS, Arcadia, Louisiana, is empowered to adopt a codification of its ordinances by Louisiana Revised Statutes, Sections 33:1361 through 33:1363 and a revision by 33:1364 through 33:1367. 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen are desirous of exercising said power; and 
WHEREAS, such a code and revision as required by Article 6, Section 10, of the Louisiana Constitution of 1974, prepared by the Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, under the supervision of Mr. Glenn Fallin, Town Attorney, has been presented to, examined and considered by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen and approved by them; now therefore 
Be It Ordained by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, and it is Hereby Ordained by the Same: 
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 21, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the town adopted on or before October 1, 1981, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after June 3, 1982, and all ordinances not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after June 3, 1982, except as hereinafter provided. Any resolution of the town not specifically mentioned is hereby repealed. Any ordinances adopted after October 1, 1981, which amend or refer to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
Section 3. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any provisions of such Code shall be punished as provided in Section 1-11 of such Code. 
Section 4. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Aldermen to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in section 1-11 of such Code, shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 6. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the town clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the town clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the town clerk, or someone authorized by said officer, to insert in their designated places all amendments and all ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 7. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Arcadia to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-11 of the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana." 
Section 8. That all ordinances, or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
Section 9. That this ordinance shall become effective on June 3, 1982. 
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN on May 11, 1982. 
/s/  	Ray Dean Smith 	/s/  	B. Harold Durrett 
	Mayor 		Alderman 
			
/s/  	Kay Watson 	/s/  	Walter Hays 
	Clerk 		Alderman 
			
/s/  	Charles T. Butler, Jr. 	/s/  	Jessie Kelly 
	Alderman 		Alderman 
			
		/s/  	Albert Rhodes 
			Alderman 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Arcadia, Louisiana." 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, R.S. 33:1361.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of aldermen: 
Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Arcadia, Louisiana as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of time allowed or prescribed by law or by order of court, the date of the act, event or default after which the period begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included, unless it is a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a legal holiday. A half-holiday is considered as a legal holiday. A legal holiday is to be included in the computation of a period of time allowed or prescribed, except when: 
(1)  It is expressly excluded; 
(2)  It would otherwise be the last day of the period; or 
(3)  The period is less than seven (7) days. 
Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, commissions. Whenever reference is made to officers, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, such references shall be read as though followed by the words "of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Parish. The words "the parish" or "this parish" shall mean the Parish of Bienville, Louisiana. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to a number of persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
R.S. The abbreviation "R.S." shall mean the latest edition of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, as amended. 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Louisiana. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the town. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Town. The words "the town" or "this town" shall be construed as if the words "of Arcadia, Louisiana," followed them. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Interpretation of revised statutes, R.S. 1:1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, chapter, article or division or as any part of the section, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such section, chapter, article or division, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes and references. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.  
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(2)  The administrative ordinances of the town, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the town; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the board of aldermen of the town to any person, firm or corporation; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the town; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing property to the town; 
(11)  Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property of the town; 
(12)  Any ordinance prescribing parking limitations or parking prohibitions affecting only specific streets not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Any ordinance regulating speed limits, stop intersections, one-way streets or any other traffic regulation affecting only specific streets and not inconsistent with this Code; 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; amendatory language. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, is hereby amended to read as follows:…" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: …" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of aldermen. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board of aldermen during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Arcadia to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11.  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, unenforceability or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and board of aldermen without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code or commit any act declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, within the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1183, § 1, 2-12-91) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties for ordinance violations, R.S. 33:362(A)(2)(b).  
Sec. 1-12. - Court costs, mayor's court. 
Court costs to be charged for mayor's court shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, in addition to all other costs mandated by law. 
(Ord. No. 1182, 2-12-91) 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted in Ord. No. 1182, adopted Feb. 12, 1991, pertaining to court costs for mayor's court, did not specify manner of codification, but have been designated by the editor as § 1-12. 
State Law reference— Court costs, R.S. 33:441.  
Sec. 1-13. - Court magistrate. 
(a)  There is hereby created the post of court magistrate for the Town of Arcadia. Said court magistrate shall be an attorney appointed by the town council upon request of the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  The court magistrate may from time to time be designated by the mayor to serve in his/her stead as the presiding official over the mayor's court, and, whenever so designated, shall exercise the powers and authority of the mayor over said court. 
(c)  The court magistrate's salary is hereby fixed at ninety dollars ($90.00) per hour to be paid monthly for time served pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2019, §§ I—III, 1-26-99)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative ordinances saved from repeal, § 1-5(2); electrical inspector, § 6-37 et seq.; gas inspector, § 6-96 et seq.; offenses against public administration, § 9-36 et seq.; planning, Ch. 15; planning commission, § 15-16 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 20; board of zoning adjustment, § 21-189 et seq. 
State Law reference— Mayor-board of aldermen form of government, R.S. 33:321 et seq.; intergovernmental functions, R.S. 33:1321 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Municipal elections, when held; term of officers. 
The municipal elections for the Town of Arcadia shall be held at the same time as the congressional elections beginning in 1990 in accordance with Revised Statute 18:402 and Act 781 of 1985. The municipal officers shall take office on the first day of January following their election and every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1165, 3-5-86) 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as Ord. No. 1165, adopted Mar. 5, 1986, pertaining to municipal elections, did not specify manner of codification, the first paragraph thereof has been designated by the editor as § 2-1.  
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the Town of Arcadia, Bienville Parish, Louisiana, shall commence on the first day of January of the calendar year and shall end on the thirty-first day of December of the same calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1199, § I, 4-11-95)  
Sec. 2-3. - Town-owned vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles owned by the Town of Arcadia, shall be used in the performance of town business only. Any personal use is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  In the event that any vehicle owned by the Town of Arcadia is taken outside of the boundaries of Bienville Parish, Louisiana, there shall be prepared a report indicating to each said trip outside of said corporate limits: 
(1)  The time and date of the trip; 
(2)  Its purpose(s); and 
(3)  Odometer readings of the vehicle before and after the trip. 
(c)  The report required by this section shall be prepared by the supervisor of the department to which said vehicle is assigned and shall be filed within seven (7) days of the relevant trip with the Mayor of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 2011, §§ I, II, 6-24-97)  
Secs. 2-4—2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers generally of mayor and board of aldermen, R.S. 33:361. 
 
Sec. 2-16. - Meetings. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall meet in regular session on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m., at the City Hall of the town, or at any other designated place. 
(Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Meetings of board of aldermen generally, R.S. 33:405; meetings of governing bodies to be open to public, R.S. 42:5.  
Secs. 2-17—2-27. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL 
 
Sec. 2-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2-28 which pertained to advertising of vacancies and employment applications and was derived from a resolution enacted Dec. 11, 1975, was deleted during the 2006 republication at the direction of the city.  
Sec. 2-29. - Dismissal from employment. 
(a)  Any employee whose immediate superior is the mayor may only be dismissed for good cause by action of the mayor. 
(b)  Any employee whose immediate superior is an individual other than the mayor may only be dismissed by his immediate superior for good cause. 
(c)  An employee dismissed under this section may, however, petition the mayor and board of aldermen within ten (10) days of the date of his dismissal for a hearing to contest the employee's dismissal. 
(Res. of 12-11-75)  
Secs. 2-30—2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances fixing salaries of officers and employees saved from repeal, § 1-5(3). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-41—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Policy and scope. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the town to extend the provisions of R.S. 33:7151 et seq., providing retirement to eligible officers and employees of the town. In pursuance of such policy, and for such purpose, the officers and employees of the town shall take such action as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations. The coverage of eligible officers and employees shall be retroactive to June 30, 1956. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-6-56)  
Sec. 2-52. - Execution of agreement. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the board of trustees of the municipal employees retirement system to secure coverage of eligible officers and employees as provided in section 2-51. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 2, 12-6-56)  
Sec. 2-53. - Withholdings authorized. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of officers and employees for the purposes provided in section 2-51 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by the board of trustees in accordance with R.S. 33:7151 et seq., and shall be paid over to the board of trustees in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations of such agency. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 3, 12-6-56)  
Sec. 2-54. - Employer contributions. 
Employer contributions and assessments under this division for administrative expenses shall be paid from amounts appropriated for such purposes to the board of trustees in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 4, 12-6-56)  
Sec. 2-55. - Records and reports required. 
The town clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations of the board of trustees under this division. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 5, 12-6-56)  
Sec. 2-56. - Supplemental retirement plan in lieu of social security. 
(a)  The town employees must join the retirement plan of the municipal employees retirement system. 
(b)  The town hereby agrees to match its employees' payments to the supplemental retirement plan of the municipal employees retirement system. 
(Res. of 2-11-75) 
State Law reference— Old-age, survivors, disability, and health insurance, R.S. 42:1001 et seq.  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2133 , adopted June 14, 2016, amended ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 3, §§ 3-1, 3-2, 3-16, 3-17, 3-26—3-38, 3-46, and 3-47, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1087, §§ 1—15, adopted May 14, 1974; Ord. No. 1088, § 1, adopted June 4, 1974; Ord. No. 1101, §§ I, II, adopted July 13, 1976; Ord. No. 1129, §§ I, II, 3, adopted July 10, 1979; Ord. No. 1191, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1994; Ord. No. 1193, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1994; Ord. No. 1194, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1994; Ord. No. 1195, adopted Apr. 26, 1994; and Ord. No. 2054 , adopted Apr. 12, 2005. 
Cross reference— Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited on premises licensed for amusement tables and devices, § 4-17; intoxication used as a defense against criminal charges, § 9-11; operating of vehicle while intoxicated, § 19-2. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, R.S. tit. 26; local licenses and permits, R.S. 26:74, 26:274; local taxation and regulation, R.S. 26:491 et seq.; local election on sale of alcoholic beverages, R.S. 26:581 et seq.; suspension or revocation of permits, R.S. 33:4785 et seq.; certain exemptions from municipal license tax, R.S. 47:360. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means any fluid or solid which is capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption, and containing more than one-half of one (0.5) percent alcohol by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquor, beer, porter, ale, stout, fruit juice, cider or wine. Beverage of high alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
Beverage of low alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
Liquor means all distilled or rectified alcoholic spirits, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin and all similar distilled alcoholic beverages, including all dilutions and mixtures of one (1) or more thereof, such as liquors, cordials and similar compounds. 
Malt beverage means beverages obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or by a brewing process or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, including, but not limited to, ale, beer, stout, porter, etc. Malt beverages are exclusive of all liquors, whether defined as intoxicating or spirituous liquors, or as alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors, or however otherwise defined as liquors. 
Open container means any container or receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage; wherein the seal or stamp has been broken, or any can, bottle, or container that contains any alcoholic beverage that has been opened subsequent to the filling of such can, bottle or container by the manufacturer, brewery or distillery. Alcoholic beverages contained in jars, drinking glasses, cups, including paper cups, plastic cups and Styrofoam cups, any receptacle that contains any amount of alcoholic beverage or frozen alcoholic beverage and to which any of the following is applicable: 
(1)  Its contents have been partially removed. 
(2)  Its lid is removed or a straw protrudes therefrom. 
Outlet means a place where a person draws or removes any alcoholic beverage from its container for consumption on the premises. 
Package house means a place where a person sells alcoholic beverages in closed containers, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
Parking lots means any public parking lot within the town; any public or school parking lot within the town, and, any privately owned parking lot within the town whereon public parking is allowed without charge. 
Premises means the building or the part of the building as defined in the application for the permit in which alcoholic beverages are sold. 
Restaurant establishment means an establishment: 
(1)  Which operates a place of business whose purpose and primary function is to take orders for and serve food and food items and; 
(2)  Which serves alcoholic beverages in conjunction with meals and; 
(3)  Which is capable of serving food through the taking of orders, preparing and serving any and all menu items during all hours of operation and; 
(4)  Which has a minimum seating capacity for twenty (20) patrons to be served at tables and; 
(5)  Which maintains separate sales figures on alcoholic beverages and upon review of a monthly compilation of said sales figures, sales of alcoholic beverages are less than that of sales of food items; and 
(6)  Which operates a fully equipped kitchen used for the preparation of uncooked foods for service and consumption of such foods on the premises. 
Retail dealer means every person who offers for sale, exposes for sale, has in his possession for sale or distribution or sells alcoholic beverages in any quantity to persons other than licensed wholesale or retail dealers. 
Sparkling wine means champagne and any other effervescent wine charged with carbon dioxide, whether artificially or as the result of secondary fermentation of the wine within the container. 
Still wine means any non-effervescent wine, including any fortified wine, vermouth, artificial imitation wine, compound sold as still wine and any fruit juice. 
Streets, sidewalks and other public places means sidewalks, grounds, parks, streets, highways, alleys and parking lots where the public is allowed without charge, any public sidewalk, public grounds, public park, public street, public highway and public street right-of-ways, within the town. 
Wholesale dealer means a person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content to licensed wholesale or retail dealers exclusively within the state, or to any person for delivery beyond the borders of the state to a licensed dealer in that state, and who conduct a bona fide wholesale business and maintain a warehouse for the storage and warehousing of alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content in the area where domiciled and licensed by the state, and conduct and maintain systematic and regular solicitations, distributions, deliveries and sales of such beverages to licensed retail dealers located within the boundary of each parish, municipality or geographic area, as contractually defined between the wholesaler and his supplier, in which the wholesale dealer makes any sale or delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:241.  
Sec. 3-2. - Exempt products. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale of: 
(1)  Patent, antiseptic and toilet preparations; 
(2)  Flavoring extracts, syrups and food products; 
(3)  Scientific, chemical, mechanical and industrial products; 
(4)  Alcohol for industrial use or purposes only, and which is denatured so as to be unfit for human consumption. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly sell any of the products listed in subsection (a) above. 
(1)  For beverage purposes; or 
(2)  Under circumstances from which he may reasonably deduce the intention of the purchaser to use such products for beverage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:3, 26:421.  
Sec. 3-3. - Closing hours. 
(a)  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 12:00 noon on Sunday, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Sunday and 12:00 midnight Monday through Sunday and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, Monday through Saturday, it shall be unlawful for any retail dealer which is a restaurant establishment to sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any beverages of either low or high alcoholic content within the town, except that the lawful hours shall be extended to 2:00 a.m. on January 1 (New Year's Day) of each calendar year only. 
(b)  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday, or between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, Monday through Friday, it shall be unlawful for any retail dealer other than a restaurant establishment to sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any beverages of either low or high alcoholic content within the town. 
(c)  If the sale of low or high alcoholic content beverages and/or admission or cover charges to the facility constitutes a majority of the gross receipts of any retail dealer, then at the hours set forth in this section, the business establishment shall be closed and the dealer shall cause the customers and patrons to leave the premises not later than 12:15 a.m., and shall securely lock all of the entrance doors to the building or other facilities where the high or low alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Sec. 3-4. - Prohibition of the possession of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any "open container" on any parking lots, streets, sidewalks, and other public places as defined herein, in the town. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions § 3-1.  
Sec. 3-5. - Bottle club, private club; definitions; hours; prohibited acts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bottle club means any establishment in which the owner/operator or his employee does not sell, serve, handle, dispense or store alcoholic beverages, but patrons are allowed to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises either from the patron's own store, stock or supplies of alcoholic beverages or from any other source, and the establishment's main business transactions (admission fees) are related to alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means an organization with limited and restricted membership which either: 
(1)  Is nonprofit in nature and classified as exempt from the payment of state and federal income tax; or 
(2)  Charges members dues or other charges for membership of at least fifty dollars ($50.00) per month; requires that the dues of any member must be fully paid in order to be a member; and exists for a fraternal, educational or social purpose. 
(b)  Bottle clubs; prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any bottle club to permit or admit any member of the public into such establishment, or part thereof, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Sunday until 6:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(2)  The owner/operator of any bottle club shall remove all patrons and members of the public from the premises by 12:01 a.m., and all doors to such premises shall be locked and closed and the establishment shall not be reopened until after 6:00 a.m. the following morning. The owner/operator and his employees or agents may enter the closed premises for the purpose of cleaning, taking stock or other work within the establishment. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any bottle club to permit members of the public to remain in the parking lot of such establishment for more than thirty (30) minutes after the closing of such establishment. 
(c)  Private clubs. Private clubs and/or individuals who allow nonmember, general public entry; alcoholic consumption on the premises; and charge a fee or something of value for entry to such establishment shall be subject to the same operating guidelines for bottle clubs as specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 3-6—3-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEALER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 3-16. - Required. 
(a)  All persons shall annually obtain from the town a permit as provided in this article before engaging in the business of dealing in beverages of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  No person shall do any act for which a permit is required by this article unless such person holds the proper town permits. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Authority to require permits under this article, R.S. 26:274.  
Sec. 3-17. - Separate permit required for each business location. 
Any retail liquor dealer making delivery of alcoholic beverages at places other than the place of business specified on the permit required by this article, except pursuant to prior specific orders therefor received at the place of business, shall be subject to a separate tax as a retail dealer at the place where the sales are made. Each dealer who has paid the tax at one (1) place of business shall not incur further tax for sales of alcoholic beverages to another dealer holding a proper tax stamp if the sales are consummated at the place of business where such dealer's tax stamp is held. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Sec. 3-18. - Notice of application. 
(a)  Prior to making application for a retail alcoholic beverage outlet permit, each applicant shall insert an appropriate signed notice, similar to the following, in the official journal of the town: 
"I am applying for a permit to sell alcoholic beverages at retail at the following address: ________________ in the Parish of Bienville." 
(b)  The publication of such notice shall not be required of permittees seeking renewal of their permits. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:277.  
Sec. 3-19. - Application. 
(a)  An application for an alcoholic beverage outlet permit to engage in any business or operation regulated by this article shall be in writing and sworn to, and shall contain the full name of the applicant, his correct home address, and an accurate description and correct address of the premises wherein the business or operation is to be conducted, which address shall be considered the proper address for all notices to the applicant or the permittee required by this article, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant showing that he meets the qualifications and conditions set out in section 3-22. 
(b)  Unless an applicant is seeking a renewal of his permit, the applicant for a retail dealer's permit shall attach to his application, as a part thereof, a sworn affidavit that he has complied with the provisions of R.S. 26:277. 
(c)  Any misstatement or suppression of fact in a permit application or accompanying affidavit shall be grounds for denial, withholding or suspension of a permit in the manner provided in this article or by law. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:278, 26:282.  
Sec. 3-20. - Administrative issuance. 
Upon the application for a permit as provided in this article, the mayor, or his designee, after a proper investigation, including consultation with the chief of police or his designees, may issue the permit when it appears that the application being submitted to the board of aldermen meets all of the requirements of this article and other applicable laws. However, if the mayor denies the application or refuses to take timely action on such application, the applicant can apply to the board of aldermen at a regular or special meeting, and the board of aldermen shall then approve or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Sec. 3-21. - Certification of the police department. 
Unless an applicant is seeking a renewal of his alcoholic beverage permit, he may be fingerprinted and receive verification that the provisions of section 3-22(a)(4), (5), (6) and (7) have not been violated. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Sec. 3-22. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  Applicants for permits of all kinds under this article shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Be a person of good character and reputation and over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States and of the state, and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two (2) years next preceding the date of the filing of the application. However, the requirements for state citizenship shall not apply to wholesale or retail dealers who have continuously held permits since July 26, 1944. 
(3)  Be the owner of the premises or have a bona fide written lease for such premises. In cases where the applicant holds a bona fide written lease, the name and current street address of the lessor shall be shown on the application form filed with the board of aldermen. 
(4)  Shall not have been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, the state or any other state or country. 
(5)  Shall not have been convicted in the state, any other state or by the United States of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, letting a disorderly place or illegally dealing in controlled dangerous substances. 
(6)  Shall not have had a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States, any state or political subdivision of a state authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked within two (2) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against him involving alcoholic beverages by the state, any other state or the United States for two (2) years prior to the application. 
(7)  Has not been adjudged by the state board of alcoholic beverage control or convicted by a court of violating any of the provisions of the state alcoholic beverage control law. 
(8)  Has not been convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter. If the applicant has been convicted, the granting of a permit or of a renewal is within the discretion of the board. 
(9)  Is not the spouse of a person whose application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked, unless judicially separated or divorced; provided that in such cases the age of the ineligible spouse shall be immaterial. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership recognized by state law, or any person in such partnership with or financed by another person, all members of such partnership or all persons furnishing the money shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. The application shall name all partners or financial backers, and furnish their social security numbers and proper addresses. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, all officers and directors and all stockholders owning in the aggregate, more than five (5) percent of the stock and the person or persons who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. However, the requirements as to citizenships and residents do not apply to officers, directors and stockholders of corporations applying for retail permits only. The corporation shall be either organized under the laws of the state or qualified to do business within the state. 
(d)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted, in whole or in part, by one (1) or more managers, agents, servants, employees or other representatives, such persons shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant in subsection (a) of this section, and shall furnish their social security numbers and correct home addresses; however, convicted felons may be employed by an applicant if alcoholic beverages are not the principal commodities sold, handled or given away in the applicant's business. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:280.  
Sec. 3-23. - Interposed persons. 
No permit shall be issued to any person who is an interposed person for the owner or proprietor of a business. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:83.  
Sec. 3-24. - Proximity to churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  A permit under this article shall not be granted for any premises situated within three hundred (300) feet or less of a public playground or a building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library or school, except a school for business education conducted as a business college or school and except a state college or university. Such distance shall be measured as a person walks using the sidewalk from the nearest point of the property line of the church or synagogue, public library, playground or school to the nearest point of the premises to be licensed, or by such method as may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the state. The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to premises which are maintained as a bona fide hotel, railway car or fraternal organization. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to registered pharmacists or licensed drugstores which are licensed under state laws and are permitted to sell alcoholic beverages by prescription only, either of high or low alcoholic content under R.S. 26:1 et seq. or R.S. 26:241 et seq. If any premises licensed to deal in beverages of low or high alcoholic content shall be located within a distance less than that provided by this section from property which is purchased or acquired after the license was obtained for the construction, erection, movement or development of a public playground or building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library or school, such subsequent purchase or acquisition shall not be grounds for the revocation, withholding, denial or refusal to renew the permit on such premises by town authorities. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "public library" means a public library which is located in a permanent structure and is open to the public for three (3) or more days each week. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Authority to limit location of business, R.S. 26:281.  
Sec. 3-25. - Permit fees; definitions. 
(a)  Fees. 
(1)  Wholesale ..... $500.00 
(2)  Class A (high alcohol content) retail dealer, off-premises consumption ..... $300.00 
Permits off-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content. 
(3)  Class B (low alcohol content) retail dealer, off-premises consumption ..... $200.00 
Allows for the package sale of beverages of low alcohol content for consumption off-premises. 
(4)  Class AR-B (low alcohol content) ..... $300.00 
Allows for sale of beverages of low alcohol content, to be consumed on premises in a restaurant establishment. 
(5)  Class AR-A&B (low & high alcohol content) ..... $500.00 
Allows for sale of beverages of high or low alcohol content, to be consumed on premises in a restaurant establishment. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, "restaurant establishment" shall be defined as an establishment: 
(1)  Which operates a place of business whose purpose and primary function is to take orders for and serve food and food items and; 
(2)  Which serves alcoholic beverages in conjunction with meals and; 
(3)  Which is capable of serving food through the taking of orders, preparing and serving any and all menu items during all hours of operation and; 
(4)  Which has a minimum seating capacity for twenty (20) patrons to be served at tables and; 
(5)  Which maintains separate sales figures on alcoholic beverages and upon review of a monthly compilation of said sales figures, sales of alcoholic beverages are less than that of sales of food items; and 
(6)  Which operates a fully equipped kitchen used for the preparation of uncooked foods for service and consumption of such foods on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Limitation on permit fees, R.S. 26:274.  
Sec. 3-26. - Display. 
All permits issued under this article must be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so as to be easily seen and read by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:276.  
Sec. 3-27. - Transferability and inheritability. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article are of a personal nature and shall not be transferable or inheritable. 
(b)  A permittee under this article may transfer or assign his permit only after written application to, and with the approval and consent of, the board of aldermen, who shall have full power to approve or deny any transfer of a permit in the manner as provided for the issuance or rejection of an original application for a permit under this article. However, in the event of the dissolution of a partnership by death, the surviving partners may operate such business under the partnership permit. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:276.  
Sec. 3-28. - Expiration. 
All permits under this article shall be expire on December 31. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Expiration of permits, R.S. 26:276.  
Sec. 3-29. - Renewal. 
Persons holding permits under this article shall file an application for renewal of such permits for the ensuing year and pay the permit fees on or before November 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Renewal of permits, R.S. 26:285.  
Sec. 3-30. - Delinquency. 
If a dealer fails to file the application and pay the fee by November 1, there shall be added to the fee a delinquency penalty of twenty (20) percent, plus six (6) percent interest per annum until paid, and if sued on, or placed in the hands of an attorney for collection, the delinquent owing for such permit shall pay attorney's fees of ten (10) percent penalties and interest. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Delinquency, R.S. 26:285.  
Sec. 3-31. - Acts prohibited on premises; suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Any person holding a retail dealer's permit under this article, and his servant, agent or employee, shall not do any of the following acts upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, unless such person submits a valid, current: 
a.  State driver's license which contains a photograph of the person presenting such driver's license. 
b.  Driver's license of another state which contains a photograph and the birth date of the person submitting the driver's license. 
c.  Special identification card issued by the state, pursuant to R.S. 40:1321, which contains a photograph of the person submitting the identification card. 
d.  Passport or visa issued by the federal government or another country or nation, which contains a permanently attached photograph and the date of birth of the person submitting the passport or visa. 
e.  Military or federal identification card issued by the federal government, which contains a photograph and the date of birth of the person submitting the identification card. 
(b)  Each form of identification listed in subsection (a)(1) of this section must establish, on the face of such identification, the age of the person as twenty-one (21) years or older, and there must not be a reason to doubt the authenticity or correctness of the identification. Any form of identification listed in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be accepted as proof of age if such identification has expired, or is defaced, mutilated or altered. If the driver's license, state identification card or lawful identification submitted is a duplicate, the person shall submit additional information which contains the name, date of birth and picture of such person. In addition, an educational institution identification card, check cashing identification card or employee identification card shall not be considered as lawful identification for the purposes of this subsection. 
(1)  Sell or serve beverages alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person. 
(2)  Intentionally entice, aid or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to visit or loiter in or about any place where alcoholic beverages or beer are the principal commodities sold, handled or given away. However, the provisions of this subsection shall not in any way prohibit the presence of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years on or about a licensed premises for any function sponsored by a religious or charitable organization with tax exempt status under section 501(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, or by a fraternal beneficiary society with tax exempt status under section 501(8) of such code, and no alcoholic beverages are sold, handled, given away or accessible during the presence of any such person. 
Permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to work in any capacity, unless such person is a musician performing in a band on the premises, under written contract with the permittee, for a specified period of time, and the musician is under the direct supervision of his parent or legal guardian. 
(3)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises, or solicit patrons for prostitution on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind or type of alcoholic beverages, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under the permit. 
(5)  Intentionally conduct illegal gambling, as defined by law, on the premises described in the application for the permit. 
(6)  Employ or permit persons commonly known as B drinkers to solicit patrons for drinks, and to accept drinks from patrons and receive any commission or remuneration in any other way for such drinks. 
(7)  Employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in any capacity in an establishment where the sale of alcoholic beverages constitutes the main business of such establishment, unless the minor is a musician performing in a band on the premises under written contract with the permittee, for a specified period of time, and is under the direct supervision of his parent or guardian during such time. If the sale of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business of the establishment, any person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be employed if the minor's employment does not involve the sale, mixing, dispensing or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; and, 
If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business of the establishment and alcoholic beverages are not sold for consumption on the premises, an employee under the age of eighteen (18) years may be permitted to participate in the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages to collect the price and taxes and issue receipts therefor, and/or may be permitted to bag packaged alcoholic beverages where immediate supervision is provided. 
(8)  Allow the sale, dispensing or distribution of alcoholic beverages in any type of automatic mechanical vending machine activated by the use of a coin, token or similar instrument. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to establishments exempt from holding permits under this chapter. 
(9)  Permit the playing of pool or billiards by any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or permit a person under eighteen (18) years of age to frequent the licensed premises operating a pool or billiard hall, except in a structure where the position of the pool or billiards playing area is separate and distinct from the area where alcoholic beverages are dispensed to patrons. 
(10)  Allow persons under the age of twenty-one (21) to possess for consumption or to consume alcoholic beverages except as provided in subsection (b)(1) above or when it is otherwise lawful for said possession. 
(11)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of controlled dangerous substances. 
(12)  Accept food stamp coupons as payment for alcoholic beverages in violation of the provisions of PL 88-525 and Regulation 1600.2(i) issued pursuant to such section of the federal statute by the United States Secretary of the Department of Agriculture. 
(13)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. 
(14)  Permit any person to enter or leave the premises with an opened alcoholic beverage container of any kind. 
(15)  After 10:00 p.m., sell or serve any alcoholic beverages at a price fixed on an "all you can drink" basis. 
(16)  If the retail dealer holds an AR permit, no alcoholic beverages can be possessed for consumption or consumed on the premises between the hours of 12:15 a.m. on Saturday night and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday, or between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following morning. 
(17)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on the licensed premises. 
a.  Attire and conduct. The following acts or conduct upon a licensed premises are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section, and therefor, an on-sale permit for alcoholic beverages shall not be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted: 
1.  Employment or use of any person in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
2.  Employment or use of the services of any hostess or other person to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
3.  Encouraging or permitting any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
4.  Permitting any employee or person to wear or use any device or covering, exposed to view, which simulates the breasts, genitals, anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof. 
(c)  Acts or conduct on licensed premises in violation of this section are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section, and therefor, an on-sale permit for alcoholic beverages shall not be held at any premises where such conduct and acts are permitted. 
(d)  Live entertainment shall be permitted on any licensed premises, except a permittee shall not permit any person to perform acts of, or which, simulate the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(3)  The displaying any portion of the breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the public hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(e)  A permittee shall not permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in subsections (b)—(d) of this section. 
(f)  The following acts or conduct upon licensed premises are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section, and therefor, an on-sale permit for alcoholic beverages shall not be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted, including the showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions depicting: 
(1)  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(3)  Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, anus or genitals. 
(4)  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described in subsections (1)—(3) above. 
(g)  Violation of this section by a retail dealer's agent, associate, employee, representative or servant shall be considered the retail dealer's act for purposes of suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(h)  Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 and shall also be sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit under this article. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by renewal under this article, the mayor may revoke or suspend such permit, as prescribed by this article, for violations of this section which occur during the permit period immediately preceding the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:286.  
Sec. 3-32. - Additional causes for suspension or revocation of permits. 
In addition to any other causes enumerated in this article, alcoholic beverage permits issued by the town may be suspended or revoked for any one (1) of the following causes: 
(1)  If the applicant or any of the persons who must possess the same qualifications failed to possess the qualifications required in section 3-22 at the time of application or fails to maintain such qualifications during the licensed year; 
(2)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the permit; 
(3)  If the permit was issued to an interposed person in contravention of section 3-23; 
(4)  If the permit granted to any person who is or has been engaged in an alcoholic beverage business with a person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been revoked; 
(5)  If the holder of any permit has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions in this chapter; 
(6)  If, without a proper license, a retailer allows any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises or on any parking lot or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises; 
(7)  If any dealer or person listed in subsection 3-22(b) violates or has violated any provision of this chapter; 
(8)  If any dealer fails to pay any excise taxes due by any regulated business to the town. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:286.  
Sec. 3-33. - Authority to suspend or revoke alcoholic beverage permits. 
The board of aldermen, or the ABCB, appointed, and given authority for the purpose of granting or refusing permits for the sale, storage and warehousing of beer or other alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Sec. 3-34. - Authority to appoint ABCB. 
(a)  The board of aldermen, in its discretion, may serve as the alcoholic beverage control board (ABCB), or may by resolution, establish a separate independent ABCB. The mayor shall then appoint five (5) members for four-year terms. These appointees shall be approved by the council. A member whose term has expired shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed in the manner as herein provided. 
(b)  In the event of death or resignation of a board member prior to expiration of his or her term, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired term in the same manner as the deceased or retiring board member was appointed, and shall take office immediately upon appointment. Such successor board member shall be eligible for reappointment to a full term. 
(c)  No person shall be appointed to the ABCB unless he or she is a resident of the town. 
(d)  Members of the ABCB shall administer the laws governing the alcoholic beverages as enacted by the state and the town. The ABCB shall have no legislative powers. 
(e)  The board of aldermen may terminate the ABCB by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Sec. 3-35. - ABCB hearings; dispositions. 
The ABCB is vested with the authority to conduct hearings on revocation or suspension of alcoholic beverage permits issued under this chapter. The ABCB of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, is vested with full and complete power to investigate charges against any permit holder who is cited to appear and show cause why his and/or its permit should not be suspended or revoked for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the Louisiana Alcohol and Tobacco Control Law. Complaints filed against any permit holder for the purpose of suspending or revoking such permit shall be made in writing and filed with the ABCB through the mayor's office. When the ABCB has reason to believe that any permit holder has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of the Louisiana Alcohol and Tobacco Control Law, the ABCB is authorized, in its discretion, to notify the permittee of said violation(s) and to cite said permittee by written notice to appear and show cause why its permit should not be suspended or revoked for said violation(s). Said notice to appear and show cause shall state the alleged violations charged and shall be served upon the permittee either by certified mail or by a member of the town police department. The notice shall be served on the permittee at least ten (10) days before the date of hearing. At the hearing, the ABCB shall publicly hear the evidence both in support of the charges and on behalf of the permittee. After such hearing, if the charges are sustained by the evidence the ABCB may, in its discretion suspend or revoke said permit. The action of the ABCB in all such hearings shall be final, subject only to review by the court as provided in the Louisiana Alcohol and Tobacco Control Law. When a permit is revoked, no new permit shall be issued hereunder for the sale of alcoholic beverages at the same location, until the expiration of one (1) year from the date said revocation becomes final. In the event, any person(s), firm, corporation. joint stock company, syndicate, or association has its alcohol permit revocated for a third time due to violations of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the Louisiana Alcohol and Tobacco Control Law, then that person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association shall not be granted an alcoholic beverage permit under the provisions of this chapter until the expiration of three (3) years from the date said revocation becomes final. If the ABCB finds that the violation is of a minor nature or that there are extenuating circumstances, or that there are reasonable grounds to expect that the permittee will not again violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the state ATC law, the ABCB may suspend the permit for such time as it deems appropriate. The ABCB shall retain jurisdiction to reopen cases at any time upon petition and for good cause shown may modify, revise or reverse its former findings and decisions in all such reopened cases shall be heard and determined under the same rules of procedure as original cases. 
(Ord. No. 2133 , 6-14-16)  
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Amusement Rides Safety Law, R.S. 40:1484.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4-1—4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TABLES AND DEVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-16. - Gambling prohibited. 
Gambling shall not be permitted on the licensed premises under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 4, 6-26-75) 
Cross reference— Gambling generally, § 9-105.  
Sec. 4-17. - Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
Alcoholic beverages containing more than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by volume shall not be sold or consumed on the premises licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 5, 6-26-75) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 3.  
Secs. 4-18—4-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Required. 
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a business of operating billiard tables, pigeonhole, jenny-lind, pool, bagatelle or domino tables, ten-pin alleys, bowling alleys or other games or devices of similar character without having first obtained a license therefor as is provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 1, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-27. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license under this division shall be filed in writing with the town clerk, on a form to be provided by the town, and shall specify: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses; 
(2)  The intended location of the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein; and 
(3)  That the applicant for the permit, if an individual or if a partnership or corporation, that the partners or shareholders of greater than five (5) per cent of the stock of any such corporation, meet the following qualifications: 
a.  Is a person of good character and reputation and over eighteen (18) years of age; 
b.  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and a resident of the state; 
c.  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor; 
d.  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, the state or any other state; 
e.  Has not been convicted of this or in any other state or by the United States of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, or illegally dealing in controlled dangerous substances; 
f.  Is not the spouse of a person whose application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked, unless judicially separated or divorced. 
(4)  The full name and address of all partners and persons financially interested and each shall furnish an affidavit showing his qualifications as required of an applicant; 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state the full name and address of all shareholders in the corporation owning in the aggregate more than five (5) per cent of the stock and each such stockholder shall furnish an affidavit showing his qualifications as required of an applicant; 
(6)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one or more managers, agents, servants, employees or other representatives, that person shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant, to be shown on the affidavit of each accompanying the application. 
(b)  If the applicant, or any person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the license shall be denied. 
(c)  The proper license fee shall accompany each application. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 2, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-28. - Fees. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of operating billiard tables, pigeonhole, jenny-lind, pool, bagatelle or domino tables, ten-pin alleys, bowling alleys or other games or devices of similar character shall pay a license of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each such table, alley or device. 
(b)  In case a person licensed under the provision of this division desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of tables, alleys or devices in his establishment, he shall surrender his license to the town clerk who shall issue a new license showing the number of tables, alleys or devices licensed thereunder, upon the payment of the proper license fee therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 3, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-29. - Investigation; approval or denial. 
Application for a license under this division shall be first referred by the town clerk to the mayor and board of aldermen who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is approved by the mayor and board of aldermen, the license shall be issued by the town clerk, and the clerk shall remit the fee to the town treasury. If the license is denied the fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 2, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-30. - Term. 
All licenses issued under this division shall expire on December thirty-first following their issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 2, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-31. - Display. 
The license issued under this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 2, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-32. - Transferability. 
Any license issued under this division shall be nonassignable and nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 2, 6-26-75)  
Sec. 4-33. - Suspension, revocation. 
Any violation of this article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license granted under this division by the mayor and board of aldermen at their discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1097-A, § 6, 6-26-75)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cruelty to animals, § 9-181. 
State Law reference— Agriculture and forestry, R.S. title 3; animals running at large, R.S. 3:2531 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Designation of bird sanctuary; molesting birds prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the town is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the town, then in such event, such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the town after having given at least three (3) days actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of such clubs. If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 976, §§ 1, 2, 12-5-57)  
Secs. 5-2—5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of dogs by local authorities, R.S. 3:2731 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-16. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit a dog to run at large within the town. 
(b)  Any dog which is found unleashed, unenclosed and unattended by a custodian shall, for the purpose of this section be deemed to be running at large. 
(Ord. No. 1013, §§ 2, 7, 5-7-63) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Animals running at large, R.S. 3:2531 et seq.  
Sec. 5-17. - Inoculation required; tag. 
(a)  Every owner of a dog in the town shall be required to have the dog inoculated against rabies at least every twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The dog shall wear a collar bearing a nameplate with the name and address of its owner and a metal tag showing the dog has a current inoculation against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 5-7-63)  
Secs. 5-18—5-23. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 5-24. - Authority. 
Any dog found running at large within the town shall be impounded by the dog-catcher. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 3, 5-7-63; Ord. No. 2020, § II, 3-9-98)  
Sec. 5-25. - Notice to owner. 
If a dog impounded under this division is wearing a collar bearing a nameplate giving the name and address of the owner, it shall be the duty of the dog-catcher to notify the owner that the dog has been impounded, and that its release can be secured by payment of the fees stipulated in section 5-26; provided, however, that the mailing of a notice, either by postcard or by letter, to the owner as shown by the nameplate shall constitute the giving of notice as provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 4, 5-7-63; Ord. No. 2020, § III, 3-9-98)  
Sec. 5-26. - Redemption by owner. 
Any dog impounded under this division shall be held for a period not exceeding five (5) days, during which period the owner of the dog may secure its release by paying to the dog-catcher a fee of five dollars ($5.00) plus the actual cost of upkeep. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 3, 5-7-63; Ord. No. 2020, § IV, 3-9-98)  
Sec. 5-27. - Destruction of dog. 
All dogs impounded pursuant to the provisions of this division that have not been claimed by the owners and the fees stipulated in section 5-26 paid within five (5) days of the date of their impoundment, shall be destroyed by the dog-catcher. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 5, 5-7-63; Ord. No. 2020, § V, 3-9-98)  
Sec. 5-28. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 5-28.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Arcadia. It is intended to be applicable to "dangerous" dogs, as defined herein, and to regulate dogs that are commonly referred to as "pit bulls," as defined herein, by ensuring responsible handling by their owners through registration, confinement and liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.2. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the town who is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the provisions of this division. 
At large means that a dog is not under the direct control of the owner or is unleashed or is unenclosed. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, presents a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well being, or property if not kept under the direct control of the owner. This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performances of their duties. The term "dangerous dog" includes any dog that according to the records of either the town animal shelter, the town department of animal control, or any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked, endangered or inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property, or when unprovoked has chased or approached a person upon the street, sidewalks, of any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by any of the above-referenced authorities; 
(2)  Has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting. 
Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of a dog, such as by means of a leash, cord, secure fence, or chain of such strength to restrain the dog and controlled by a person capable of restraining the dog, or safe and secure restraint within a vehicle. If the controlling person is at all times fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and hearing of the dog, voice control shall be considered direct control when the dog is actually participating in training or in an official showing, obedience or field event. Direct control shall not be required of dogs actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or to government police dogs. 
Director means the director of the department of animal control or chief of police. 
Impoundment means the taking or picking up and confining of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, or any other public officer under the provisions of this division. 
Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any persons or other animal. 
Pit bull dog means and includes any of the following dogs: 
(1)  The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dogs; 
(2)  The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dogs; 
(3)  The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dogs; 
(4)  Dogs that have the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of the breeds of dogs known as Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier. 
Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity owning, harboring or keeping any animal or in the case of a person under the age of eighteen (18), that person's parent or legal guardian. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days. This definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel. 
Sanitary condition means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.3. - Procedure for declaring a dog dangerous. 
(a)  An animal control officer or any adult person may request under oath that a dog be classified as dangerous as defined in section 5-28.2 by submitting a sworn written complaint on a form approved by the chief of police to the department of animal control. Upon receipt of such complaint, the chief of police shall notify the owner of the dog that a complaint has been filed and that an investigation into the allegations as set forth in the complaint will be conducted. 
(b)  At the conclusion of an investigation, the director may: 
(1)  Determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog is impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner; or 
(2)  Determine that the dog is dangerous and order the owner to comply with the requirements for keeping dangerous dogs set forth in section 5-28.7, and if the dog is impounded, release the dog to its owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for the impoundment. If all impoundment fees have not been paid within ten (10) business days after a final determination that a dog is dangerous, the chief of police may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.4. - Notification of dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  Within five (5) business days after declaring a dog dangerous, the chief of police shall notify the owner by certified mail of the dog's designation as a dangerous dog and any specific restrictions and conditions for keeping the dog, as set forth in section 5-28.7 of this division. The chief of police also shall notify the mayor and the department of animal control of the designation of any dog as a dangerous dog. Such notification shall describe the dog and specify any particular requirements of conditions placed upon the dog owner. 
(b)  The notice shall inform the dog owner that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the chief of police's finding and designation within five (5) business days after delivery of the dangerous dog declaration notice. 
(c)  If the chief of police cannot with due diligence locate the owner of a dog that has been seized pursuant to this division, the chief of police shall cause the dog to be impounded for not less than five (5) business days. If after five (5) days the owner fails to claim the dog, the chief of police may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.5. - Hearing on dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  The department of animal control shall hold a hearing within fifteen (15) business days after receiving the dog owner's written request for such a hearing. The department shall provide notice of the date, time and location of the hearing to the dog owner by certified mail and to the complainant by regular mail. 
(b)  At a hearing, all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the dog's dangerousness. Criteria to be considered in a hearing required by this section shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Provocation; 
(2)  Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal; 
(3)  Previous aggressive history of the dog; 
(4)  Observable behavior of the dog; 
(5)  Site and circumstances of the incident; and 
(6)  Statements from interested parties. 
(c)  A determination at a hearing that the dog is in fact a dangerous dog as defined in section 5-28.2 shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this division. 
(d)  Failure of the dog owner to request a hearing shall result in the dog being finally declared a dangerous dog and shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.6. - Appeal from dangerous dog declaration. 
If the chief of police determines that a dog is dangerous at the conclusion of a hearing conducted under section 5-28.5, that decision shall be final unless the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within ten (10) days after receiving notice that the dog has been finally declared dangerous. The appeal must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the chief of police's determination of dangerousness. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.7. - Keeping of dangerous dogs. 
The keeping of a dangerous dog as defined in section 5-28.2 shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Leash. No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to exit its kennel, pen or other proper enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a leash not more than four (4) feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash. 
(2)  Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog's breathing or vision. 
(3)  Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a locked pen or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The structure must have secure sides and a secure top, or all sides must be at least eight (8) feet high; 
b.  The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides or the sides must be embedded not less than one (1) foot into the ground; and 
c.  The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that a dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
(4)  Indoor confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(5)  Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of dangerous dogs shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." 
(6)  Liability insurance, surety bond. The owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the department of animal control proof that he has procured liability insurance or a surety bond in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering any damage or injury that may be caused by such dangerous dog. The policy shall contain a provision requiring that the town be notified immediately by the agent issuing the policy in the event that the insurance policy is canceled, terminated, or expired. The liability insurance or surety bond shall be obtained prior to the issuing of a permit to keep a dangerous dog. The dog owner shall sign a statement attesting that he shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance policy during the twelve-month period for which a permit is sought, unless he ceases to own or keep the dog prior to the expiration date of the permit period. In the event that the owner proves to the satisfaction of the department of animal control that insurance is not available, he may pay a nonrefundable cash fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the town. 
(7)  Animals born of registered dogs. All offspring born of dangerous dogs registered with the department of animal control also must be registered with the department within six (6) weeks of birth. 
(8)  Notification of escape. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall notify the department of animal control immediately if such dog escapes from its enclosure or restraint and is at large. Such immediate notification shall also be required if the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. 
(9)  Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner of a dangerous dog registered with the department of animal control to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any dog found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in the division shall result in the revocation of the dog's license and the permit providing for the keeping of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.8. - Permit and tag required for a dangerous dog. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall, within three (3) business days after the classification of the dog as dangerous or upon acquisition of such a dog, obtain an annual permit from the department of animal control to harbor the dog. The fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, a red circular tag shall be issued to the owner of the dangerous dog. The tag shall be worn at all times by the dog to clearly and easily identify it as a dangerous dog. 
(c)  The permit for maintaining a dangerous dog shall be presented to an animal control officer upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.9. - Pit bull dogs presumed dangerous. 
There shall be an irrefutable presumption that any dog registered with the department of animal control as a pit bull dog is a dangerous dog and is therefore subject to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.10. - Notification of intent to impound. 
(a)  When the director of animal control or chief of police or his designee intends to impound a dog declared to be dangerous for violation of section 5-28.7, he shall notify the owner or custodian of the dog, by certified mail, of the intended impoundment at least five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, except as provided in section 5-28.11. 
(b)  The notice of intent to impound shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request in writing, within five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, a hearing to contest the intended impoundment and finding of violation. 
(c)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request for a hearing. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog's owner or custodian requesting such hearing. 
(d)  If the owner or custodian requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), no impoundment shall take place until conclusion of the hearing except as authorized in section 4-44. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.11. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  A dog declared to be dangerous may be immediately impounded without a pre-impoundment hearing when the director of animal control or chief of police or his designee determines such immediate impoundment is necessary for the protection of public health or safety. Such immediate impoundment may be ordered for violation of section 5-28.7 or when the dog bites a person or domestic animal. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of the dog immediately impounded pursuant to subsection (a) shall be notified of the impoundment by certified mail within five (5) business days after the dog's impoundment. 
(c)  The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner or custodial of the dog that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the impoundment within five (5) business days after the mailing of the notice of impoundment. 
(d)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing under subsection (c), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after such request. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog owner requesting the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.12. - Impoundment hearing. 
(a)  If, after a hearing on impoundment, the chief of police or his designee finds no violation of section 5-28.7, or that the dog has not bitten an individual, the dog shall be returned to its owner or custodian if already impounded, or shall not be impounded as intended. 
(b)  Incident to the findings and conclusions made at the impoundment hearing, the chief of police or his designee may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog to ensure the health and safety of the public and the animal. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Posting of bond or other proof of ability to respond in damages; 
(2)  Specific requirements as to size, construction and design of a kennel in which to house the dog; 
(3)  Requirements as to type and method of restraint and/or muzzling of the dog; 
(4)  Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purposes of identification; and 
(5)  Payment of reasonable fees to recover the costs incurred by department of animal control in ensuing compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.13. - Destruction. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee may order the destruction of a dog that he determines to be extremely dangerous to public health or safety, a dog that has made an extremely vicious attack upon a individual, or a dog declared dangerous whose owner is unable or unwilling to adequately restrain it. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall give written notice by certified mail of his intention to destroy such dog to the owner or custodian of the dog, who may request in writing, within ten (10) business days after delivery of such notice, a hearing to contest the intended destruction. 
(c)  If no hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), the dog shall be destroyed pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), such hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request; and the dog shall not be destroyed prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  The dog owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required for the Town to humanely and safely keep the animal during any legal proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.14. - Appeal from order of humane destruction. 
If the chief of police or his designee orders a dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed pursuant to section 5-28.13, that decision shall be final unless the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of the destruction order. If an appeal is timely filed, the chief of police shall suspend the destruction order pending the final determination of the court. The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the chief of police's destruction order. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.15. - Change of ownership. 
(a)  Any owner of a dangerous dog who sells or otherwise transfers ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall, within ten (10) business days after such change of ownership or residence, provide written notification to the department of animal control of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. It also shall be the responsibility of the person transferring ownership or custody of the dog to provide written notification of the dog's classification as dangerous to the person receiving the dog. The previous owner shall furnish a copy of such notification to the department of animal control along with written acknowledgment by the new owner of his receipt of such notification. The chief of police or his designee shall notify the mayor and the department of animal control of any changes of ownership, custody or residence of the dog within three (3) business days after receiving the required information from the previous dog owner. 
(b)  Any person receiving a dog classified as dangerous must obtain the required permit, tag and enclosure prior to acquisition of the dog. The new owner shall comply fully with the provisions of this division pertaining to obtaining liability insurance, payment of fees and maintenance, control and ownership of a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.16. - Continuation of dangerous dog declaration. 
Any dog that has been declared dangerous by any agency or department of this town, another municipality, parish or county, or state shall be subject to the provisions of this division for the remainder of its life. The person owning or having custody of any dog designated as a dangerous dog by any municipality, parish or county, or state government shall notify the department of animal control of the dog's address and conditions of maintenance within ten (10) days of moving the animal into the Town of Arcadia. The restrictions and conditions of maintenance of any dog declared dangerous by the town, another municipality, parish or county, or state shall remain in force while the [dog] remains in the town. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.17. - Conflicting divisions. 
All other divisions of the Town of Arcadia that are in conflict with this division are hereby repealed in the event of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 5-28.18. - Severability. 
The provisions of this division are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of the division shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, clauses and phrases of this division but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this division shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part. 
(Ord. No. 2043, 9-9-03)  
Secs. 5-29—5-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-39. - Running at large prohibited. 
All livestock, such as cattle, horses, mules, hogs, sheep, goats and geese shall be and they are hereby prohibited from running at large within the town. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 1, 9-7-05) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of livestock running at large, R.S. 3:2531 et seq.  
Sec. 5-40. - Hogs prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or cause to be kept, any hog, whether confined or not confined, for a longer period than twenty-four (24) hours within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 890, § 1, 5-23-41)  
Sec. 5-41. - Keeping of cattle restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or cause to be collected within the town any number of cattle exceeding twenty-five (25) upon less than two (2) acres of land for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 24, § 1, 4-2-06)  
Secs. 5-42—5-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 5-51. - Authority. 
Any livestock found at large within the town in violation of this article shall be impounded by the chief of police or any other officer designated by the town for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 23, § 1, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 5-52. - Notice to owner. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to advertise any livestock which have been impounded under this division as soon thereafter as he can insert a notice in the official newspaper of the town. If he knows the owner, he may notify such owner by any sure and convenient notice. 
(Ord. No. 23, § 2, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 5-53. - Redemption by owner. 
Any livestock impounded under this division shall be held for a period not exceeding five (5) days, during which period the owner of the livestock may secure its release by paying to the chief of police a fee of five dollars ($5.00) plus the actual cost of upkeep. 
(Ord. No. 23, § 1, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 5-54. - Sale of unclaimed livestock. 
If the livestock impounded under this division is not claimed by the owner within five (5) days and the fees stipulated in section 5-53 paid, then the chief of police shall advertise the livestock for sale in the official newspaper of the town for ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 23, § 2, 1-3-06)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Defacing buildings, § 9-77; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; flood damage prevention, Ch. 10.5; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal building regulations generally, R.S. 33:4721 et seq.; building permits, R.S. 33:4744. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 6-16. - Adoption of Uniform Construction Code. 
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of regulating the construction, alterations, repair, equipment, use and occupancy and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to such buildings or structures, excluding farm structures and recreational camps, the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code. The Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code is incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the town. The Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code shall consist of the following: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 edition, not including Chapter 1—Administration, Chapter 11—Accessibility, Chapter 27—Electrical, and Chapter 29—Plumbing Systems. The applicable standards referenced in that code are included for regulations of construction within this state. 
(2)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, not including Chapter 1—Administration, and the standards referenced in that code for regulations of construction within this state. 
(3)  International Residential Code, 2006 edition, not including Parts I—Administrative, V—Mechanical, VII—Plumbing, and VIII—Electrical. The applicable standards referenced in that code are included for regulation of construction within this state. Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures, is also included for mandatory regulation. For the purposes of this part, IRC R301.2.1.1 (Design Criteria) shall be amended as follows and shall only apply to the International Residential Code, 2006 edition: 
a.  Amendment of R301.2.1.1 (Design Criteria). 
b.  Item 6, The American Concrete Institute, Guide to Concrete Masonry Residential Construction in High Winds Areas, shall be added. 
c.  Item 7, Institute for Business & Home Safety, Optional Code-Plus Fortified for Safer Living, shall be added. 
d.  Item 8, Federal Alliance for Safe Homes, Optional Code-Plus Blueprint for Safety, shall be added. 
(4)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, and the standards referenced in that code for regulation of construction within this state. 
(5)  The Louisiana State Plumbing Code (Part XIV—Plumbing of the state sanitary code) as amended by the state health officer acting through the office of public health of the department of health and hospitals. Nothing in this part shall be construed so as to prevent the state health officer for enforcing Part XIV—Plumbing of the state sanitary code, the enforcement of which is his statutory and regulatory responsibility. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, and the standards referenced in that code for regulation of construction within this state. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2005 edition. 
(Ord. No. 1047 , Art. 1, 12-12-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1047 , Art. 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, amended § 6-16 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former § 6-16 pertained to adoption of standard building code and derived from Ord. No. 1047, § 1, adopted July 11, 1967. 
State Law reference— Effective January 1, 2007, authority to adopt Uniform Construction Code pursuant to R.S. 40:1730.21, et seq.  
Sec. 6-17. - Violations. 
Any person who shall construct, demolish, alter or remove a building or structure within the corporate limits of the town in violation of the provisions of this article, including the Standard Building Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 2, 7-11-67)  
Secs. 6-18—6-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-29. - Adoption of National Electrical Code. 
The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe installation of electrical wiring and apparatus. All electric wiring and apparatus installed, replaced, maintained or repaired within the corporate limits of the town from the point of delivery of electric current by any power company shall conform to the requirements of this article and to the specifications, rules and regulations contained in that certain code known as "National Electrical Code, 1978 edition," published for the National Fire Protection Association, and the whole thereof, of which an ample supply of copies has been and are now filed in the office of the town clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and hereafter the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the installation, alteration and maintenance of all electric wiring and apparatus from the point of delivery of electric current by any power company in any building or structure within the town. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 1, 4-7-64; Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 7-11-67) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt electrical code by reference, R.S. 33:1368.  
Sec. 6-30. - Violations. 
Any person that shall fail to comply with or violate any of the provisions of this article, including the National Electrical Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 9, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-31—6-36. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 6-37. - Office created. 
To provide for the administration and enforcement of this article, the office of electrical inspector is hereby created. The inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the proper performance of the duties of the office, shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 3, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-38. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The electrical inspector is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article, and the inspector, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations of this article. 
(b)  The electrical inspector is authorized to disconnect any electric wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been issued with respect to same, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to such electric wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall state that the same has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice or reconnect the electric wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus without authorization by the inspector, and such electric wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus shall not be put in service or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his prior disconnection notice. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 4, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-39—6-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 6-46. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall install any electric wiring or apparatus in any building, structure or improvement within the town without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the town clerk. 
(b)  Any power company authorized to do or doing business within the town shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters, or to extend, relocate, remove or repair its service lines or other facilities or for work having to do with its own system. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 5, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-47. - Inspection. 
(a)  A rough inspection shall be made after all new wiring or the installation of all apparatus authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such wiring or apparatus has been covered or concealed or any fixture or appliances regularly using current from such electric wiring have been attached thereto. 
(b)  A final inspection shall be made after all work authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been concealed or before any fixtures or appliances have been attached thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 6, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-48. - Certificates. 
The electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion of the work for which a permit for electric wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus has been issued, if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of this article. A duplicate of each certificate so issued shall be delivered to any company furnishing electricity within the town and used as its authority to render electrical service. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 7, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-49. - Fees. 
(a)  The total fees for inspection of the installation of electric wiring and apparatus at any one location (including both rough and final inspection) shall be four dollars ($4.00) for one to twenty (20) outlets, inclusive, and ten cents ($0.10) for each outlet above twenty (20). 
(b)  If the electrical inspector is called back, after correction of defects noted, an additional fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be made for each such return inspection. 
(c)  Any and all fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 8, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-50. - Nonliability of town. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the town any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any electrical wiring or apparatus mentioned herein or by installation thereof, nor shall the town, or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 10, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-51—6-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 6-56. - License. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or work at the installation, alteration or maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus until such person shall have secured a license. 
(b)  Upon approval of the bond required in section 6-57, the person desiring to do such work shall secure from the town clerk a nontransferable license which shall run to the first day of January next succeeding its issuance. 
(c)  The person obtaining a license shall pay an annual license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the town clerk; provided, however, any license obtained after the first day of July of any year shall be computed at the rate of one-half of the annual fee. 
(d)  Licenses issued under this section may be revoked for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1020, §§ 2, 9, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-57. - Bond. 
No person shall engage in or work at the installation, alteration or maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus until such person shall have executed and delivered to the town clerk a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with surety approved by the town attorney, or corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all such work in strict accordance and compliance with the provisions of this article, and which bond shall expire on the first day of January next following its approval and thereafter on the first day of January of each year a new bond in form and substance as herein required shall be given by such person to cover all such work as shall be done during such year. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 2, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-58. - Exemptions. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as prohibiting an individual from installing, repairing or maintaining electric wiring or apparatus on or in his own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work on his own premises; provided, however, all such work must be done in conformity with all other provisions of this article, including those relating to permits, inspections and fees. 
(Ord. No. 1020, § 2, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-59—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Water, § 20-16 et seq.; sewers, § 20-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Plumbers, R.S. 37:1361 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Adoption of Standard Plumbing Code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating the installation and alteration of plumbing equipment in all buildings in the town, that certain code known as "Standard Plumbing Code," being particularly the 1979 edition thereof, of which an ample supply of copies has been and now are filed in the office of the town clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and hereafter the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the installation and alteration of all plumbing fixtures and equipment in all buildings and other structures within the town. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 7-11-67) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plumbing code by reference, R.S. 33:1368.  
Sec. 6-72. - Violations. 
Any person who shall install plumbing fixtures or equipment in any building or structure within the town in violation of the provisions of this article, including the Standard Plumbing Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 7-11-67)  
Secs. 6-73—6-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GAS CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-86. - Adoption of Standard Gas Code. 
The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe installation of consumer's gas piping and appliances. All such gas piping and gas appliances installed, replaced, maintained or repaired within the town shall conform to the requirements of this article and to the specifications, rules and regulations contained in that certain code known as "Standard Gas Code," 1979 edition, published for the Southern Building Code Congress, and the whole thereof, of which an ample supply of copies has been and are now filed in the office of the town clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and hereafter the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the installation of consumer's gas piping and installing, replacement and maintenance of gas appliances. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 4-7-64;(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 7-11-67) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt gas code by reference, R.S. 33:1368.  
Sec. 6-87. - Definitions. 
The following definitions, along with those contained in the Standard Gas Code adopted hereby, are provided for the purpose of interpretation and administration of this article: 
(1)  Gas company means any person distributing natural gas within the town; 
(2)  Certain appliances means conversion burners, floor furnaces, central heating plants, vented recessed heaters, water heaters and boilers. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 11, 4-7-64) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-88. - Violations. 
Any person that shall fail to comply with or violate any of the provisions of this article, including the Standard Gas Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-89—6-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAS INSPECTOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 6-96. - Office created. 
To provide for the administration and enforcement of this article, the office of gas inspector is hereby created. The inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the proper performance of the duties of the office, shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 3, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-97. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The gas inspector is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article, and the inspector, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations of this article. 
(b)  The gas inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been issued with respect to same, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture or appliance disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall state that the same has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice or reconnect the gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the inspector, and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in service or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his prior disconnection notice. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 4, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-98—6-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 6-106. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall install a gas conversion burner, floor furnaces, central heating plant, vented recessed heater, water heater, boiler, consumer's gas piping, or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the town clerk; however, permits will not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair of leaks in house piping. 
(b)  The gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters, or to extend, relocate, remove or repair its service lines, mains or other facilities, or for work having to do with its own gas system. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 5, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-107. - Inspections. 
(a)  A rough piping inspection shall be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. 
(b)  A final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury twelve (12) inches in height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least fifteen (15) minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor and assistance necessary for the tests shall be furnished by the installer of such piping. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 6, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-108. - Certificates. 
The gas inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been issued, if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of this article. A duplicate of each certificate issued covering consumer's gas piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used at its authority to render gas service. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 7, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-109. - Fees. 
(a)  The total fees for inspection of consumer's gas piping at one location (including both rough and final piping inspection) shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for one to four (4) outlets, inclusive, and fifty cents ($0.50) for each outlet above five (5). 
(b)  The fees for inspecting conversion burners, floor furnaces, boilers or central heating plants shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for each unit. 
(c)  The fees for inspecting vented recessed heaters and water heaters shall be one dollar ($1.00) for each unit. 
(d)  If the gas inspector is called back, after correction of defects noted, an additional fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be made for each such return inspection. 
(e)  Any and all fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-110. - Nonliability of town. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the town any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by installation thereof, nor shall the town or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the gas inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 10, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-111—6-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GAS CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 6-121. - License. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension or alteration of consumer's gas piping or certain gas appliances until such person shall have secured a license as herein provided. 
(b)  Upon approval of the bond required in section 6-122, the person desiring to do such work shall secure from the town clerk a nontransferable license which shall run to the first day of January next succeeding its issuance. 
(c)  The person obtaining a license shall pay an annual license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the town clerk; provided, however, any license obtained after the first day of July of any year shall be computed at the rate of one-half of the annual fee. 
(d)  Licenses issued under this section may be revoked for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1018, §§ 2, 9, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-122. - Bond. 
No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension or alteration of consumer's gas piping or certain gas appliances until such person shall have executed and delivered to the town clerk a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with surety approved by the town attorney, or corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all such work in strict accordance and compliance with the provisions of this article, and which bond shall expire on the first day of January next following its approval and thereafter on the first day of January of each year a new bond in form and substance as herein required shall be given by such person to cover all such work as shall be done during such year. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 2, 4-7-64)  
Sec. 6-123. - Exemptions. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as prohibiting an individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing, extending, replacing, altering or repairing consumer's piping on his own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work on his own premises; provided, however, all such work must be done in conformity with all other provisions of this article, including those relating to permits, inspections and fees. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 2, 4-7-64)  
Secs. 6-124—6-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fair housing, § 8-16 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-136. - Adoption of Standard Housing Code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing the use, occupancy and maintenance of dwellings, dwelling units and accessory structures, establishing minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities, and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings safe, sanitary, and fit for human habitation, establishing minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of dwellings and accessory structures, fixing certain responsibilities and duties on owners and occupants of dwellings, creating a board of housing code appeals and fixing the duties and responsibilities thereof, authorizing the inspection of dwellings and accessory structures and providing for the condemnation of all buildings deemed unfit for human habitation and use, located within the town, that certain housing code known as "Standard Housing Code," being particularly the 1979 edition, and the whole thereof, published for the Southern Building Code Congress, of which an ample supply of copies has been and now are filed in the office of the town clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and hereafter the provisions thereof shall be controlling to establish minimum housing standards in the town. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 7-11-67)  
Sec. 6-137. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, including the Standard Housing Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 2, 7-11-67)  
Secs. 6-138—6-148. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR TREES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— (Ord. No. 1168, §§ 1—7, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, enacted provisions pertaining to dangerous buildings, structures or trees. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification, but has been included in the Code as superseding former Art. VII, dangerous vacant buildings, §§ 6-149—6-156, derived from(Ord. No. 1132, §§ 1—8, adopted Apr. 22, 1980. The provisions of(Ord. No. 1168 have been designated as Art. VII, §§ 6-149—6-155, by the editor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4761 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-149. - Authority to condemn and remove. 
The mayor and board of aldermen (governing authority) may condemn and cause to be demolished or removed any building, structure or trees within the corporate limits of the municipality when it is in a dilapidated and dangerous condition which endangers the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 1, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 6-150. - Report; hearing; notice to owner. 
Before any building, structure or trees are condemned there must be submitted to said governing authority a written report recommending the demolition or removal of said building or other signed by the mayor, or by someone appointed by him to act in the matter. The mayor shall thereupon serve notice on the owner of the building or other structure requiring him to show cause at a meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen why the building, structure or trees should not be condemned. The date and hour of the meeting shall be stated in the notice which shall be served at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing, except in case of grave public emergency as hereinafter provided. The notice may be served by the town marshal or by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, or constable having jurisdiction and power to serve legal process where the owner of the building, structure or trees are in the State of Louisiana. The officer making said service shall make return thereof as in ordinary cases. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 6-151. - Absent and unrepresented owner; service of notice. 
If the owner of the building, structure, or trees is absent from the state and is unrepresented therein, then the notice shall be served upon the occupant of the condemned building, structure or trees and also upon an attorney at law appointed by the mayor to represent the absentee. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 3, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 6-152. - Order of condemnation. 
After a hearing on the matter, if in the opinion of said governing authority the facts justify it, an order shall be entered condemning the building, structure or trees and ordering that it be demolished or removed within a certain delay. If repairs will correct the dilapidated, dangerous or unsafe condition the mayor and board of aldermen may grant the owner the option of making such repairs, but in such case the general nature or extent of the repairs to be made, the time thereof, and the defects to be corrected shall be specified in the decision of said governing authority. Said decision shall be in writing and shall be final unless appealed from within five (5) days as provided in R.S. 33:4763. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 5, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 6-153. - Abatement by owner or town. 
(a)  The owner or his designated agent may proceed to demolish and remove the building, structure or trees, or have the same repaired, in accordance with the order of the mayor and board of aldermen provided he executes a contract in writing obligating himself to have the work done within the required time and files with the mayor a copy of said contract together with a bond to guarantee performance. 
(b)  In the event the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or trees, refuses to comply with the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen and fails to appeal therefrom within the legal delays as provided by R.S. 33:4764 then the mayor may proceed with the demolition or removal of the condemned building, structure or trees, in which case neither he nor the town shall be liable for damages. 
(c)  Prior to the demolition or removal of the building, structure or trees, the mayor or some official designated by him shall serve notice on the owner or agent, and on the occupant of the building, if any there be, or upon the attorney at law appointed to represent the absentee giving the time when the work will begin upon the demolition or removal of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 6, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 6-154. - Emergency conditions, condemnation procedure. 
In case of grave emergency where the condition of the building, structure or trees is such as to cause possible immediate loss or damage to person or property the mayor and board of aldermen as governing authority of said town may condemn the building, structure or trees, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice served upon the owner or his agent, or upon the occupant and the attorney at law appointed to represent the absent owner. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 4, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 6-155. - Lien for recovery of town expenses; appointed representative, fee. 
(a)  The town shall have a lien and privilege for the cost of demolishing or removing the building, structure or trees, against the lot and improvements upon which the building, structure or trees are situated and same may be preserved as set forth in R.S. 33:4766. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint an attorney at law to represent the absentee, minor or interdict upon whom notices or other proceedings may be served, and he shall be paid a reasonable fee to be taxed as part of the costs of demolition. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 7, 11-25-86)  
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Cemeteries, R.S. title 8; publicly owned cemeteries, R.S. 8:101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Burial in cemetery required. 
(a)  No deceased person shall be buried within the corporate limits of the town in any place other than a cemetery. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a cemetery is defined as a tract of land described by metes and bounds and within which there is already buried at the time five (5) or more persons. 
(Ord. No. 1041, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-66)  
Sec. 7-2. - Permit required for interment. 
(a)  No person shall open a grave for the purpose of interring a body in any cemetery maintained by the town without first obtaining a permit for the opening of such grave. 
(b)  Such permit shall be obtained from the sexton of such cemetery or the duly appointed caretaker thereof upon the payment of a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(c)  Such sum as enumerated in subsection (b) shall be placed into a special fund designated by the mayor and board of aldermen and shall be used exclusively for the care, maintenance and upkeep of such cemetery, including removal of excess soil caused by the opening of such graves. 
(Ord. No. 1042, §§ 1—3, 11-1-66)  
Chapter 8 - CIVIL RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Louisiana Equal Housing Opportunity Act, R.S. 51:2601 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Housing code, § 6-136 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-16. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings as ascribed in this section: 
Discriminate includes difference in treatment in the sales, lease, rental or financing of housing accommodations because of race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
Housing accommodations includes any building, structure or portion thereof which is used or occupied, or is maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings. 
Real estate broker means any real estate broker required to be licensed under R.S. 47:348 or one acting in the capacity of a real estate broker, who shall exercise any function of a real estate broker within the town. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 2-20-79) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-17. - Unfair housing practices. 
It shall be an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any real estate broker licensed as such by the town or parish: 
(1)  To publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication notice, advertisement, sign of other writing of any kind relating to the sale, rental or leasing of such housing accommodation, predicated upon the race, color, religion or the national origin or ancestry of any prospective buyer, lessee or renter of such property. (Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict a property owner from selling or disposing of his property to whomsoever he pleases, or from listing his property with a broker for sale or lease with such restrictions as the owner may choose to impose.) 
(2)  To discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation in the town because of race, color, religion or national origin or ancestry. 
(3)  In their capacity as brokers, to exploit or overcharge any person for housing accommodations in the town because of race, color, religion or national origin or ancestry. 
(4)  To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease, of any housing accommodation within the town on the ground of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion or national origin or ancestry. 
(5)  To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation in the town to sell or lease his property because of any present or prospective change in the race, color, religion or national origin or ancestry of persons in the neighborhood. 
(6)  To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, religion or national origin in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 2, 2-20-79)  
Sec. 8-18. - Violations. 
Any real estate broker violating any of the provisions of section 8-17 shall, upon conviction, have his real estate broker's occupational license suspended or revoked, or be punished as provided in section 1-11 or any combination of these penalties at the discretion of the judge for each and every violation. 
(Ord. No. 1125, § 3, 2-20-79)  
Chapter 9 - CRIMINAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Louisiana Criminal Code, R.S. 14:1 et seq.; Crime Victims Reparations Act, R.S. 46:1801 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-01. - Violation of certain state statutes. 
(a)  The violations of any of the provisions of state law hereinafter set out, within the town limits of the Town of Arcadia, are hereby prohibited: 
(1)  [General.] All crimes listed in Title 14 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Louisiana except those punishable by minimum sentences in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or six (6) months in jail or both; 
(2)  [Substance] possession. It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or chemical derivatives thereof, unless such substance was obtained directly, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order, from a practitioner or as provided in R.S. 40:978, while acting in the course of his professional practice. 
(b)  Every violation of such provisions shall be punished as per the provisions of the applicable revised statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1181, §§ 1, 2, 2-12-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1181, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 12, 1991, enacted provisions concerning the violation of certain state criminal statutes. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 9-01 has been at the discretion of the editors. 
Cross reference— Marijuana, provisions of state statutes adopted, § 9-110.  
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter or in other offenses under this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Another refers to any person or legal entity, including the state or any subdivision thereof. 
Anything of value must be given the broadest possible construction, including any conceivable thing of the slightest value, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private, and including transportation, telephone and telegraph services, or any other service available for hire. It must be construed in the broad popular sense of the phrase, and not necessarily as synonymous with the traditional legal term "property." In all cases involving shoplifting the term "value" is the actual retail price of the property at the time of the offense. 
Dangerous weapon includes any gas, liquid or other substance or instrumentality, which, in the manner used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm. 
Foreseeable refers to that which ordinarily would be anticipated by a human being of average reasonable intelligence and perception. 
Person includes a body of persons, whether incorporated or not. 
Property refers to both public and private property movable and immovable, and corporeal and incorporeal property. 
Public officer, public office, public employee or position of public authority means and applies to any executive, ministerial, administrative, judicial or legislative officer, office, employee or position of authority respectively, of the state or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or of any agency, board, commission, department or institution of the state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. 
State means the State of Louisiana, or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of said state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. 
Whoever in a penalty clause refers only to natural persons insofar as imprisonment is provided, but insofar as a fine may be imposed "whoever" in a penalty clause refers to any person. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, R.S. 14:2.  
Sec. 9-2. - Interpretation. 
The sections of this Code shall not be extended by analogy so as to create crimes not provided for herein; however, in order to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law, all of its provisions shall be given a genuine construction, according to the fair import of their words, taken in their usual sense, in connection with the context, and with reference to the purpose of the provision. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:3.  
Sec. 9-3. - Civil remedies not affected. 
Nothing in this Code shall affect any civil remedy provided by the law pertaining to civil matters, or any legal power to inflict penalties for contempt. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:6.  
Sec. 9-4. - Crime defined. 
A crime is that conduct which is defined as criminal in this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:7.  
Sec. 9-5. - Criminal conduct. 
Criminal conduct consists of: 
(1)  An act or a failure to act that produces criminal consequences, and which is combined with criminal intent; or 
(2)  A mere act or failure to act that produces criminal consequences, where there is no requirement of criminal intent; or 
(3)  Criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:8.  
Sec. 9-6. - Criminal consequences. 
Criminal consequences are any set of consequences prescribed in the various sections of this Code as necessary to constitute any of the various crimes defined therein. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:9.  
Sec. 9-7. - Criminal intent. 
Criminal intent may be specific or general: 
(1)  Specific criminal intent is that state of mind which exists when the circumstances indicate that the offender actively desired the prescribed criminal consequences to follow his act or failure to act. 
(2)  General criminal intent is present whenever there is specific intent, and also when the circumstances indicate that the offender, in the ordinary course of human experience, must have adverted to the prescribed criminal consequences as reasonably certain to result from his act or failure to act. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:10.  
Sec. 9-8. - Criminal intent; how expressed. 
The definitions of some crimes require a specific criminal intent, while in others no intent is required. Some crimes consist merely of criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. However, in the absence of qualifying provisions, the terms "intent" and "intentional" have reference to "general criminal intent." 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:11.  
Sec. 9-9. - Criminal negligence. 
Criminal negligence exists when, although neither specific nor general criminal intent is present, there is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender's conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful man under like circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:12.  
Sec. 9-10. - Insanity. 
If the circumstances indicate that because of a mental disease or mental defect the offender was incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong with reference to the conduct in question, the offender shall be exempt from criminal responsibility. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:14.  
Sec. 9-11. - Intoxication. 
The fact of an intoxicated or drugged condition of the offender at the time of the commission of the crime is immaterial, except as follows: 
(1)  Where the production of the intoxicated or drugged condition has been involuntary, and the circumstances indicate this condition is the direct cause of the commission of the crime, the offender is exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(2)  Where the circumstances indicate that an intoxicated or drugged condition has precluded the presence of a specific criminal intent or of special knowledge required in a particular crime, this fact constitutes a defense to a prosecution for that crime. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:15.  
Sec. 9-12. - Mistake of fact. 
Unless there is a provision to the contrary in the definition of a crime, reasonable ignorance of fact or mistake of fact which precludes the presence of any mental element required in that crime is a defense to any prosecution for that crime. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:16.  
Sec. 9-13. - Mistake of law. 
Ignorance of the provision of this Code is not a defense to any criminal prosecution. However, mistake of law which results in the lack of an intention that consequences which are criminal shall follow, is a defense to a criminal prosecution under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the offender reasonably relied on an act of this city in repealing an existing criminal provision, or in otherwise purporting to make the offender's conduct lawful; or 
(2)  Where the offender reasonably relied on a final judgment of a competent court of last resort that a provision making the conduct in question criminal was unconstitutional. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:17.  
Sec. 9-14. - Justification; general provisions. 
The fact that an offender's conduct is justifiable, although otherwise criminal, shall constitute a defense to prosecution for any crime based on that conduct. This defense of justification can be claimed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the offender's conduct is an apparently authorized and reasonable fulfillment of any duties of public office; or 
(2)  When the offender's conduct is a reasonable accomplishment of an arrest which is lawful under the laws of the state or of this Code; or 
(3)  When for any reason the offender's conduct is authorized by law; or 
(4)  When the offender's conduct is reasonable discipline of minors by their parents, tutors or teachers; or 
(5)  When the crime consists of a failure to perform an affirmative duty and the failure to perform is caused by physical impossibility; or 
(6)  When any crime is committed through the compulsion of threats by another of death or great bodily harm, and the offender reasonably believes the person making the threats is present and would immediately carry out the threats if the crime were not committed; or 
(7)  When the offender's conduct is in defense of persons or of property under any of the circumstances described in Articles 19 through 22 of the Louisiana Criminal Code. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:18.  
Sec. 9-15. - Use of force or violence in defense. 
The use of force or violence upon the person of another is justifiable, when committed for the purpose of preventing a forcible offense against the person or a forcible offense or trespass against property in a person's lawful possession; provided that the force or violence used must be reasonable and apparently necessary to prevent such offense, and that this section shall not apply where the force or violence results in a homicide. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:19.  
Sec. 9-16. - Aggressor cannot claim self-defense. 
A person who is the aggressor or who brings on a difficulty cannot claim the right of self-defense unless he withdraws from the conflict in good faith in such a manner that his adversary knows or should know that he desires to withdraw and discontinue the conflict. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:21.  
Sec. 9-17. - Defense of others. 
It is justifiable to use force or violence in the defense of another person when it is reasonably apparent that the person attacked could have justifiably used such means himself, and when it is reasonably believed that such intervention is necessary to protect the other person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:22.  
Sec. 9-18. - Principals. 
All persons concerned in the commission of a crime, whether present or absent, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, aid and abet in its commission, or directly or indirectly counsel or procure another to commit the crime, are principals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:24.  
Sec. 9-19. - Accessories after the fact. 
(a)  An accessory after the fact is any person who, after the commission of a criminal offense, shall harbor, conceal or aid the offender, knowing or having reasonable ground to believe that he has committed a breach of the law, and with the intent that he may avoid or escape from arrest, trial, conviction or punishment. 
(b)  An accessory after the fact may be tried and punished notwithstanding the fact that the principal may not have been arrested, tried, convicted or amenable to justice. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:25.  
Sec. 9-20. - Attempt. 
(a)  Any person, who, having a specific intent to commit a crime, does or omits an act for the purpose of and tending directly toward the accomplishing of his object is guilty of an attempt to commit the offense intended; and it shall be immaterial whether, under the circumstances, he would have actually accomplished his purpose. 
(b)  Mere preparation to commit a crime shall not be sufficient to constitute an attempt; but lying in wait with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, or searching for the intended victim with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, shall be sufficient to constitute an attempt to commit the offense intended. 
(c)  An attempt is a separate but lesser grade of the intended crime; and any person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a crime, although it appears on the trial that the crime intended or attempted was actually perpetrated by such person in pursuance of such attempt. 
(d)  Whoever attempts to commit any crime shall be fined or confined or both in the same manner as for the offense attempted; but such fine or confinement shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine or one-half of the longest confinement prescribed for the offense so attempted or both. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:27.  
Sec. 9-21. - Conspiring to commit an offense. 
Anyone not actually participating in the crimes, offenses or other provisions enumerated in this chapter or elsewhere in this Code but conspiring with others for the purpose of exercising or participating in the same shall be guilty of a criminal conspiracy to commit the violation. 
State Law reference— Criminal conspiracy, R.S. 14:26.  
Secs. 9-22—9-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting law enforcement, R.S. 14:108 et seq.; offenses affecting organized government, R.S. 14:113 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-36. - Resisting an officer; obstruction defined. 
(a)  Resisting an officer is hereby declared unlawful and is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(b)  The phrase "obstruction of" as used herein shall, in addition to its common meaning, signification and connotation mean: 
(1)  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; 
(2)  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is incarcerated in jail; 
(3)  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer. 
No. 50, § 1, 7-3-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108.  
Sec. 9-37. - False personation. 
False personation shall be unlawful, and is the performance of any of the following acts with the intent to injure or defraud, or to obtain or secure any special privilege or advantage: 
(1)  Impersonating any public officer, or private individual having special authority by law to perform an act affecting the rights or interests of another, or the assuming, without authority, of any uniform or badge by which such officer or person is lawfully distinguished; or 
(2)  Performing any act purporting to be official in such assumed character. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:112.  
Sec. 9-38. - Obstructing a fireman. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to obstruct any fireman while in the performance of his official duties. Obstructing a fireman is hereby defined as intentionally hindering, delaying, hampering, interfering with, or impeding the progress of, any regularly employed member of the fire department while in the performance of his official duties; or cursing, reviling or using any opprobrious language directed at any such fireman while in the performance of his official duties. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:327.  
Sec. 9-39. - Obstruction of fire prevention. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with fire prevention by the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Defacing or destroying fire warning notices or posters; 
(2)  Injuring, destroying, removing or in any manner interfering with the use of any tools, equipment, towers, buildings or telephone lines used in the detection, reporting or suppression of fire. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:206.  
Sec. 9-40. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make, turn in, or report a false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 2, 2-4-47) 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, R.S. 14:59.  
Sec. 9-41. - False report of crime. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make or file with, the police authorities any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime. 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, R.S. 14:59.  
Sec. 9-42. - Escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an escape. The crime of escape is the intentional departure of a person from lawful custody of an officer or from any place where he is lawfully detained by any officer. 
State Law reference— Aggravated escape, simple escape, R.S. 14:110.  
Secs. 9-43—9-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses against the person, R.S. 14:29 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-56. - Battery defined. 
Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another; or the intentional administration of a poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:33.  
Sec. 9-57. - Aggravated battery. 
Aggravated battery is a battery committed with a dangerous weapon and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:34.  
Sec. 9-58. - Simple battery. 
Simple battery is a battery committed without the consent of the victim, and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35.  
Sec. 9-59. - Assault defined. 
Assault is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:36.  
Sec. 9-60. - Simple assault. 
Simple assault is an assault committed without a dangerous weapon and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:38.  
Sec. 9-61. - Aggravated assault. 
Aggravated assault is an assault committed with a dangerous weapon and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:37.  
Sec. 9-62. - Negligent injuring. 
(a)  Negligent injuring is the inflicting of any injury upon the person of another by criminal negligence and shall be unlawful. 
(b)  The violation of an ordinance shall be considered only as presumptive evidence of such negligence. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:39.  
Sec. 9-63. - Intimidation by officers. 
Intimidation by officers is the intentional use, by any police officer or other person charged with the custody of parties accused of a crime or violation of a municipal ordinance, of threats, violence or any means of inhuman treatment designed to secure a confession or incriminating statement from the person in custody, and is unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40.  
Sec. 9-64. - Terrorizing. 
Terrorizing is the intentional communication of information, known by the offender to be false, that the commission of a crime of violence is imminent or in progress or that a circumstance dangerous to human life exists or is about to exist; and thereby causing any person to be in sustained fear for his or another person's safety; causing evacuation of a building, a public structure, or a facility of transportation; or causing other serious disruption to the public, and is unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40.1.  
Sec. 9-65. - False imprisonment. 
False imprisonment is the intentional confinement or detention of another, without his consent and without proper legal authority, and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:46.  
Secs. 9-66—9-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses against property, R.S. 14:51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-76. - Criminal damage to property. 
Criminal damage to property is the intentional damaging of any property of another, without the consent of the owner, and shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 1, 5-1-28) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, R.S. 14:55, 14:56.  
Sec. 9-77. - Defacing buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to deface any building or property within the corporate limits of the town, by making signs or figures thereon, or write any indecent or obscene word, words or sentences on any building, room, hall, closet, wall or fence. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 1, 5-1-28) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 9-78. - Contaminating water supplies. 
Contaminating water supplies is the intentional performance of any act tending to contaminate any private or public water supply and shall be unlawful. 
Cross reference— Water generally, § 20-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:58.  
Sec. 9-79. - Criminal mischief. 
Criminal mischief is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Tampering with any property of another, without the consent of the owner, with the intent to interfere with the free enjoyment of any rights of anyone thereto, or with the intent to deprive anyone entitled thereto of the full use of the property; or 
(2)  Giving of any false alarm of fire; or 
(3)  Driving of any tack, nail, spike or metal over one and one-half (1½) inches in length into any tree located on lands belonging to another, without the consent of the owner, or without the later removal of the object from the tree; or 
(4)  The felling, topping or pruning of trees or shrubs within the right-of-way of a municipal street, without the prior written approval of the chief of police; or 
(5)  Giving of any false report or complaint to any officer of the law relative to the commission of, or an attempt to commit, a crime; or 
(6)  Throwing any stone or any other missile in any street, avenue, alley, road or highway, or open space or public square, or enclosure; or throwing any stone or other missile from any place into any street, avenue, road, highway, alley, open space, public square or enclosure. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59.  
Sec. 9-80. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-81. - Destroying, defacing or removing signs. 
No person shall intentionally and without authority destroy, deface or remove posted signs, or signs designating or purporting to designate the boundary lines of immovable property. 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, R.S. 14:63.  
Sec. 9-82. - Refusal to leave premises. 
No person shall without authority of law go into or upon or remain in or upon or attempt to go into or upon or remain in or upon any structure, watercraft or any other movable, or immovable property, which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by any owner, lessee or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purpose of this section, the above-mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable, or immovable property; including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or part, portion or area thereof at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.3.  
Sec. 9-83. - Inciting others to refuse to leave premises. 
(a)  No person shall incite, solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure any other person to go into or upon or to remain in or upon any structure, watercraft or any other movable which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing that such other person has been forbidden to go or remain there, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by the owner, lessee or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purposes of this section, the abovementioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or part, portion or area thereof, at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer investigating a complaint that the provisions of this section are being or have been violated or any such officer making any arrest for violation of the provisions of this section, is hereby vested with authority to require any person involved in such investigation or arrest to identify himself to such officer. Upon demand of such officer, the person involved shall inform the officer of his true name and address. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.4.  
Sec. 9-84. - Theft. 
Theft is the misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another or is under the control of another, either without the consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations and shall be unlawful. An intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be the subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.  
Sec. 9-85. - Unauthorized use of movables. 
Unauthorized use of movables is the intentional taking or use of any movable which belongs to another, either without the other's consent, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations, but without any intention to deprive the other of the movable permanently and shall be unlawful. The fact that the movable so taken or used may be classified as an immovable, according to the law pertaining to civil matters, is immaterial. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68.  
Sec. 9-86. - Receiving stolen things. 
Receiving stolen things is the intentional procuring, receiving, or concealing of anything of value which has been the subject of any robbery or theft, under circumstances which indicate that the offender knew or had good reason to believe that the thing was the subject of one of these offenses and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:69.  
Sec. 9-87. - Issuing worthless checks. 
(a)  Issuing worthless checks is the issuing in exchange for anything of value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with intent to defraud, of any check, draft or order for the payment of money upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of the issuing that the offender has not sufficient credit with the bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation and shall be unlawful. This provision shall not apply to payments on installment contracts or open accounts. 
(b)  The offender's failure to pay such check, draft or order, issued for value, within ten (10) days after notice of its nonpayment upon presentation has been deposited by certified mail in the United States mail system addressed to the issuer thereof either at the address shown on the instrument or the last known address for such person shown on the records of the bank upon which such instrument is drawn or within ten (10) days after delivery or personal tender of the written notice to said issuer by the payee or his agent, shall be presumptive evidence of his interest to defraud. 
(c)  In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed on a violation of this section, the court may, at its discretion, order as part of the sentence, restitution in the amount of the check or checks. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:71.  
Sec. 9-88. - Forgery. 
(a)  Forgery is the false making or altering, with intent to defraud, of any signature to, or any part of, any writing purporting to have legal efficacy and shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Issuing or transferring, with intent to defraud, a forged writing, known by the offender to be a forged writing, shall also constitute a forgery. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:72.  
Secs. 9-89—9-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting the public morals, R.S. 14:80 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-101. - Prostitution. 
Prostitution is: 
(1)  The practice by a person of indiscriminate sexual intercourse with others for compensation and shall be unlawful. 
(2)  The solicitation by one person of another with the intent to engage in indiscriminate sexual intercourse with the latter for compensation and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:82.  
Sec. 9-102. - Soliciting for prostitutes. 
Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing or transporting a person to any place with the intention of promoting prostitution and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:83.  
Sec. 9-103. - Letting premises for prostitution. 
Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge and shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 12, § 1, 8-2-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:85.  
Sec. 9-104. - Letting premises for obscenity. 
Letting premises for obscenity is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of obscenity or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:85.1.  
Sec. 9-105. - Gambling. 
(a)  Gambling as hereinafter defined is declared to be a misdemeanor and is prohibited within the corporate limits of this city. 
(b)  Gambling is defined as any one of the following acts: 
(1)  The intentional conducting, or directly assisting in conducting, as a business, of any game, contest, lottery or contrivance whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit; 
(2)  The intentional betting, wagering or risking the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit at any table, bank, alley, lottery or contrivance; 
(3)  The intentional betting, wagering or risking the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit at any game conducted with cards, dice, dominoes or other contrivance. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to gambling as hereinabove defined conducted within a bona fide private residence. For purpose of this section, "bona fide private residence" shall be defined as a structure actually used and occupied as a dwelling or place of abode, provided such structure is not a hotel, motel, rooming house or place of transient residence, and provided further that such structure is not used for or attached to any other structure used for the wholesale or retail sale of any material, substance or commodity of whatsoever kind or description. 
(d)  Any owner, proprietor, lessee or tenant of a building who knowingly permits gambling as elsewhere prohibited in above subsections in such building may be charged as a principal under above subsections. 
(e)  Any gambling paraphernalia or apparatus seized upon premises wherein any gambling herein prohibited is subsequently determined to have occurred, such determination to the conviction of any person for gambling on such premises, may be destroyed and any moneys seized thereat will be forfeited to the city and paid into the general fund upon order of the court adjudging such conviction. 
Cross reference— Gambling not to be permitted on premises licensed for amusement tables and devices, § 4-16. 
State Law reference— Gambling, R.S. 14:90.  
Sec. 9-106. - Obscenity. 
(a)  The crime of obscenity is unlawful and is the intentional: 
(1)  Exposure of the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva or female breast nipples in any public place or place open to the public view with the intent of arousing sexual desire or which appeals to prurient interest or is patently offensive. 
(2)  Participation or engagement in, or management, production, presentation, performance, promotion, exhibition, advertisement, sponsorship or display of, hard core sexual conduct when the trier of fact determines that the average person applying contemporary community standards would find that the conduct, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and the hard core sexual conduct, as specifically defined herein, is presented in a patently offensive way; and the conduct taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. Hard core sexual conduct is the public portrayal, for its own sake, and for ensuing commercial gain of: 
a.  Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual, simulated or animated, whether between human beings, animals or an animal and a human being; or 
b.  Masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition, actual, simulated or animated, of the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva or female breast nipples; or 
c.  Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning actual, simulated or animated, flagellation, or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a costume which reveals the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals, or female breast nipples, or in the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained, on the part of one so clothed; or 
d.  Actual, simulated or animated touching, caressing or fondling of, or other similar physical contact with a pubic area, anus, female breast nipple, covered or exposed, whether alone or between humans, animals or a human and an animal, of the same or opposite sex, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or 
e.  Actual, simulated or animated stimulation of a human genital organ by any device whether or not the device is designed, manufactured or marketed for such purpose. 
(3)  Sale, allocation, consignment, distribution, dissemination, advertisement, exhibition or display of obscene material, or the preparation, manufacture, publication or printing of obscene material for sale, allocation, consignment, distribution, advertisement, exhibition or display. Obscene material is any tangible work or thing which the trier of fact determines: 
a.  That the average person applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and 
b.  Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, hard core sexual conduct specifically defined in subsection (2) above; and 
c.  The work or thing taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(4)  Requiring as a condition to a sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication to a purchaser or consignee that such purchaser or consignee also receive or accept any obscene material, as defined in subsection (3) above, for resale, distribution, display, advertisement or exhibition purposes; or, denying or threatening to deny a franchise to, or imposing a penalty, on or against, a person by reason of his refusal to accept, or his return of, such obscene material. 
(5)  Solicitation or enticement of an unmarried person under the age of seventeen (17) years to commit any act prohibited by subsections (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(6)  Advertisement, exhibition or display of sexually violent material. "Violent material" is any tangible work or thing which the trier of facts determines depicts actual or simulated patently offensive acts of violence, including but not limited to, acts depicting sadistic conduct, whippings, beatings, torture and mutilation of the human body, as described in subsection (2)c. above. 
(b)  Lack of knowledge of age or marital status shall not constitute a defense. 
(c)  No theater employee or bookstore employee acting within the course and scope of a bona fide contract of employment wherein such employee is employed by any person exhibiting motion pictures or selling books, periodicals or other published materials pursuant to a license or permit to exhibit or sell the same issued by the state or any municipality, parish or consolidated city-parish government therein, shall be guilty of a violation of this section as a result of his possession, exhibition or sale within the course and scope of such employment provided such employee has no managerial duties and has no financial interest in the possession, exhibition or sale of any materials other than wages for his employment. 
(d)  The provisions of this section do not apply to recognized and established schools, churches, museums, medical clinics, hospitals, physicians, public libraries, governmental agencies, quasi-governmental sponsored organizations and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such organization. For the purpose of this subsection, the following words and terms shall have the respective meanings defined as follows: 
(1)  Recognized and established schools means schools having a full-time faculty and pupils, gathered together for instruction in a diversified curriculum. 
(2)  Churches means any church, affiliated with a national or regional denomination. 
(3)  Physicians means any licensed physician or psychiatrist. 
(4)  Medical clinics and hospitals mean any clinic or hospital of licensed physicians or psychiatrists used for the reception and care of the sick, wounded or infirm. 
(e)  Except for those motion pictures, printed materials, and photographic materials showing actual ultimate sexual acts or simulated or animated ultimate sexual acts when there is an explicit, closeup depiction of human genital organs so as to give the appearance of the consummation of ultimate sexual acts, no person shall be arrested, charged or indicted for any violations of a provision of this section until such time as the material involved has first been the subject of an adversary hearing under the provisions of this section, wherein such person is made a defendant and, after such material is declared by the court to be obscene, such person continues to engage in the conduct prohibited by this section. The sole issue at the hearing shall be whether the material is obscene. 
(1)  The hearing shall be held before the court having jurisdiction over the proceedings within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of notice by the person. The person shall be given notice of the hearing by registered mail or by personal service on the owner, manager or other person having a financial interest in the material; provided, if there is no such person on the premises, then notice may be given by personal service on any employee of the person on such premises. The notice shall state the nature of the violation, the date, place, and time of the hearing, and the right to present and cross-examine witnesses. 
(2)  The city or any defendant may appeal from a judgment. Such appeal shall not stay the judgment. Any defendant engaging in conduct prohibited by this section subsequent to notice of the judgment, finding the material to be obscene, shall be subject to criminal prosecution notwithstanding the appeal from the judgment. 
(3)  No determination by the court pursuant to this section shall be of any force and effect outside the judicial district in which made and no such determination shall be res judicata in any proceeding in any other judicial district. In addition, evidence of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall not be competent or admissible in any criminal action for the violation of any other section of this chapter; provided, however, that in any criminal action, charging the violation of any other section of this chapter, against any person that was a defendant in such hearing, involving the same material declared to be obscene under the provisions of this section, then evidence of such hearing shall be competent and admissible as hearing on the issue of scienter only. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:106.  
Sec. 9-107. - Peeping Tom. 
(a)  No person shall perform such acts as will make him a "Peeping Tom" on or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "Peeping Tom." 
(b)  "Peeping Tom" as used in this section means one who peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, situated on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the "Peeping Tom" be upon the premises of the person being spied upon. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:284.  
Sec. 9-108. - Vagrancy. 
The following persons are and shall be guilty of the misdemeanor of vagrancy: 
(1)  Habitual drunkards; or 
(2)  Persons who live in houses of ill fame or who habitually associate with prostitutes; or 
(3)  Able-bodied persons who beg or solicit alms, provided that this section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious, charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization thereof; or 
(4)  Habitual gamblers or persons who for the most part maintain themselves by gambling; or 
(5)  Able-bodied persons without lawful means of support who do not seek employment and take employment when it is available to them; or 
(6)  Able-bodied persons of the age of majority who obtain their support gratis from persons receiving old-age pensions or from persons receiving welfare assistance from the state; or 
(7)  Persons who loaf on the streets habitually or who frequent the streets habitually at late or unusual hours of the night, or who loiter around any public place of assembly, without lawful business or reason to be present; or 
(8)  Persons found in or near any structure, movable, vessel or private grounds, without being able to account for their lawful presence therein; or 
(9)  Prostitutes; or 
(10)  Persons upon whom or in whose possession shall be found any instrument, tool or other implement for picking locks or pockets, or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to account satisfactorily for the possession of the same. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:107.  
Sec. 9-109. - Telephone communications, improper language, harassment. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in or institute a telephone call, telephone conversation, or telephone conference, with another person, anonymously or otherwise, and therein use obscene, profane, vulgar, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate or harass another person; 
(2)  Make repeated telephone communications anonymously or otherwise in a manner reasonably expected to annoy, abuse, torment, harass, embarrass or offend another, whether or not conversation ensues; or 
(3)  Make a telephone call and intentionally fail to hang up or disengage the connection; or 
(4)  Knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(b)  Any offense committed by use of a telephone as set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place where the telephone call or calls originated or at the place where the telephone call or calls were received. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:285.  
Sec. 9-110. - Marijuana. 
The provisions, regulations and penalties for the violation of R.S. 40:961 et seq., relative to the use, sale, possession, delivery, disposition, etc., of marijuana are hereby adopted by the city. 
Cross reference— Substance possession unlawful, § 9-01(a)(2).  
Secs. 9-111—9-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting the public safety, R.S. 14:94 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-121. - Air guns. 
The use, firing, shooting and explosion of "air guns" or "air rifles" and "blow guns" within the corporate limits of this city is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot or explode "air guns" or "air rifles" or "blow guns" within the municipal limits.  
Sec. 9-122. - Illegal carrying of weapons. 
(a)  Illegal carrying of weapons is: 
(1)  The intentional concealment of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, on one's person; or 
(2)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, at any time by an enemy alien; or 
(3)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any tools, or dynamite or nitroglycerine, or explosives, or other instrumentality customarily used by thieves or burglars at any time by any person with the intent to commit a crime; or 
(4)  The manufacture, ownership, possession, custody or use of any switchblade knife, spring knife or other knife or similar instrument having a blade which may be automatically unfolded or extended from a handle by the manipulation of a button, switch, latch or similar contrivance. 
(b)  The provisions of this section except subsection (a)(4), shall not apply to sheriffs and their deputies, state and city police, constables and city marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of official duties. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to illegally carry weapons as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 1, 7-3-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95.  
Sec. 9-123. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge either in the daytime or nighttime, any firearm within the corporate limits of this city; except law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties, and except other persons acting in the necessary defense of life or property. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 8-2-04)  
Sec. 9-124. - Possession of dangerous weapons where mayor and board of aldermen are meeting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, whether concealed or in open view, a firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon in any place where the mayor and board of aldermen are holding a public meeting. Sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, state police officers, city police officers, constables, town marshals, and persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of their duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any person who enters a place where the mayor and board of aldermen are holding a public meeting does, by the mere fact of such entering, consent while on the premises to the search without a warrant of his person for any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police officer, city police officer, constable, town marshal or persons vested with police power. The search authorized by this section shall be limited to only weapons unless probable cause for a wider search is authorized. 
(c)  Place where the mayor and board of aldermen are holding a public meeting shall mean the building in which the meeting is actually held and the parking area immediately adjacent thereto. 
(d)  Any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon in the possession of any person in violation of subsection (a) shall be confiscated from the person and may be used as evidence in court. 
(e)  Any firearms or other dangerous instrumentalities seized under the provisions of this section shall be held by the police until the disposition of the charges against the defendant; in the event of a conviction, the weapon shall be destroyed unless otherwise ordered by the mayor, who shall have the authority to order the weapon either destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 5-11-76)  
Sec. 9-125. - Possession of dangerous weapons in alcoholic beverage establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon in any premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises except the owner or lessee of the premises, or their employees, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, state police, town police, constables, town marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of their duties. 
(b)  Any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police, town police, constables, town marshals, or persons vested with police power, may search any person found in any place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises and shall confiscate any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon which such peace officer may find; this search shall be limited to only weapons unless probable cause for a wider search is authorized. 
(c)  Any person who enters a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises does by the mere fact of entering, consent to the search of his person for any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon while on the premises, by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police, town police, constable, town marshal or persons vested with police power, without a warrant. 
(d)  Premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises shall include all of the licensed premises including the parking lot. 
(e)  Any gun or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon found on any person while on the premises of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed may be used as evidence in court. 
(f)  Any guns or other dangerous instrumentalities seized under the provisions of subsections (a)—(e), inclusive, shall be held by the police until the disposition of the charges against the defendant; in the event of a conviction, the weapon shall be destroyed unless otherwise ordered by the judge, who shall have the authority to order the weapon either destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 5-13-75)  
Sec. 9-126. - Obstruction of street. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful to obstruct a highway of commerce intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner by the placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, street, highway, thoroughfare, or runway of an airport, which will render movement thereon more difficult. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:97.  
Sec. 9-127. - Obstruction of walk. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful to wilfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building, structure, watercraft or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein.  
Sec. 9-128. - Trash fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to start or set any trash fire or to burn paper, grass, trash or debris where such fire is not protected by a proper furnace or incinerator, within the town limits.  
Sec. 9-129. - Abandoning or discarding iceboxes or other airtight containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or doors or which may not be released for opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator or container. It shall further be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which is airtight and has a snap lock or other device thereon without first removing said snap lock or locks, or door or doors, from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:324.  
Sec. 9-130. - Model glue; use of; unlawful sales to minors. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "model glue" shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles and which contains one or more of the following volatile solvents: 
(1)  Toluol, 
(2)  Hexane, 
(3)  Trichlorethylene, 
(4)  Acetone, 
(5)  Toluene, 
(6)  Ethyl acetate, 
(7)  Methyl ethyl ketone, 
(8)  Trichlorothane, 
(9)  Isopropanol, 
(10)  Methyl isobutyl ketone, 
(11)  Methyl cellosolve acetate, 
(12)  Cyclohexanone, or 
(13)  Any other solvent, material, substance, chemical or combination thereof having the property of releasing toxic vapors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any type of model glue for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system; or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any type of model glue to a minor for any reason whatsoever. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise transfer possession of any type of model glue to any minor for any purpose whatsoever, unless the minor receiving possession of the model glue is the child or ward of and under the lawful custody of the vendor, donor or transferor of the glue. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.1.  
Sec. 9-131. - Purchasing or selling gasoline or mineral spirits in glass containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or sell gasoline or mineral spirits in glass containers.  
Sec. 9-132. - Intentional failure to remove debris. 
(a)  Establishment of crime. It shall be a misdemeanor criminal violation for any contractor or subcontractor who cuts any tree, shrubbery or other vegetative material in the town to fail to remove such cut material within forty-eight (48) hours of the cutting thereof. 
It shall further be a misdemeanor criminal violation for any individual, entity, contractor or subcontractor to bring any tree, shrubbery, vegetative material or refuse into the town for disposal therein, exclusive of individuals, entities, contractors or subcontractors improving land for residential or commercial uses. 
(b)  Fines. Upon plea or conviction, the offender shall be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition, may be assessed by the court with all costs of removal of the debris by the town, or any of its contractors as a cost of court. 
(c)  Enforcement. Any police officer of the town may issue a summons under this part to compel the attendance of the owner, occupant or possessor of the property alleged to be in violation of this section, and this section shall be enforceable in the mayor's court of the town or the Louisiana District Court encompassing Bienville Parish. 
(Ord. No. 2123 , §§ 1—3, 11-13-12)  
Secs. 9-133—9-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting the general peace and order, R.S. 14:103 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-146. - Unnecessary noise. 
(a)  Unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the corporate limits. 
(b)  Nonexclusive enumeration of unnecessary noise. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns or signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any noise for any unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radio, phonograph or any musical instrument. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, street car or vehicle so out of repair or loaded in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Construction and repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets or highways in any residential district or section other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity, in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the town clerk, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days while the emergency continues. If the town clerk should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the words. 
(9)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in a hospital. 
(10)  Loading, unloading. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  Drums, loudspeakers. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(12)  Loudspeakers on trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(13)  Loudspeakers for advertising. The use or operation, or the causing to be used or operated, in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or through any window, doorway or opening of such building abutting upon the public street, or upon any public street any device or apparatus for tapping windows, or for amplifying sound from any radio or phonograph, or any sound reproducing device. 
(14)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(c)  Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any publicly owned vehicle while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of any public agency during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character, and for which a permit is first obtained from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 2-23-82)  
Sec. 9-147. - Disturbing the peace. 
Disturbing the peace shall be unlawful and is the doing of any of the following in such manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public: 
(1)  Engaging in a fistic encounter; or 
(2)  Addressing any offensive, derisive or annoying words to any other person who is lawfully in any street, or other public place; or call him by any offensive or derisive name, or make any noise or exclamation in his presence and hearing with the intent to deride, offend or annoy him, or to prevent him from pursuing his lawful business, occupation or duty; or 
(3)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; or 
(4)  Engaging in any act in a violent and tumultuous manner by any three (3) or more persons; or 
(5)  Holding of an unlawful assembly; or 
(6)  Interruption of any lawful assembly of people. 
(Ord. No. 11, 8-2-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:103.  
Sec. 9-148. - Keeping a disorderly place. 
Keeping a disorderly place is the intentional maintaining of a place to be used habitually for any illegal purpose or for any immoral sexual purpose and is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1, 8-2-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:104.  
Sec. 9-149. - Letting a disorderly place. 
Letting a disorderly place is the granting of the right to use any premises knowing that they are to be used as a disorderly place, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge and shall be unlawful. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:105.  
Sec. 9-150. - Demonstrations in or near building housing a court or occupied as residence by judge, juror, witness or court officer. 
Whoever, with the intent of interfering with, obstructing, or impeding the administration of justice, or with the intent of influencing any judge, juror, witness or court officer, in the discharge of his duty, pickets or parades in or near a building housing a court of the state, or in or near a building or residence occupied or used by such judge, juror, witness or court officer, or with such intent uses any sound-truck or similar device or resorts to any other demonstration in or near any such building or residence, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:401.  
Sec. 9-151. - Obstructing buildings or passageways. 
(a)  No person shall wilfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building, structure, watercraft or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to the erection or construction of any barricades or other forms of obstructions as a safety measure in connection with construction, excavation, maintenance repair, replacement or other work, in or adjacent to any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road or other passageway, nor to the placing of barricades or other forms of obstruction by government authorities, or any officer or agent thereof, in the proper performance of duties. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 3-30-26; Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 6-1-65) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100.1.  
Secs. 9-152—9-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING MINORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Sexual offenses affecting minors, R.S. 14:80 et seq.; offenses affecting the health and morals of minors, R.S. 14:91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-166. - Unlawful sales to minors and purchases by minors. 
(a)  Unlawful sales to minors is the selling, or otherwise delivering for value by anyone over the age of seventeen (17) of any intoxicating or spirituous liquors, or any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) and shall be unlawful. Lack of the knowledge of the minor's age shall not be a defense. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person over the age of seventeen (17) and under the age of eighteen (18) to purchase any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any adult to purchase on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen (18) any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving any licensed retail dealer in beverages of either high or low alcoholic content of any responsibilities imposed upon the dealer under the provisions of Title 26 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.  
Sec. 9-167. - Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles. 
(a)  Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles is the intentional enticing, aiding or permitting, by anyone over the age of seventeen (17), of any child under the age of seventeen (17), and no exception shall be made for a child who may be emancipated by marriage or otherwise, to: 
(1)  Beg, sing, sell any article or play any musical instrument in any public place for the purpose of receiving alms; or 
(2)  Associate with any vicious or disreputable persons, or frequent places where the same may be found; or 
(3)  Visit any place where spirituous or intoxicating liquors are the principal commodity sold or given away; or 
(4)  Visit any place where any gambling device is found, or where gambling habitually occurs; or 
(5)  Habitually trespass where it is recognized he has no right to be; or 
(6)  Use any vile, obscene or indecent language; or 
(7)  Perform any sexually immoral act; or 
(8)  Absent himself or remain away, without authority of his parents or tutor, from his home or place of abode; or 
(9)  Violate any law of the state or ordinance of any parish or village, town or city of the state; or 
(10)  Visit any place where sexually indecent and obscene material, of any nature, is offered for sale, displayed or exhibited. 
(b)  Lack of knowledge of the juvenile's age shall not be a defense. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92.  
Sec. 9-168. - Curfew. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Custodian means any person over the age of twenty-one (21) who has been deemed by the parent or guardian to be responsible for a juvenile. 
Guardian means any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
Minor means any person under the age of seventeen (17). 
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include but not be limited to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public, including the front or immediate vicinity of such. 
Town means the Town of Arcadia. 
(b)  Curfew terms. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age to be or remain upon any public street or thoroughfare or in any public place, including places of amusement within the city, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. from Sunday through Thursday or between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. from Friday through Saturday, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  When such person is accompanied by his parent or tutor or legal guardian, or some person of full age and competency to whom full authority, permission and responsibility over such juvenile shall have been given and delegated by the parent or tutor of such child; 
(2)  When such person is attending a special function or activity sponsored by an educational, religious, or nonprofit organization that requires such person to be in a public place at an hour later than that authorized in subsection 9-168(b), provided that the sponsor of the activity shall register the activity with the chief of police or his designee prior to the activity. The registrant shall state the time the activity shall end. Juveniles attending such activities shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 9-168(b) if they remain in any public place one hour past the time the registered activity is ended; 
(3)  When such person is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by his parent, tutor or other adult having the care and custody of the juvenile or where the juvenile is acting within the scope of legitimate employment. The juvenile shall be in possession of documentation from his parent, tutor or other adult having the care and custody of the juvenile which indicates the start and completion time of the errand, business, or activity directed by such person; 
(4)  When such person is on an interstate trip through the Town of Arcadia. The juvenile shall be in possession of documentation from his parent, tutor, or other adult having the care and custody of the juvenile which indicates the start and completion time of such trip 
(c)  Unlawful to permit minors in prohibited places. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment or other business place to permit any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to remain in such places during the hours prohibited by this section in the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply when such minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
(d)  Enforcement. In enforcing the juvenile curfew ordinance [this section], the police department of the town will abide by the following procedures: 
(1)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of the juvenile curfew ordinance [this section], shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and deliver him or her to the custody of a responsible adult at his or her home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report such action to the juvenile division of the police department. 
(2)  If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by police officer or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and address, he or she shall be taken to the police department and the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If such parent, guardian or other adult person cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any minor found to be in violation of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with the Louisiana Children's Code or other applicable Louisiana law. 
(2)  Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor found guilty of violating subsection (b) hereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment in the town violating subsection (c) hereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1198, 3-28-95)  
Secs. 9-169—9-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 9-181. - Cruelty to animals. 
Cruelty to animals is the intentional or criminally negligent mistreatment of any animal by any act, or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted upon the animal and shall be unlawful. 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl generally, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:102.  
Sec. 9-182. - Spitting in public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or on any hall, stairway or floor of any public building or conveyance. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 9-183. - Fortune-telling prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to practice or engage in "fortune-telling," "palmistry," "reading futures" and the like.  
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 10-16. - Adoption of Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the "Standard Fire Prevention Code," being particularly the 1979 edition thereof, and the whole of such code, an ample supply of which have been and are now on file in the office of the town clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and hereafter the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 7-11-67) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368.  
Sec. 10-17. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, including the Standard Fire Prevention Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 7-11-67)  
Chapter 10.5 - FLOODS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10.5-1—10.5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2115 , adopted Dec. 11, 2010, amended art. II in its entirety. Former art. II, §§ 10.5-31—10.5-42, 10.5-61—10.5-64, and 10.5-81—10.5-83, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1190, art. 1, §§ A—D, art. 2, art. 3, §§ A—G, art. 4, §§ A—D, art. 5, §§ A—C, adopted Aug. 23, 1993. 
 
Sec. 10.5-31. - Adopted. 
The flood damage prevention provisions, as adopted by Ord. No. 2115 on December 11, 2010, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth in this volume. 
(Ord. No. 2115 , 12-11-10)  
Chapter 11 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Power to regulate garbage removal, R.S. 33:4169.1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Arcadia landfill; use regulated. 
From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following at the Arcadia landfill: 
(1)  Scavenge, salvage, or otherwise disturb or remove any abandoned material whatsoever; 
(2)  Light a fire or otherwise cause any burning; 
(3)  Abandon the carcass of any dead animal; 
(4)  Permit or cause any domestic animal to run at large; 
(5)  Abandon any "hazardous waste," as defined by Louisiana statutes and regulations of the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources; 
(6)  Abandon any material except as specifically instructed and prescribed by the town employee lawfully assigned to the care of the Arcadia landfill; 
(7)  Damage or otherwise interface with any lock, gate, fence, or other restraining or protective structure; 
(8)  In any way interfere with any town employee in the performance of his duties; 
(9)  Make any unauthorized entry upon the Arcadia landfill. 
(Ord. No. 1149, § 1, 9-14-82)  
Secs. 11-2—11-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-16. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Aircraft shall mean any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle shall mean a litter storage and collection receptacle constructed so to reasonably confine and retain litter and trash. 
Commercial handbill shall mean any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place at any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this town; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purpose, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage shall mean animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. 
Litter shall mean garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill shall mean any printed or written matter, or sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Park shall mean a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the town, owned or used by the town and its inhabitants, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Private premises shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designated or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place shall mean any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, grounds or building. 
Refuse shall mean all solid waste, except body waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned motor vehicles and solid market industrial wastes. 
Rubbish shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastic and similar materials. 
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 11-17. - Placing in receptacles—Required. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the town except in public receptacles, or in authorized receptacles for collection.  
Sec. 11-18. - Same—So as to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.  
Sec. 11-19. - Sweeping into gutters; cleanliness of sidewalk. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any private or public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 11-20. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the town shall keep all premises, including sidewalk, service alleys, and parking area of their business, free of litter. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 11-21. - Throwing from vehicle prohibited. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the town, or upon private property. 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 11-22. - Vehicle loads. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 11-23. - Parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.  
Sec. 11-24. - Bodies of water. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter into any fountain, pond, stream, ditch, canal or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town.  
Sec. 11-25. - Throwing from aircraft prohibited without a permit. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the town any litter, handbill or any other object, without obtaining a permit from the town.  
Sec. 11-26. - Occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied private property within the town whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.  
Sec. 11-27. - Owner to maintain premises. 
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.  
Sec. 11-28. - Vacant lots. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the town whether owned by such person or not.  
Sec. 11-29. - Posting of signs. 
The public works department of the town is directed to install and maintain adequate signs at appropriate places throughout the town outlining the substance of this article, such signs warning the public that any violations thereof will be prosecuted. In addition, the town clerk is authorized to give proper publicity thereto.  
Secs. 11-30—11-36. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 11-37. - Throwing or distributing in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the town. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 11-38. - Throwing on vacant private premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.  
Sec. 11-39. - Distributing on private premises. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises.  
Sec. 11-40. - Distributing at inhabited private premises. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, unless requested by anyone upon such inhabited private premises not to do so, such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provision of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.  
Sec. 11-41. - Political. 
The provisions of this article notwithstanding, political handbills or printed matter may be handed out or distributed in public places to individuals who are willing to accept same; provided, however, no handbills of a commercial, political or noncommercial nature may be handed out or distributed to any occupant of a vehicle upon the public streets, whether such vehicle is moving or stopped. Nothing herein contained shall be construed in any way to deprive any bona fide organization or its members from enjoying and exercising any rights or privileges which they have, or may hereafter have, under the provisions of the laws of the state or the laws or Constitution of the United States of America.  
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, Ch. 10.5; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; nuisances, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Louisiana Environmental Quality Act, R.S. 30:2001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - State sanitary code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the safeguarding of the public health, that certain sanitary code known as the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana, prepared and promulgated by the Louisiana State Board of Health, as amended to date, copies of which have been and now are filed in the office of the town clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in all matters affecting the public health in the town. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 8-2-51) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368.  
Sec. 12-2. - Enforcement of sanitary code by health officer. 
All regulations of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana adopted by section 12-1 shall be enforced by the local health officer. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 8-2-51)  
Sec. 12-3. - Smoking in Arcadia Town Hall. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "smoking" means the carrying of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other form of tobacco or the inhaling of and exhaling of smoke by a person from any form of lighted tobacco. 
(b)  The smoking of tobacco in any form is hereby prohibited within any part of Arcadia Town Hall. A "No Smoking" sign shall be conspicuously posted. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 1197, §§ I—III, 2-28-95)  
Secs. 12-4—12-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES 
 
Sec. 12-31. - Advanced life support licensing required. 
(a)  All ambulances operating within the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, shall be required to be licensed as advanced life support level of prehospital and interhospital emergency care as such as defined in the Rules and Regulations of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals. 
(b)  That the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, finds and declares that the Town of Arcadia desires that advanced life support ambulance service be provided to the citizens of the Town of Arcadia, and it is the mandate of the Town of Arcadia, except as hereinafter provided, that all ambulances operated within the Town of Arcadia be staffed, equipped and licensed as advanced life support ambulances which would meet all requirements for said services of regulations promulgated by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals. 
(Ord. No. 2036, §§ 1, 2, 3-22-02)  
Sec. 12-32. - Annual inspection. 
All ambulances operating within the Town of Arcadia, except is hereinafter provided, shall be inspected and approved annually by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals pertaining to said vehicles. All transports, emergency and nonemergency, shall be made with vehicles duly licensed as advanced life support, and be equipped and operated as such. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 3, 3-22-02)  
Sec. 12-33. - Applicability. 
This article shall not apply to those ambulance services not receiving reimbursement, whether public or private, for their services. This article is not intended to restrict the operations of volunteer or not-for-profit ambulances. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 4, 3-22-02)  
Sec. 12-34. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person found guilty of violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 5, 3-22-02)  
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Abatement of public nuisances, R.S. 13:4711 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "nuisance" shall refer to the prohibitions contained in Articles 664 through 674 of the Louisiana Civil Code. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-2. - Nuisances generally. 
(a)  Any person who is guilty of unreasonable, unwarranted or unlawful use of his property, real or personal, or from his own improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, thereby working an obstruction or injury to a right of another citizen of the town or of the public in general, in producing any material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, hurt, damage or harm, or anyone whose personal conduct or use of property, whether owned by him or under his possession, use and control, which personal conduct and use of property shall cause an offensive, noxious or injurious injury to a citizen of the town or to the public in general, or causing a vexatious, disagreeable or annoying injury to a citizen of the town or to the public in general, shall be guilty of a nuisance and upon conviction shall be fined or imprisoned as is directed in section 1-11. 
(b)  The following conduct is hereby defined, particularly, as nuisances, which conduct shall constitute a violation of this article, however in defining such nuisances particularly, such definitions are not to be determined as exclusive and any other conduct which shall constitute a nuisance shall be subject to punishment as herein set forth: 
(1)  When noise is of such a character as to be productive of actual physical discomfort and annoyance to a person of ordinary sensibilities, except usual, necessary and ordinary sounds or noises now in existence from businesses presently in existence; 
(2)  Contamination or pollution of the atmosphere with offensive matter, where the contamination substantially impairs the use of property, or interferes with the comfort of a person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(3)  Dust blown from a person's land onto a neighbor's premises, where it is sufficient to cause perceptible injury to property or so pollutes the air as sensibly to impair its enjoyment; 
(4)  The causing of noxious fumes, gases or vapors to escape onto neighboring premises to such a degree as to render persons of ordinary sensitiveness uncomfortable and sick; 
(5)  Noxious smells or odors; 
(6)  The invasion of premises in the neighborhood or causing annoyance of the general public by smoke, soot or smudge; 
(7)  Invasions of one's premises by ashes, cinders, chaff, dirt, burning particles, refuse or sand; 
(8)  Obstruction of access to a person's property; 
(9)  A bawdy house or other disorderly house of like nature; 
(10)  Keeping of one's premises in a disorderly and untidy condition so as to be offensive to the neighborhood; 
(11)  When a person causes or allows sewage, garbage, filth, refuse or other noxious matter to be discharged, or to penetrate or drain from his premises into or onto the premises of another, or keeps such sewage, garbage, filth, refuse or other noxious matter publicly displayed in such a manner as to offend the appearance of the neighborhood, or in such a manner as to cause rats, rodents or other vermin to infest and invade the neighborhood, or in such a manner as to cause an unsanitary and unhealthy condition to exist in a neighborhood; 
(12)  The keeping or storage of gasoline, chemicals, natural gas, butane gas, or other dangerous substances, chemicals or matter in such a way as to present a continuing dangerous condition to the neighborhood; 
(13)  The keeping of one's yard or premises, or any sidewalk or banquette abutting such premises, in an untidy and unsightly condition so as to offend the sensibilities of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 4, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 41, § 1, 9-11-11; Ord. No. 316, § 1, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 317, §§ 1, 3, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 997, § 1, 11-3-59)  
Sec. 13-3. - Notice to abate. 
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the town, the health officer or some other duly designated officer of the town shall give five (5) days' written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 4, § 2, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 316, § 2, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 317, § 2, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 997, § 2, 11-3-59)  
Sec. 13-4. - Contents of notice. 
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary; 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the town will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person.  
Sec. 13-5. - Service of notice. 
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law.  
Sec. 13-6. - Abatement by town. 
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this article to abate the same, the health officer or other duly designated officer of the town shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 3, 11-3-59)  
Sec. 13-7. - Costs declared lien. 
Any and all costs incurred by the town in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 3, 11-3-59)  
Secs. 13-8—13-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS MATTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Weed cutting in municipalities, R.S. 33:5062 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-21. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, place or area within the town, or the agent of such owner, to permit on such lot, place or area, or upon any sidewalk or banquette abutting same, any weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths over one foot in height, or other noxious matter, that may be growing, lying or located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 317, §§ 1, 3, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 997, § 1, 11-3-59) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4876.  
Sec. 13-22. - Notice to remove. 
The town clerk, or his duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any lot, place or area as described in section 13-21 within the city, or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy or remove any weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, found growing, lying or located on such owner's property, or upon the sidewalk or banquette abutting same; provided that such written notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to the owner, or agent of the owner, at his last known address in accordance with the tax rolls of the town. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 2, 8-23-26; Ord. No. 317, § 2, 8-3-26; Ord. No. 997, § 2, 11-3-59)  
Sec. 13-23. - Removal by town. 
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal, of any owner of a lot as described in section 13-21, or agent of such owner to cut, destroy or remove such weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, growing, lying, or located upon such owner's property, or upon the sidewalk or banquette abutting same, within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice provided for in section 13-22, or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice, if the same is returned to the town by the post office because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the town clerk, or his duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the cutting, destroying or removal of such weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 3, 11-3-59)  
Sec. 13-24. - Cost levied against owner. 
Whenever the town clerk, or his duly authorized representative has paid for the cutting, destroying or removal of such weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, as set forth in section 13-23, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the town, which charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of such tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 3, 11-3-59)  
Sec. 13-25. - Recordation of lien. 
If the full amount due the town is not paid by the owner within ten (10) days after the cutting, destroying or removal of such weeds, or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, as set forth in sections 13-23 and 13-24, then, and in that case, the town clerk, or his duly authorized representative, shall cause to be recorded in the mortgage records of the parish, a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work and the date, place of property on which work was done, and the recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made; such costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of ten (10) per cent if same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes delinquent; sworn statement recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been properly and satisfactorily done, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collective as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 3, 11-3-59)  
Secs. 13-26—13-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNK AND ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alternative procedure for removal of abandoned vehicles, R.S. 32:471 et seq.; similar provisions, R.S. 33:4876. 
 
Sec. 13-37. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Abandoned major appliance shall refer to any refrigerator, freezer, range, machinery or other metal, tin or other discarded items which are not operable or in use, and which are so damaged or dismantled as to be a total loss and not worth the cost of repairs. 
Junked, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles shall mean any motor vehicle which is totally inoperable, which has been left unattended on any unused portion of an occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk, and is so damaged or dismantled as to be a total loss. 
Total loss shall mean that the cost to repair the damaged or dismantled motor vehicle exceeds the junk value, as determined by any recognized national appraisal book. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 9-11-73) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-38. - Deemed public property. 
The ownership of any junked, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles or any part or parts thereof, or any other junk, discarded or abandoned major appliances, such as refrigerators, freezers, ranges or machinery or other metal, tin or other discarded items on any vacant lot or on any unused portion of any occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk within the town and which is not removed by the owner thereof after due notice, as provided in this article, shall be forfeited to the public. Such vehicles or items shall be considered public property and disposed of as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 2, 9-11-73) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4876(B).  
Sec. 13-39. - Procedure for removal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be responsible for the administration of this article and shall remove or cause to be removed from the streets, sidewalks, neutral ground or vacant lots, or any unused portion of an occupied lot in the town, all junked, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles and any other junk, discarded or abandoned major appliances, such as refrigerators, freezers, ranges or machinery or any other metal, tin or discarded items, all in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Prior to the removal of any such vehicle or major appliance, the chief of police shall place or have placed on the motor vehicle or major appliance a notice of removal, which notice shall be placed on the vehicle or appliance at least ten (10) days prior to its removal. The notice shall state that the vehicle or appliance unless claimed within ten (10) days will be considered public property and removed from the town street or from the lot on which it is located and sold for junk. The notice shall further state the following: 
(1)  The date the notice was placed on the vehicle or appliance; 
(2)  The date the ten (10) days notice will expire; 
(3)  That any person claiming to have an interest in the vehicle or appliance should contact the chief of police. 
Such notice shall be placed in a prominent place on the abandoned and junked motor vehicle or appliance so as to be plainly in public view. 
(c)  The chief of police, after the time provided hereinabove has expired, shall remove or cause to be removed the junked, wrecked or used automobile or motor vehicle or the junk, discarded or abandoned major appliance from the streets or the lot where same is located and the chief of police is further authorized to convey same to a scrap iron dealer approved by the town for sale as scrap iron. 
(d)  All junked, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles removed from the streets, neutral grounds or sidewalks in accordance with this section shall be subject to a service charge not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) by the owner of the car or motor vehicle. 
(e)  In the case of other abandoned property, such as major appliances, including refrigerators, freezers, ranges or machinery as hereinabove set forth, the notice shall be placed on the junked appliance and a copy of same shall also be given to the owner of the lot or parcel of ground upon which the junked material is located. This shall likewise be done in the case of junked automobiles or motor vehicles located on private property. Exactly the same notice shall be placed on the automobiles or appliances on private property as placed upon the items on the streets or on public property. 
(f)  In the case of junked, wrecked or abandoned property, such as motor vehicles or major appliances, on private property, after the procedures set forth herein, to wit: A written notice placed on the automobile or appliance and a written notice sent by certified mail to the owner of the lot, then the cost of removing the material shall constitute a special lien against the lot, collectible in the same manner as special assessments collected by law. The lien shall not exceed the actual cost of removal of the abandoned property or motor vehicle and shall in no event exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any one lot or parcel of ground. 
(g)  The chief of police shall furnish a report to the director of the state motor vehicle division of the department of revenue, each month, with the following information: 
(1)  The location where the junked and abandoned motor vehicle was abandoned; 
(2)  All identification information available; 
(3)  Date of sale and name and address of scrap iron dealer who purchased the junked, wrecked or used motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 3, 9-11-73) 
State Law reference— Power of city to prohibit storing or abandoning of junk, vehicles, etc., R.S. 33:4876(A).  
Sec. 13-40. - Record of sales. 
The chief of police shall keep a complete record of all abandoned, stripped, wrecked or junked motor vehicles removed from streets, with the details as to the date of placing the ten (10) day notice, the date of removal from the streets or from private property, and the name and address of the scrap iron dealer who picked it up or to whom it was taken. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 4, 9-11-73)  
Sec. 13-41. - Contract for removal. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, the chief of police is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with an approved towing service for the removal of abandoned, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles from the streets of the town, and from private lots in the town. This towing service shall act for and be the agent of the town in the removal of such vehicles. Any such agreement shall be approved by the mayor and board of aldermen as to the form and legality. Any proceeds received from the sale of abandoned, junked, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles, or junked, discarded or abandoned major appliances after their removal from the streets of the town or from private property, as hereinabove provided, shall accrue to the general fund of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1086, § 5, 9-11-73)  
Chapter 14 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1151, §§ 1(A)—(R), enacted Nov. 23, 1982, did not specifically amend this Code; therefore, inclusion as §§ 14-1—14-18, was at the editor's discretion. Provisions formerly codified as § 14-1 have been treated as being superseded by similar provisions of § 14-3(2) and § 14-17; former § 14-1 was derived from Ord. No. 946, §§ 1, 3, enacted Oct. 2, 1952. 
Cross reference— License taxes, § 18-16 et seq.; sales and use tax, § 18-49 et seq. 
State Law reference— Hawkers and peddlers, R.S. 33:4831 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Itinerant vendor. The term "itinerant vendor" means and includes and shall be construed to mean and include all persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in the municipality of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, including photographs and portraits, or exhibiting the same for sale, who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof, either hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure or other enclosure in the municipality, in, through or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. 
Temporary. The word "temporary" means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the municipality for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises, for at least six (6) months, in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
Transient. The word "transient" means and shall be construed to mean any such business of any such itinerant vendor as may be operated or conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees, who reside away from the municipality or who have fixed places of business in places other than the municipality, or who have their headquarters in places other than the municipality, or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the municipality with the purpose or intention of removing them, or the unsold portion thereof, away from the municipality before the expiration of six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(A), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(Q), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-3. - Exemption from provisions of chapter. 
This chapter is not, and shall not be held to be applicable to the: 
(1)  Ordinary commercial traveler who sells or exhibits for sale goods or merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and dealing in such goods or merchandise; 
(2)  Vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock, or agricultural products in their natural state produced by vendors; proof of such natural state and production by the vendor must be made to the tax collector of the city; 
(3)  Sales of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(R), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-4. - Duty of police—Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the town to require any person seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's license, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(M), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-5. - Same—Records. 
The chief of police shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter and the clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(N), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-6. - Solicitor's permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or collect money or to sell tickets or tags upon the streets of the municipality, or in any office building or other public building within the municipality, or to solicit alms, food, clothing or other contributions within the municipality for any charity, church or philanthropic institution, or for the support or assistance of any corporation or institution whatsoever, unless the person so soliciting or collecting or selling tickets or tags shall first obtain a permit authorizing such collections, soliciting or sales. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(D), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-7. - Itinerant vendor's license—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, any goods or merchandise, including photographs and portraits, in the municipality, without first obtaining a license so to do; provided, however, that this section shall not be held to be applicable to the ordinary commercial traveler who sells or exhibits for sale goods or merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and dealing in such goods or merchandise; to vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural products in their natural state; or to the sale of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds of which are applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(E), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-8. - Same—Application—Generally. 
Application for the itinerant vendor's license required by this chapter shall be made to the clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date of any contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the municipality. Such application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating the full name and address of the itinerant vendor, the location of his principal office and place of business, the names and addresses of its officers, if it is a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all partners, if such itinerant vendor is a firm. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(F), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-9. - Same—Same—Accompanying statements and instruments. 
Before any license required of an itinerant vendor by this chapter shall issue, the application therefor must be accompanied by: 
(1)  A statement showing the kind and character of the goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited; 
(2)  A certified copy of the charter, if the itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state; 
(3)  A certified copy of its permit to do business in Louisiana, if the itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of some state other than Louisiana; 
(4)  A bond in a sum of not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), executed by the itinerant vendor as principal, with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the clerk, which bond shall be payable to the mayor and his successors in office for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto and conditioned that the principal and surety shall pay all damages to any person caused by or arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the itinerant vendor while conducting any sale or exhibit in the municipality. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license and two (2) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(G), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-10. - Same—Fees. 
For each itinerant vendor's license issued under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant therefor shall pay to the clerk the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such sum shall be compensation to the municipality for the service required of it by this chapter and to enable the municipality to partially defray the expenses of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(H), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-11. - Issuance. 
The clerk shall issue an itinerant vendor's license authorizing such vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, in the municipality, his goods or merchandise only after such vendor shall have fully complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, including the payment of the fee provided for in section 14-10. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(I), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-12. - Same—Duration. 
The itinerant vendor's license provided for in this chapter shall continue so long as such sale or exhibit is continuously held in the municipality, but in no event shall it continue for more than thirty (30) days from the date of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(J), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-13. - Same—Display. 
The itinerant vendor's license provided for by this chapter shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where any sale or exhibit permitted by it is being conducted and shall remain so displayed for so long as any goods or merchandise are being so sold or exhibited. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(K), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-14. - Same—Transfer; authority limited to one person. 
The itinerant vendor's license provided for by this chapter shall not be transferable nor shall it give authority to more than one person to sell or exhibit goods or merchandise as an itinerant vendor, either by agent or clerk or in any other way than his own proper person; provided, however, that any person having obtained such license may have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting the sale or exhibit who shall have authority to aid that principal, but not to act for or without him. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(L), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-15. - Revocation of license or permit; notice and hearing. 
Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the mayor after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business as peddler; 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(O), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-16. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the town clerk in the denial of an application for permit or license as provided in this chapter, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided in this chapter, shall have the right of appeal to the board of aldermen. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the said board, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as appropriately provided in this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the board on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(P), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-17. - Entering private residence without invitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise to go in and upon any private residence in the municipality, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of such residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same. Such practice is hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as a misdemeanor; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the vending or sale of ice, or soliciting orders for the sale of ice, milk and dairy products, truck vegetables, poultry and eggs, and other farm and garden produce, so far as the sale of the named commodities is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(B), 11-23-82)  
Sec. 14-18. - Stopping in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person selling articles of any kind from any stand, tray, vehicle or other container to stop on any alley, street, sidewalk or other public place of the municipality, except when he is actually engaged in making a sale. 
(Ord. No. 1151, § 1(C), 11-23-82)  
Chapter 15 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 10.5; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Planning generally, R.S. 33:101 et seq.; municipal zoning regulations generally, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Municipal planning commissions generally, R.S. 33:101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-16. - Created. 
There is hereby created a municipal planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 12-11-56) 
State Law reference— Authority to create a planning commission, R.S. 33:102; planning commission to serve as the zoning commission, R.S. 33:4726.  
Sec. 15-17. - Composition; appointment. 
The planning commission shall be composed of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 12-11-56) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103.  
Sec. 15-18. - Compensation. 
All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 2, 12-11-56) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103.  
Sec. 15-19. - Member's terms; filling of vacancies. 
The members of the planning commission shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years from and after the expiration of their predecessors in office. If a vacancy occurs otherwise than expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment by the mayor for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 2, 12-11-56) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103.  
Sec. 15-20. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the planning commission shall be as presently provided by law and particularly R.S. 33:101 to 33:110, inclusive and 33:4721 to 33:4732, inclusive, or as such statutes may in the future be amended. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 3, 12-11-56)  
Sec. 15-21. - Acting as municipal zoning commission. 
The planning commission shall serve as a municipal zoning commission, and when acting as such, it shall hold separate meetings with separate minutes and records. When acting as the municipal zoning commission, it shall exercise all of the powers and duties conferred by R.S. 33:4721 through R.S. 33:4729. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4726.  
Secs. 15-22—15-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGIONAL PLANNING AREA 
 
Sec. 15-32. - Created. 
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 33:131, there is hereby created a regional planning area, which shall include the area shown on the map on file in the clerk's office and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 1, 9-27-71)  
Sec. 15-33. - Regional planning commission—Created. 
For the purpose of exercising the powers and duties set forth in R.S. 33:131 through 33:144, inclusive, there is hereby created the Northwest Louisiana Regional Planning Commission. In accordance with Section 132, of L.R.S. 33:131 through 33:144, the governing body of the regional planning commission is hereby designated to be the board of directors of the Coordinating and Development Council of Northwest Louisiana, Inc. (CDCNL), an economic development district duly authorized by the governor of the state, and duly designated by the United States Department of Commerce, Economic Development Administration. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 2, 9-27-71)  
Sec. 15-34. - Same—Members' right to vote or act. 
It is expressly understood that the privilege to act or vote on matters coming before the Northwest Louisiana Regional Planning Commission shall be limited to the CDCNL board members who represent parishes that have adopted the identical ordinance from which this article was derived, and CDCNL members-at-large who reside in parishes that have adopted such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 3, 9-27-71)  
Sec. 15-35. - Same—Expansion. 
The Northwest Louisiana Regional Planning Commission may be expanded to include additional parishes and incorporated areas, by passage of the identical ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 5, 9-27-71)  
Sec. 15-36. - When article shall be effective. 
This article shall be effective in and for the regional planning area described above upon the adoption of this article and other identical ordinances by the governing authority of adjacent parishes. As and when this article becomes effective, it shall be filed, together with its accompanying map and copies of the other identical ordinances adopted by governing authorities, in the official offices of the member units of government. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 4, 9-27-71)  
Sec. 15-37. - List of governing bodies passing article to be filed with each upon passage. 
A true and correct list of all governing bodies passing the identical ordinance from which this article was derived shall be filed with the official office of each such governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1075, § 6, 9-27-71)  
Secs. 15-38—15-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 15-51. - Commission established. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Historic District Commission of the Town of Arcadia. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-52. - Recommendation and appointment of members. 
The commission shall consist of a minimum of five (5) and a maximum of ten (10) members, all of whom shall reside in the area served by the governmental unit and shall be appointed by the mayor. Additionally, the mayor may appoint not more than five (5) parish residents to serve as members in an advisory, non-voting capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § I, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-53. - Term of members; vacancies. 
Each of the members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. The first commission shall have staggered terms to be determined by the mayor. The chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected annually by the members of the commission. Whenever the term of a member of the commission expires, the mayor shall appoint his/her successor. The members may serve consecutive terms. All commission members shall have a demonstrated knowledge of or interest, competence, or expertise in historic preservation. The commission shall seek the advice, as needed, or professionals in the related disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, or archaeology, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § II, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-54. - Administration and committees of community development. 
The director of community development will provide staff support to the commission and will act as liaison between the commission and the office of the mayor. Nominal expenses necessary to carry out the duties of the commission will be budgeted through the aforementioned department. The recording secretary for the commission will be designated by the director and all files, records, and minutes of the commission will be maintained by the director. The town attorney shall be the ex officio attorney for the commission. The commission may designate and appoint, from among its members, various committees with such powers and duties as the commission may have and prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § III, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-55. - Rules, regulations and guidelines; meetings; reports and recommendations. 
The commission shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs not inconsistent with the laws of the town and state. The commission shall meet monthly, but meetings may be held at any time by the commission on the written request of any of the three (3) members or of the mayor. Copies of the rule, regulations, guidelines, and meeting minutes are available at city hall. Commission meeting agendas will be posted at city hall a minimum of three (3) days prior to each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § IV, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-56. - Purpose. 
The Arcadia Historic District Commission shall have for its purpose the preservation and stewardship of all structures in the designated historic district of the town. The commission shall have for its further purpose the guardianship of those structures which have architectural and historical value and which should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the town and state. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-57. - Definition of historic district. 
The following area of the Town of Arcadia is hereby designated as the "Arcadia Historic District," to-wit: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the Kansas City Southern Railroad with the centerline of North Hazel Street within the Town of Arcadia, Bienville Parish, Louisiana; thence run north along the centerline of North Hazel Street to the intersection of the centerline of North Hazel Street and Second Street; thence run westerly along the centerline of Second Street to its intersection with the center line of North Maple Street; thence run southerly along the centerline of North Maple Street to its intersection with the centerline of First Street; thence run westerly along the centerline of First Street to a point one hundred (100) feet west of the west right-of-way of North Maple Street; thence southwesterly and perpendicular to First Street, a distance of sixty (60) feet, more or less, to the northwest corner of Lot 8 of Block P; thence southwesterly along the west lines of Lots 8, 7, 6, 5, 4 3, 2 and 1 of Block P to the centerline of the Kansas City Southern Railroad; thence along the centerline of the railroad to its intersection with the centerline of North Hazel Street, being the point of beginning of the property described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-58. - Submission of plans to commission for exterior changes. 
(a)  The owner of any property within the historic district shall apply for a permit or certificate of appropriateness from the commission before the commencement of any work in: 
(1)  The erection of any new building or other construction in the Arcadia Historic District; or 
(2)  The alteration or addition to any existing structure in the Arcadia Historic District; or 
(3)  The painting, repairing or demolishing of any existing building situated within the Arcadia Historic District. 
(4)  The relocation of any building into or out of the Arcadia Historic District. 
(b)  The application therefore shall be made to the commission, accompanied by the full plans and specifications thereof so far as they relate to the proposed appearance, color, texture or materials and architectural design of the exterior, including the front, sides, rear and roof of such buildings, alterations or addition of any building or outbuilding, party wall courtyard, sidewalk, driveway, parking area, fence or other dependency thereof. 
(c)  Where, by reason of topographical conditions, irregularly shaped lots, or because of unusual circumstance applicable solely to the particular applicant, strict enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in serious undue hardship peculiarly affecting said applicant, then the commission, in passing upon his application, shall have the power to vary or modify adherence to this article provided always that its requirements insure harmony with the general purposes hereof and will not adversely affect the historic district as a whole. 
(d)  All changes and other work which has been done on exterior of the buildings in the historic district prior to the time of the adoption of the ordinance [from which this article is derived] are "grandfathered." 
(e)  For a period of one (1) year from the date the ordinance [from which this article is derived] is adopted, property owners within the historic district shall inform the historic district commission (in writing) of their intention to modify or relocate an existing building or construct a new structure in the historic district. A certificate of appropriateness from the historic district commission is desired but not mandatory a period of one (1) year from the effective date of the ordinance [from which this article is derived]. 
(f)  Notice of Intent to demolish a property in the historic district must be given in writing to the Arcadia Board of Aldermen. A ninety (90) day waiting period upon approval by the council will be invoked in order to allow alternatives to demolition to be investigated and pursued. 
(g)  The historic district commission will provide information on historical preservation techniques and practices on an advisory basis and do whatever is possible to encourage such changes in the historic district be in keeping with accepted and proven historic preservation guidelines and standards. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-59. - Commission recommendation and action thereon. 
The Arcadia Historic District Commission shall upon due consideration, render its decision concerning the approval or disapproval of the issuance of the permit, which may include such changes, if any, as in its judgment are reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of this article, and send its decision, in writing, to the applicant and the building inspector. If the permit is approved, the building inspector shall promptly issue a permit for such work in conformance with the commission's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-60. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision, act or proceedings of the Arcadia Historic District Commission shall have a right to apply in writing to the board of aldermen for reversal or modification thereof, and the mayor, or presiding officer of the board of aldermen shall have the right to stay all further action until the board of aldermen shall have had an opportunity to rule thereon. Any such appeal shall be taken in ten (10) days from date of the written decision, and the board of aldermen may consider said appeal at its next general or special meeting, but, in any event, not more than forty-five (45) days thereafter. The board of aldermen may affirm a decision of the Arcadia Historic District Commission by majority vote of its members. The board of aldermen shall have the right to reverse, change or modify any decision of the Arcadia Historic District Commission by majority vote of all its members. 
(b)  Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the board of aldermen affecting said historic district shall have the right to file a civil suit within thirty (30) days from date of decision in a court of competent jurisdiction under the usual rules of procedure governing same, with the right to stay order and injunctive relief provided the situation warrants it. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-61. - Injunctions. 
Whenever any person has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this article, the commission may make application to the appropriate court for an order enjoining such act or practice, or requiring such person to refrain from such prospective violation or to remedy such violation by restoring the affected property to its previous condition. Upon a showing by the commission or the town that such person has engaged or is about to engage in such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other appropriate order shall be granted without bond. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-62. - Penalties. 
Any owner, agent, lessee or other person acting for or in conjunction with him, who shall violate this article or law or rules, regulations or decisions of a commission, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation, except as hereinafter provided. Any owner, agent, lessee, or other person acting for or in conjunction with him, who shall demolish a structure or edifice without having received an appropriate certificate of appropriateness may be fined a single fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). For violations other than demolition without an appropriate certificate of appropriateness, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § V, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-63. - Stopping work commenced without permit. 
The building inspector shall promptly stop any work attempted to be done without or contrary to a permit issued under this article and shall promptly prosecute any person responsible for such a violation of this article or engaged in such violation. Any officer or authorized agent of the commission shall exercise concurrent or independent powers with the building inspector in prosecuting violations of this article and stopping work attempted to be done without or contrary to the permits reported [required] by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-64. - Provisions of article prevail in case of conflict. 
The provisions of this article shall govern and take precedence over any other provisions of any ordinance or codes of the Town of Arcadia. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-65. - New construction. 
(a)  Proposals for new construction in the Arcadia Historic Downtown District should seek compatibility with existing structures through the appropriate use of site planning, materials, decorative details, architectural elements, and scale. A proposed design should not draw unnecessary attention to itself in any one of these characteristics but be compatible with the architectural period of the historic downtown district. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  Scale: The relationship of the building and its elements (including doors and windows) to other structures in the district. It is important in considering scale, that a careful study be made of the height, width, and mass of buildings in the immediate neighborhood and district as a whole. This study should serve to confirm or deny the appropriateness of the height, width, and mass of the proposed building. Maximum height of any new structure shall conform to the secretary of the interior's standards for the treatment of historic properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitation, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings. In no case shall a new structure exceed a height of seventy-five (75) feet above the street. 
(2)  Siting: The positioning of a building on a lot. This process includes determining the setback of a building, the spacing of this building from adjacent buildings, and the location of the wall, fences, walks, drives, and landscaping, if any of these are used in the overall design. 
(3)  Materials: The surface building fabric which contributes to the exterior character and appearance of a building. 
(4)  Decorative details; ornamentation or embellishment: These include cornices, lintels, arches, balustrades, chimneys, shutters, columns, and other common details. When used, details should create a unifying effect on a building and should be compatible with the context of the neighborhood. 
(5)  Architectural elements; parts of a building that are integral to its composition: These include balconies, roofs, porches, chimneys, dormers, parapets, and other parts of a building that contribute to its overall shape and silhouette. The choice and arrangement of elements of a proposed building should reflect those of other buildings in the neighborhood. The building should not draw unnecessary attention to itself by failing to relate to neighboring styles. But neither should it copy these styles. The object is to compliment the context of the Arcadia Historic District. 
(c)  The Arcadia Historic District Commission shall follow the secretary of the interior's standards for the treatment of historic properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic buildings in considering all proposals for new construction and/or rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-66. - Fences. 
(a)  Fence design must be in harmony with the nature of the district. The following fencing materials are generally acceptable: iron, iron picket, brick, wood picket. 
(b)  The following fencing materials are not acceptable: barbed wire, chain-link, concrete block, stockade, plywood, hardboard, or asbestos board. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-67. - Floodlights. 
The Arcadia Historic District shall not be illuminated by privately controlled floodlights or other illumination except as approved by the historic district commission or as permitted specifically by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-68. - Overhanging balconies. 
No overhanging balconies or galleries may be removed, but new or additional balconies may be erected if they conform to the distinctive architecture of the historic district. The permit for all such new construction or any renovation shall be subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-69. - Signs. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Sign shall include any symbol device, image, poster, flag, banner, billboards, design or directional sign used for advertising purposes, whether painted upon, attached to, erected on, or otherwise maintained on any premises containing any words, letters, or parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, trade names or trade marks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business or a commodity or product, which is visible from any public street and is used to attract attention. 
(2)  Display includes erect, paint, repaint, place, replace, hang, rehang, repair, maintain paint directly upon a building or other structure, inlay, embed in, or otherwise exhibit in public view. 
(b)  Signs must conform to character of section. In addition to the prohibitions contained in this section, approval of the display of a sign in the Arcadia Historic District of the Town shall be granted by the commission only when such signs and the plans therefor, so far as they relate to the appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials and design, conform to the quaint and distinctive character of the Arcadia Historic District or do not injuriously affect it or impair the value to the community of those buildings having architectural or historical worth. 
(c)  No signs to be displayed in certain places. No sign shall be displayed from the parapet or roofs of any buildings in the Arcadia Historic District. No sign shall be displayed or placed in any manner whatsoever so as to disfigure or conceal any significant architectural feature or detail of any building. 
(d)  What signs may advertise. No sign shall be displayed in the Arcadia Historic District unless such sign advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the premises and, if it does do so, no more than fifty (50) percent of the area of such sign may be used to advertise products or commodities actually sold on the premises. This is exclusive of any pre-existing, historic/"ghost" signs. 
(e)  Number of primary signs. In general one (1) primary sign is allowed to each store, shop, or bona fide place of business, and this sign shall be no larger than the maximum stipulated in this article. 
(1)  In the case of a business operated on a corner lot that faces two (2) streets, one (1) primary sign on each street facing is allowed and shall be regulated as if each side were a separate storefront. 
(2)  In the case of a single sign being inappropriate, multiple primary signs may be used, the total face area of which may not exceed the maximum size stipulated in this article. 
(f)  Surface area of signs. The surface area of any sign shall be in direct proportion to the amount of front footage of each ownership and shall be as follows: 
(1)  For single faced signs, attached flat against the wall and including painted wall signs there shall be allowed thirty (30) square inches of sign surface area to each foot of lot frontage. 
(2)  For double faced signs, suspended by brackets or arms perpendicularly from the wall of a building, the surface area shall be the sum of the area of each face not to exceed thirty (30) square inches of sign surface area to each foot of lot frontage. 
(3)  In the case of multiple businesses operating at a single location, the total face area of signage may be increased to 1½ times the maximum stipulated in this article. 
(g)  Secondary signs. In addition to the primary sign(s) referred to in subsection 15-519(e), small secondary signs may be used to identify the following: 
(1)  Entrance doors; 
(2)  Operating hours; 
(3)  Temporary signs. 
(h)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs of a promotional nature may be placed on the interior of store windows. In no case may they remain longer than sixty (60) days. A permit is not required for the placement of a temporary sign. Temporary signs may be placed on the exterior of a building for the following special situations: 
(1)  For the identity of real estate for sale. 
(2)  For political advertisement. Except for signs larger than a two (2) foot by two (2) foot yard sign, no application is required. 
(3)  For promotion by nonprofit organizations. In no case may these signs exceed the size limitations of this article. 
(i)  Portable and changeable letter signs. No portable or changeable letter signs may be erected or allowed to remain within the Arcadia Historic District. Upon notification from historic commission, the violator will have thirty (30) days to comply, after which penalties set forth in section 15-62 will apply. 
(j)  Illuminated signs. No illuminated signs may be constructed or erected within the Arcadia Historic District without the express approval of the historic district commission. 
(1)  Concealed fighting is recommended. Bulbs may not be exposed. The light should enhance the sign as well as the building on which it is mounted. 
(2)  Internally illuminated signs are not permitted. 
(3)  Flashing, or intermittent signs (exclusive of historic signs) are not permitted. 
(k)  Signs no longer complying as to advertisement to be taken down. Any sign displayed which no longer advertises a bona fide business (exclusive of historic or "ghost" signs) conducted upon the premises shall upon notification by the Arcadia Historic District Commission or its agent (who is specifically authorized to so proceed), be taken down, removed or obliterated within thirty (30) days after such notification and failure to so comply on the part of the owner, occupant, agent or person having the beneficial use of any building or premises upon which such sign may be found shall subject such person to the penalty provided in section 15-62. 
(l)  Building code applicable to signs. All signs under this section shall be further governed by existing regulations of the building code of the town which are not in conflict with this section. 
(m)  Application for signs to be submitted to commission. All applications for permits to display signs with the historic district of the town shall be submitted to the historic district commission office for approval before a permit therefor may be issued in conformity with section 15-59. 
(n)  Form of application to display signs. Accompanying drawings application for a permit to display signs in the historic district of the town shall be made to the commission upon forms furnished by the commission. Such an application shall also be accompanied by sketches and drawings in triplicate showing details of construction and foundation when required by the building code of the town and shall delineate the size, shape, design, coloring, lighting, and position in relation to the building from or upon which it shall be displayed. 
(o)  Permanent signs already erected are "grandfathered." This does not include signs or wheels and other portable signs. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, §§ VI, VII, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-70. - Aerials, antennas etc., prohibited. 
The construction of aerials, antennas, or satellite dishes of any type within the Arcadia Historic District is prohibited without the express approval of the historic district commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97)  
Sec. 15-71. - Dumpsters and garbage cans. 
Garbage cans are allowed on the streets of the historic district on the day of pick-up only. Industrial dumpsters within view from the historic district streets shall be concealed by privacy fencing or relocated out of view in alleys behind buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § VIII, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-72. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
In order to insure the protective maintenance of resources, the exterior features of such properties shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the town's minimum housing code and the town's building code. 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § IX, 10-27-98)  
Sec. 15-73. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Any resource which is a landmark and all resources within a preservation district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons as may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such resource if it is found to have one or more of the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration to the extent that creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the town building inspector. 
(2)  Deterioration, as determined by the town building inspector, of a building characterized by one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
d.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration. 
e.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship or deterioration. 
g.  Members of ceilings, root ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
h.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material workmanship, or deterioration. 
i.  Any fault, defect, or condition in the building which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(b)  If the commission makes a preliminary determination that a resource is being demolished by neglect, it shall direct the town building inspector to notify the owner(s) of the resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefore, and shall give the owner of record thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of such notice or the posting thereof on the property, whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail restricted delivery, mailed to the last known address of the record owner(s) as listed on the town and/or parish tax rolls. 
(2)  If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource. 
(c)  If the owner(s) fail(s) to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by a building permit, the board of aldermen shall notify the owner(s) in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the board of aldermen at a date, time and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed or posted at least thirty (30) days before said hearing. For the purpose of insuring lawful notice, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The board of aldermen shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner(s) may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If after such hearing, the board of aldermen shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, it may direct the town building official to take appropriate action against the owner(s) if the necessary repairs are not completed within ninety (90) days of the determination by the board of aldermen that the subject building or structure is being demolished by neglect. 
(d)  Appropriate action is defined as follows: 
(1)  The council may direct the city building inspector to secure the building to such a state that it is no longer a safety hazard to the public and contiguous property owners; expenses for such action to be borne by the property owner. 
(2)  The council may direct the city building inspector to commence condemnation process; expenses for such action including actual destruction of the property to be borne by the property owner. A ninety (90) day waiting period will be invoked from time of declaration of condemnation and actual destruction of the building (to allow for other solutions to be presented). 
(Ord. No. 2012, § I, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2017, § X, 10-27-98)  
Chapter 16 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); any ordinance establishing and prescribing street grade of any street in the town saved from repeal, § 1-5(7); possession of alcoholic beverages in public places, § 3-2; dogs running at large prohibited, § 5-16; livestock running at large prohibited, § 5-39; cemeteries, Ch. 7; spitting in public places, § 9-182; sweeping litter into gutters, cleanliness of sidewalks, § 11-19; merchants duty to keep sidewalks free of litter, § 11-20; throwing or distributing handbills in public places, § 11-37; planning, Ch. 15; subdivision regulations, Ch. 17; design standards for streets and subdivisions, § 17-5(a); street improvements in subdivisions, § 17-6(a); sidewalk improvements in subdivisions, § 17-6(b); traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Streets and sidewalks, R.S. 33:3301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Adoption of an official map. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted for the purpose of naming and designating all the streets within the corporate limits of the town that certain map prepared by William F. Kilgore, dated October 3, 1963, as corrected and revised to March 1, 1964, and as revised from time to time, as the official map of the town. Such map is hereby adopted and incorporated as the official map of the town, for the limited purpose of showing the names of the streets within the town as fully as if set out at length herein. The names of the streets as shown thereon shall be the proper designation and name of the streets within the corporate limits of the town. 
(b)  Not less than three (3) copies of the map adopted by this section shall be on file in the office of the clerk, and that a copy thereof shall be paraphed "Ne Varietur" as per this section by the mayor and filed in the office of the clerk of court for the parish. 
(Ord. No. 1030, §§ 1, 2, 3-2-65)  
Secs. 16-2—16-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-16. - Permit. 
No person shall cut or cause to be cut the hard-surfaced streets of the town or any portion of the public right-of-way, for the purpose of installing utility facilities or for any other purpose whatsoever, without first obtaining a written permit from the town. 
(Ord. No. 915, § 1, 8-3-48; Ord. No. 925, § 1, 11-1-49; Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 6-3-69)  
Sec. 16-17. - Deposit. 
(a)  A permit shall be issued under this article by the mayor and board of aldermen or any person designated by the mayor and board of aldermen to issue such permit upon the deposit of a sum equal to ten dollars ($10.00) per lineal foot of the distance of the street or portion of the public right-of-way to be cut. 
(b)  Each deposit shall be retained by the mayor and board of aldermen for a period of ten (10) days and after such time, may be returned to the applicant for such permit provided the street has been satisfactorily repaired. If the street is not satisfactorily repaired within ten (10) days of the cutting of the street, the amount of deposit shall be forfeited by the giving of notice of forfeiture to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 915, § 1, 8-3-48; Ord. No. 925, § 2, 11-1-49; Ord. No. 1060, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-69)  
Chapter 17 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town saved from repeal, § 1-5(9); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 10.5; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Planning generally, R.S. 33:101 et seq.; regulation of subdivisions, R.S. 33:111 et seq.; platting land into squares or lots, R.S. 33:5051 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. It safeguards the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider and the local government. Once land has been cut up into streets, lots and blocks, and has been publicly recorded, the correction of defects is costly and difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or later becomes a public responsibility, in that roads and streets must be maintained, and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is, as a result, affected in many important respects. It is, therefore, to the interests of the public, the developer and future homeowners that subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and intelligent development standards. 
(b)  This chapter is intended to provide common grounds of understanding and cooperation between the subdividers and the planning commission.  
Sec. 17-2. - Authority and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Authority. In accordance with the provisions of R.S. 33:101—33:119, and in order to promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town, and to assist in bringing about the coordinated, efficient and economical development of the urban area, the regulations and minimum standards in this chapter are hereby adopted. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. Every subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the town shall be shown upon a plat and submitted to the planning commission for approval or disapproval.  
Sec. 17-3. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Alley means a minor public way, not less than twenty (20) feet in width, to provide a secondary means of access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on the street. 
Collector street means a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major streets including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
Cul-de-sac means a short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
Easement means a grant by the owner for the use of a strip of land by others for specific purposes. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land, intended as a building site or unit for transfer of ownership. 
Major street means a street which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic way and is shown on a major street plan or a revision thereof, and adopted by the planning commission. 
Residential street means a right-of-way dedicated to public use which provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
Servitude means a strip reserved for public utilities, drainage and other public purposes, the title to which shall remain with the property owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the servitude. 
Subdivider means any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
Subdivision means: 
(1)  The division of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels, any one of which has an area of less than three (3) acres; or 
(2)  The dedication of a road, highway or street through a tract of land regardless of area; or 
(3)  The resubdivision of land heretofore divided into lots, tracts, sites or parcels; 
provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to: 
(4)  A subdivision legally established and recorded prior to the adoption of this chapter; or 
(5)  Small parcels of land sold or exchanged to or between adjoining property owners upon certification by the building inspector that such sale or exchange does not create additional lots and does not conflict with the area requirements of this chapter or the zoning ordinance in Chapter 21. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 17-4. - Platting procedure. 
The following are the five (5) steps in the platting procedure for subdivisions: 
(1)  Conference between planning commission and subdivider: 
a.  It is suggested that each subdivider of land confer with the planning commission before preparing the preliminary plan, in order to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements and with the proposals of the master plan, especially the major street plan, affecting the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies. 
b.  After consultation with the planning commission, the subdivider is advised to confer with his land planner, in order to resolve the major factors of the site into a workable and profitable subdivision plan. 
c.  The subdivider should reach, at this initial stage, firm conclusions regarding the suitability of the location of the proposed subdivision, the arrangement of streets and lots, what part of the market demand should be served and other development opportunities. Good counsel on all parts of the problem is essential at this stage, in order to prevent unnecessary and costly revisions. 
(2)  Preparation and approval of preliminary plan: 
a.  Preparation and submission. After information and all data on existing conditions has been gathered and analyzed, the subdivider and his land planner should prepare a preliminary plan. The subdivider will submit to the planning commission an "Application for Approval of Preliminary Subdivision Plan" (see form 100 in clerk's office) and six (6) black and white or blue line prints (blueprints not acceptable) drawn to a scale of no smaller than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet; one inch equals sixty (60) feet; one inch equals fifty (50) feet, etc. The planning commission will forward one copy to the town engineer, one copy to the town council and one copy to the parish police jury (if the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits). Three (3) copies will be retained in the planning commission files. The plans submitted will show the following information: 
1.  The scale, north point and date map was prepared; 
2.  The location of present property, section, township and parish lines and lines of incorporated areas, other legally established districts, streets, buildings, watercourses, and other features within the area to be subdivided; and similar facts regarding existing conditions on land immediately adjacent thereto; 
3.  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, appropriate evidence of ownership of tract to be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider, and the name and address of the land planner or engineer, if any, designing the subdivision; 
4.  The names and addresses of owners of record of all property immediately adjoining the subdivision (this information may be supplied by showing the lot and block designation of property on the map itself and supplying also a typed list of the lot owners including their addresses); 
5.  Existing storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water main are to be indicated in a general way upon the plan. If the subdivision is to utilize septic tanks for sewage disposal, the subdivision plans must be signed by the parish board of health, indicating approval of the septic tank design for the intended use of the land; 
6.  The proposed street and lot layout, showing street widths, lot sizes and servitudes; 
7.  All streets bordering the property, and also all existing street intersections must be shown; 
8.  Contours with intervals of two (2) feet or less referred to sea level datum as determined by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey (if considered necessary by the planning commission); 
9.  The zoning classification of the property to be subdivided. 
b.  Public hearings. No preliminary plan of a subdivision will be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon, except, in the case of a subdivision of five (5) lots or less, no public hearing will be required. After receipt of the subdivision plans, the commission will fix the date for a hearing on the proposed subdivision. No quorum of the commission will be required for such a hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing will be sent to the owner or owners by registered mail not less than five (5) days before the date fixed for the hearing. Similar notice will be mailed to the subdivider and to the owners of land immediately adjoining the land proposed to be subdivided. 
c.  Commission action: 
1.  Within thirty (30) days after submission of the preliminary plan in approved form, the planning commission will review it and indicate its approval, disapproval or conditional approval, as a basis for the preparation of the final plat. If a plan is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications will be stated in writing or noted on the plan. 
2.  Approval of the preliminary plan does not constitute final acceptance of the subdivision by the planning commission. 
3.  Failure of the planning commission to act on the preliminary plan within thirty (30) days, after its submission in approved form to the commission, will be deemed approval of such plans. 
4.  One copy of the approved preliminary plan, signed by the chairperson of the planning commission, will be retained in the planning commission files; one signed copy will be returned to the subdivider, with any notations deemed necessary by the commission, and one copy will be forwarded to the parish police jury (if the subdivision is located outside of the town). 
5.  The approval of the preliminary plan will lapse unless a final plat is submitted within one year from the date of such approval. 
(3)  Preparation of plans and specifications: 
a.  Following the receipt of notification of preliminary approval, the subdivider will consult with the town engineer for advice in preparing plans and specifications for required improvements. Minor variations and changes may be made in the preliminary plan when the plans and specifications for improvements are prepared. However, such changes should be limited to slight shifts in street alignment, or shifts in location of crosswalks and utility easements, or widening or reducing right-of-way widths. 
b.  The subdivider will submit four (4) copies of the plans and specifications for required improvements to the planning commission. The commission will forward them to the town engineer for examination. After approval by the town engineer, one certified copy of the plan is to be forwarded to the planning commission; one certified copy will be forwarded to the parish police jury to inform them of the nature and extent of the proposed improvements (this in case subdivision is located outside of the town limits); one certified copy will be retained by the town engineer; and one certified copy will be returned to the subdivider. 
c.  Planning commission approval of the plans and specifications for required improvements must precede any improvement construction, or before the final plat can be approved. Prior to submission of the final plat for final approval, the subdivider must either complete the construction of required improvements or submit a surety bond to the planning commission, such bond to guarantee that improvements will be made in a reasonable, stipulated time. 
d.  If the subdivider elects to submit a surety bond in lieu of making the necessary improvements before the final plat is approved, he may do so by addressing a letter to the planning commission for an estimate of the cost of improvement for the entire development or a portion of the development. The planning commission, after obtaining cost estimates from the town engineer, will notify the subdivider of the amount of the bond. 
(4)  Preparation and approval of final plat: 
a.  Submission. An application for final approval (see form 200 in clerk's office) and a lien cloth tracing and five (5) black and white or blue line prints of the final plat will be submitted to the planning commission by the subdivider. The final plat is to be drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet from an accurate survey on sheets not larger than twenty-five (25) inches by thirty-six (36) inches long. Where the subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the planning commission may permit a variation in the scale. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size will be filed showing the entire subdivision with the sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. If improvements have been constructed within the subdivision, five (5) prints of certified plans showing the improvements are to be submitted along with the final plat. If the subdivider elects to assure the completion of the required improvements by posting a bond, a surety bond is to be submitted along with the final plat. The final plat will show: 
1.  Title or name of subdivision, north point, scale, date map was prepared, and name of owner or owners of the subdivision; 
2.  The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate distances and bearings; also all section, township and parish lines involved; 
3.  The property lines of all proposed streets and alleys, with their widths and names; 
4.  The accurate boundary line of any property which is offered for dedication for public use; 
5.  The line of departure of one street from another; 
6.  All common boundaries of all adjoining lands and the limits of adjacent streets and alleys with their widths and names; 
7.  All lot lines and identification system for all lots and blocks and other areas; 
8.  Notations of the purpose for which any sites are reserved; 
9.  Location and dimensions of utility easements; 
10.  All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating boundaries and subdivision lots, streets, alleys, easements and areas for public or private use, and such are to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot; 
11.  Radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles, for all curvilinear streets, and radii for all rounded corners; 
12.  Certification by a civil engineer or surveyor licensed and registered in the state to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him and that all the necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon; 
13.  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, will be written in their entirety on the subdivision plat; 
14.  Before it is recorded, a certificate will accompany the final plat, showing that all taxes payable have been previously paid in full. 
b.  Action by planning commission: 
1.  If the necessary improvements have been constructed and their construction certified in the required form, the planning commission will act on the final plat. 
2.  If the subdivider elects to submit a surety bond, the bond is referred to the town attorney for examination as to correct legal form. Return of the approved bond from the town attorney is authorization for the chairperson of the planning commission to sign the final plat. 
3.  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within sixty (60) days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by such commission on demand. The applicant for a commission's approval may, however, waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of such commission. Any plat submitted to such commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by such commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to the address by certified mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the parish assessment rolls. 
4.  Approval of the final plat by the planning commission will not constitute acceptance by the town of any public street, public way or public land intended to be dedicated to public use by the subdivider. Dedication of such land will be accomplished by the subdivider or his authorized agent submitting an ordinance to the town attorney, who in turn will check it as to correct form and submit the ordinance to the mayor and the board of aldermen for adoption. The ordinance shall accurately describe in engineering terms or by use of a suitable map containing the necessary engineering information which can be photographed and made a part of the ordinance, the property to be dedicated and shall be accompanied by a signed approved copy of the final plat. 
(5)  Recording of plat. When the final plat has been approved by the planning commission, the linen cloth tracing and all copies will be signed by the chairperson of the commission. The linen cloth tracing will be returned to the subdivider for recording and filing with the office of the parish clerk. A second copy of the final plat containing the certification of the planning commission will be forwarded to the town engineer for his records; a third copy will be retained in the files of the planning commission as a permanent record; and a fourth copy will be filed with the assessor's office of the parish. The fifth copy will be filed with the parish police jury. Filing of the final plat with the office of the clerk of court shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and at the subdivider's expense. 
State Law reference— Procedure for approving plat, R.S. 33:113.  
Sec. 17-5. - Design standards. 
(a)  Streets: 
(1)  Conformity to the major street plan. The width and location of streets will conform to the major street plan adopted by the planning commission, both as to general alignment and right-of-way widths. 
(2)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system will extend existing streets or projections at the same or greater width, but at no less than the required minimum width. Where in the opinion of the planning commission it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. 
(3)  Minimum widths. The minimum width of proposed streets and roads, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the major street plan, or if not shown on such plan shall be: 
a.  Major streets ..... 84 feet 
b.  Collector streets and other streets except local service streets ..... 60 feet 
c.  Local service streets or minor streets ..... 50 feet 
d.  Alleys ..... 20 feet 
(4)  Maximum grades. Grades on streets shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Major street ..... 6 per cent 
b.  Collector street ..... 10 per cent 
c.  Residential street ..... 20 per cent 
(5)  Curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. 
(6)  Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in rates of grade for major streets and one half this minimum length for minor streets. In no case, however, shall the vertical curve be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(7)  Reverse curves. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and collector streets. 
(8)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees. Curb radii at street intersections shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and, where it is deemed necessary, the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. In instances where the established radius of the curb curtains the sidewalk area at an intersection, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit construction of an adequate sidewalk within the street right-of-way. 
(9)  Culs-de-sac. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, will be no longer than five hundred (500) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. 
(10)  Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named, shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix, street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place or court. 
(11)  Alleys. Alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks, except under unusual conditions. In a commercial district, however, land subdivided for commercial use shall provide for alleys at the rear of all such lots, and such alleys shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
(b)  Blocks: 
(1)  Length. Blocks shall be no longer than twelve hundred (1,200) feet, except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the street pattern. In blocks over eight hundred (800) feet in length, the planning commission may require one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten (10) feet in width to extend entirely across the block and at locations deemed necessary. 
(2)  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented for topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission will approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(c)  Lots: 
(1)  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front upon a public street or road which is not less than fifty (50) feet in width. 
(2)  Minimum size: 
a.  The minimum width for single-family residential lots shall be fifty (50) feet. All lots shall contain no less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  Corner lots shall have extra widths where necessary to permit establishment of building lines on both streets in order to obtain appropriate building setback from, and orientation to, both streets. Setbacks may be required to obtain satisfactory visibility for drivers of vehicles approaching a street intersection, up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Lots with double frontage shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet across and along which there shall be no right of access may be required along the lines of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(d)  Monuments and markers. Permanent monuments shall consist of a one-fourth inch or larger steel rod cast in concrete with a minimum diameter of four (4) inches and extending a minimum of three (3) feet below the ground line. Markers for lot corners shall be one-half inch iron rods, thirty (30) inches long with top set flush with the ground. 
(e)  Servitudes and easements. Where alleys are not provided, a servitude of not less than seven and one-half (7½) feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines, where necessary, for poles, wire conduits, drainage pipes or ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, and other utilities. Where both water and sewer lines are located in the same servitude, and where the contour of land requires a drainage ditch, a width of servitude shall be required sufficient to serve all of the necessary services and to provide and maintain the necessary drainage. Wherever it is necessary to install sanitary or storm sewers or drainage ditches along side lot lines or across lots, a sufficient servitude shall be required to contain the necessary services as determined by the planning commission. 
(f)  Reservation of parks, playgrounds and school sites. In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other common areas for public use so as to conform to the recommendations of the planning commission. Any provision for schools, parks and playgrounds shall be indicated on the preliminary plan in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated to, or acquired by, the appropriate agency. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 20.  
Sec. 17-6. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Street improvements. Street construction shall be in accord with the standards and specifications of the town. 
(b)  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on at least one side of a minor street and on both sides of a major street in accordance with the applicable standards of the town. Sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick, and located on the edge of the street right-of-way line. 
(c)  Water lines: 
(1)  When an approved public water supply is within reasonable access, in the opinion of the planning commission, every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system which will adequately and safely serve the area platted according to the opinion of the planning commission. 
(2)  In order to avoid low water pressure in new subdivisions and in order to provide an adequate water supply for fire protection, the minimum size of all water mains shall be eight (8) inches, except in rare instances in low lying areas where water pressure would be of sufficient force that six (6) inch mains would be suitable for both water supply and fire protection. Fire hydrants shall be a minimum of six (6) inches and in accord with the town's specifications, and shall be located a maximum distance of one thousand (1,000) feet apart and within five hundred (500) feet of every lot in the subdivision. 
(3)  Whenever subdivisions are located where no approved water supply is reasonably accessible or procurable, the subdivider shall construct wells or a private water supply in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be available to each lot in the subdivision. 
(d)  Sewage disposal: 
(1)  When town sewage mains are within reasonable access, in the opinion of the planning commission, every subdivision shall be provided with a complete sewerage system which will adequately and safely serve the area platted. 
(2)  To maintain maximum service with a minimum of maintenance all sewer mains shall have a minimum size of eight (8) inches. 
(3)  Where town sewerage mains are not within reasonable access proper provisions shall be made for disposal of sanitary wastes in accordance with the standards and requirements of the parish board of health. A signed copy of the preliminary plan showing the parish health department's approval of the sewage disposal system for each lot in the subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission by the subdivider and shall be a prerequisite to commission action on the subdivision. 
(e)  Drainage. Drainage facilities shall be installed in accord with the requirements and specifications of the town engineer. In establishing such requirements the town engineer will take into consideration the particular drainage conditions and drainage needs of the area and of the street or streets involved. Where deemed necessary by the town engineer subsurface drainage pipes, concrete curbs and gutters, catch basins, and culverts or bridges will be required. 
(f)  Reference monuments. All block corners, points of curvature, points of tangents, angle points, and other points as may be required by the town engineer, shall be marked with permanent monuments set to approved grades. Where a bench mark is not existing within a reasonable distance, a permanent bench mark shall be accessibly placed, and its elevation shall be based on sea level datum as determined by the United States Geological Survey and accurately noted on the subdivision plat. Lot corner markers shall be installed prior to submission and approval of the final plat. 
(g)  Street name signs. Street name signs of a type meeting approval of and in locations designated by the planning commission shall be erected at all street intersections. 
(h)  Miscellaneous. Electrical service, gas mains and other utilities shall be provided in each subdivision. 
(i)  Acceptance of street improvements. It shall be the duty of the subdivider to notify the town clerk when all required improvements are constructed and in proper condition for inspection by the town engineer. No streets shall be accepted for maintenance by the town until such an inspection has been made, and approval and recommendations have been given in writing. In cases where the subdivider has given notice that an inspection should be made, and it is found that the streets have not been properly constructed and surfaced according to approved specifications, then a reasonable inspection fee for each additional inspection required may be charged against the subdivider. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 20.  
Sec. 17-7. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Whenever a subdivision is developed as a neighborhood unit, wherein adequate park or playground space is provided, through traffic is adequately cared for, and the majority of the minor streets are of the cul-de-sac type, the planning commission may vary the requirements of this section in order to allow the subdivider more freedom in the arrangement of streets and lots; however, the planning commission shall insure that the convenience, health, welfare and safety of the probable future residents of the subdivision, as well as the character of the surrounding property and the general welfare of the entire parish, are protected. The average lot area per family shall not be less than the requirement of the zoning regulations in the area being subdivided, and in no event shall it be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet per family. 
(b)  Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the planning commission may vary or modify such requirements, so that the subdivider is allowed to develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare is protected and the general intent and spirit of this chapter are preserved.  
Sec. 17-8. - Administration and amendment. 
The planning commission may, from time to time, adopt, amend and publish rules and instructions for the administration of this chapter to the end that the public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. This chapter may be changed or amended by the commission after public hearings, due notice of which shall be given as required by law.  
Sec. 17-9. - Fees. 
(a)  The following fees and charges shall be collected by the planning commission when any preliminary plan or final plat is submitted to the planning commission for processing. Each fee or charge shall be paid in advance. No action of the commission shall be valid until such fee shall have been deposited with the town clerk. 
(b)  Subdivision processing fees shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  A flat fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) per lot will be charged the subdivider for processing a subdivision plan. Such fee is payable at the time of submission of the preliminary plat and is not refundable irrespective of the action of the planning commission. 
(2)  Such fees collected by the planning commission shall be remitted under suitable accounting procedure to the town clerk for deposit into the town's general fund.  
Sec. 17-10. - Violations. 
Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by a planning commission and recorded or filed in the office of the clerk of court of the parish, shall pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed to be sold, and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The town may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by suit or injunction brought in any court of competent jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:114.  
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; gallonage tax for alcoholic beverages, § 3-46 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local taxation and fiscal affairs, R. S. 33:2621 et seq.; time for levy and payment of municipal tax, R.S. 33:2745. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose license taxes, Const. 1921, art. 10, § 8. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1155, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 26, 1984, has been treated as superseding the provisions of Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 18-16—18-20, in their entirety. Said former Div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 5, 1943. 
 
Sec. 18-16. - Occupational license tax imposed; when due and payable; new businesses. 
There is hereby imposed an annual occupational license tax upon each person pursuing a trade, profession, vocation, calling, or business within the territorial limits of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana. The annual license tax imposed on any such individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity doing business in the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana, shall be that as set by Louisiana R.S. 47:342—47:405 as the same was in effect on December 31, 1981, and said tax shall be subject to all exemptions, limitations, and provisions of the law which were in effect on December 31, 1981. The first license tax hereby imposed shall be due and payable to the tax collector of the Town of Arcadia on or before July 1, 1984, in accordance with the annual license fee as set by the aforesaid statutes of the State of Louisiana, effective December 31, 1981. Each year thereafter, the license tax shall be payable annually on or before July 1st of the year for which the license is due, except that for a new business commencing after July 1st of any year, the first license shall be due and payable on the date business is commenced. 
(Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 18-17. - Delinquent licenses; penalty. 
All licenses unpaid prior to September 1st of the calendar year for which they are due or, in the case of a new business, unpaid on the date such business is commenced, shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the payment of delinquent interest and penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1155, § 2, 6-26-84)  
Secs. 18-18—18-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INSURANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose local license taxes on insurers, R.S. 22:1076. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Levy. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on any insurer engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract, which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax for state purposes, all as authorized by R.S. 22:1076 on risks located in this municipality as follows: 
(1)  Life, accident and health insurance. On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies, other than programs of benefits authorized or provided pursuant to the provisions of Parts I and II of Chapter 12 of Title 42 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annually policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations whether such insurer by operating in this state through an agent or other representative or otherwise: 
a.  Ten dollars ($10.00) on gross annual premiums up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and an additional license thereafter of seventy dollars ($70.00) on each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); 
b.  The maximum license on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any one insurer, shall be twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000.00). 
(2)  Fire, marine, transportation, surety, indemnity, etc. On any insurer, engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, worker's compensation, employers' liability, property damage, livestock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary, or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operating in this state through agents or other representative or otherwise, not more than the following: 
a.  1st class: When the gross receipts are not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the license shall be forty dollars ($40.00); 
b.  2nd class: When the gross receipts are more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00); 
c.  3rd class: When the gross receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), and not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the license shall be eighty dollars ($80.00); 
d.  4th class: When the gross receipts exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00); 
e.  Maximum tax. The maximum license tax on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any insurer shall be nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), provided that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay only one-third of the above rates provided in subsection (2). 
(3)  The amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this section, shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by L.R.S. Title 22, Chapter 1, Part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixth of the total admitted assets of the payer, are invested and maintained in qualifying Louisiana investments as defined in L.R.S. 22:1068(C). 
(b)  All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on June 1st. A penalty of five (5) percent per month shall be added to the amount of tax due and payable to this municipality along with the tax due. The amount of any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to this section shall not be greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of the tax due. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with L.R.S. 22:1076 and 47:1601. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 11-6-62; Ord. No. 2037, §§ 1, 2, 4-23-02)  
Sec. 18-32. - Exceptions to full rates. 
Plate glass and steam boiler insurance companies, societies, associations, corporations, firms and individuals shall pay one-third of the rates provided in section 18-31(2). The amount of license tax payable hereunder as fixed in sections 18-31(1) and 18-31(2) shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the board of aldermen at the time of making application for license, showing that at least one-sixth of the total admitted assets of the payer is invested and maintained in bonds of the state, or of municipal school, road or levee district or other political subdivision, or in mortgages on property located in the state or in policy loans or other loans to residents of the state, or in corporations organized under the laws of the state, and domiciled in the state, or in capital stock of corporations organized under the laws of the state and domiciled in the state, the value of which is entirely represented by real estate owned by such corporations in the state. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 11-6-62)  
Sec. 18-33. - Computation of premiums. 
The annual premiums referred to in this division shall be the gross amount of premiums for the preceding year; if the company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual be new, then the premiums for the first two (2) months shall be the basis for the license tax and six (6) times that amount shall be estimated as the gross amount of premiums for such business; provided that any company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual commencing business after the first of July shall pay one-half of the license taxes graded as herein, but the license shall never be less than the minimum herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 2, 11-6-62)  
Sec. 18-34. - Certification of gross premiums. 
Each company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual issuing contracts referred to in this division, shall before the first day of March of each year, render to the tax collector of the town, a report signed by the president and its secretary or if a foreign corporation, by its United States resident manager or other official in charge of its affairs in the United States, which shall certify to the amount of gross premiums or risks located in the town for the preceding year as provided for in R.S. 22:1070. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 11-6-62)  
Sec. 18-35. - Collection; delinquency. 
The license tax collected by this division shall be collected by the town tax collector, and such license tax shall be due and payable on January first of each year and shall become delinquent on March first of each year and if not paid before becoming delinquent, the license shall bear a two (2) per cent penalty per month on the amount due until paid, the license tax and penalty to be collected by town tax collector according to law. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 3, 11-6-62)  
Secs. 18-36—18-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The preamble and ordaining clause of the ordinance adopted on August 9, 1977, constituting this article, as follows: 
"WHEREAS, under the provisions of Article VI, Section 29(A) of the Constitution of the State of Louisiana of 1974, Sub-Part D, Part I, Chapter 6, Title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 33:2711 et seq.), and other constitutional and statutory authority supplemental thereto, the Town of Arcadia, State of Louisiana, is authorized to levy and collect within such town an additional tax of one per cent upon the sale at retail, the use, the lease or rental, the consumption and the storage for use or consumption of tangible personal property and upon the sale of services as defined in sections 301—317, inclusive, of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 47:301—47:317); and 
 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 18-49. - Scope. 
As used in this article, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this division, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1)  
Sec. 18-50. - Agricultural commodity.[] 
"Agricultural commodity" shall mean horticultural, viticultural, poultry, farm and range products and livestock and livestock products. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.01) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
"WHEREAS, pursuant to the requirements of Article VI, Section 29(A) of the Constitution of the State of Louisiana of 1974, Act No. 21 of the First Extraordinary Session of the Louisiana Legislature of 1975, and other constitutional and statutory authority supplemental thereto, a special election was held in said town on Saturday, July 9, 1977, to authorize the levy and collection of a tax, and the following proposition was submitted at said election and duly approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting in said election, viz: 
"PROPOSITION 
"Shall the Town of Arcadia, State of Louisiana (the "Town"), under the provisions of Article VI, Section 29(A) of the Constitution of the State of Louisiana of 1974, Act No. 21 of the First Extraordinary Session of the Louisiana Legislature of 1975, Sub-Part D, Part I, Chapter 6, Title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 33:2711 et seq.), and other constitutional and statutory authority supplemental thereto, be authorized to levy and collect, and adopt an ordinance providing for such levy and collection, a tax of one per cent upon the sale at retail, the use, the lease or rental, the consumption and storage for use or consumption of tangible personal property and on sales of services in the town, all as defined in La. R.S. 47:301 to La. R.S. 47:317, inclusive, for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of the first levy of said tax, with the proceeds of said tax, after payment of the reasonable and necessary expenses of collecting and administering the tax, to be dedicated and used for the purposes of constructing, acquiring, extending, improving, maintaining and/or operating capital improvements (including, but not limited to, sewers, sewage disposal facilities and waterworks improvements) and paying general operating expenses for the town, and shall the town be further authorized to issue bonds payable from said tax for the purposes of making capital improvements to the extent and in the manner permitted by said Act No. 21 as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, said bonds to run not more than fifteen (15) years from the date of the first levy of said tax? 
and 
"WHEREAS, in compliance with the aforesaid statutory authority and said election of July 9, 1977, it is the desire of this Board of Aldermen to levy said tax and provide for the collection and distribution of the proceeds thereof and other matters in connection therewith as hereinafter provided in this ordinance; 
"NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the Town of Arcadia, State of Louisiana, that:" 
State Law reference— Authority to local sales and use tax, R.S. 33:2711; state sales tax, R.S. 47:301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Business. 
"Business" shall include any activity engaged in by any person or caused to be engaged in by him with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect. The term "business" shall not be construed in this article to include the occasional and isolated sales or transactions by a person who does not hold himself out as engaged in business. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.02)  
Sec. 18-52. - Collector. 
"Collector" shall mean and include the town clerk or his duly authorized assistant or assistants or such other person, agency or instrumentality designated by the mayor and board of aldermen to handle and accomplish the collection, enforcement and administration of sales and use of taxes on behalf of the town. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.03)  
Sec. 18-53. - Cost price. 
"Cost price" shall mean the actual cost of the articles of tangible personal property without any deductions therefrom on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, transportation charges or any other expenses whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.04)  
Sec. 18-54. - Dealer. 
"Dealer" shall include every person who: 
(1)  Manufactures or produces tangible personal property from any state, or other political subdivision of this state, or foreign country, for sale at retail, for use or consumption, or distribution, or storage to be used or consumed in this town; 
(2)  Imports, or causes to be imported, tangible personal property from any state, or other political subdivision of this state, or foreign country, for sale at retail, for use or consumption, or distribution, or storage to be used or consumed in this town; 
(3)  Sells at retail, or who offers to sell at retail, or who has in his possession for sale at retail, or for use, or consumption, or distribution, or storage to be used or consumed in this town, tangible personal property; 
(4)  Has sold at retail, or used, or consumed, or distributed or stored for use or consumption in this town, tangible personal property and who cannot prove that the tax levied by this ordinance has been paid on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, or the storage of said tangible personal property; 
(5)  Leases or rents tangible personal property for a consideration, permitting the use or possession of such property without transferring title thereto; 
(6)  Is the lessee or rentee of tangible personal property and who pays to the owner of such property a consideration for the use or possession of such property without acquiring title thereto; 
(7)  Sells or furnishes any of the services subject to the tax under this article or purchases or receives any of the services subject to tax under this article; or 
(8)  Is engaging in business in the town. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.05)  
Sec. 18-55. - Distraint or distrain. 
"Distraint" or "distrain" shall mean the right to levy upon and seize and sell, or the levying upon or seizing and selling, any property or rights to property of the delinquent dealer by the officer charged with the collection of the tax for the purpose of satisfying any tax, interest or penalties due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.06)  
Sec. 18-56. - Engaging in business in this town. 
"Engaging in business in this town" shall mean and include any of the following methods of transacting business: Maintaining directly, indirectly or through a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business or by having an agent, salesman, solicitor, or employee operating within the town under the authority of the seller or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent, salesman, solicitor, or employee is located in this town permanently or temporarily, or whether such a seller or subsidiary is qualified to do business in this town, or by having within this town any choses in or causes of action, or any property, or any liens on property, or any indebtedness due it in this town, protected by the laws and courts of this town. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.07)  
Sec. 18-57. - Governing authority. 
"Governing authority" shall mean and include the mayor and board of aldermen of the town. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.08)  
Sec. 18-58. - Gross sales. 
"Gross sales" shall mean the sum total of all sales of tangible personal property, as hereinafter provided and defined, and sales of services without any deductions whatsoever of any kind or character, except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.09)  
Sec. 18-59. - Hotel. 
"Hotel" shall mean and include any establishment engaged in the business of furnishing sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins to transient guests where such establishment consists of six (6) or more sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins under a single roof. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.10)  
Sec. 18-60. - Lease or rental. 
"Lease or rental" shall mean the leasing or renting of tangible personal property and the possession or use thereof by the lessee or rentee for a consideration, without transfer of the title of such property. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.11)  
Sec. 18-61. - New article. 
"New article" shall mean the original stock in trade of the dealer and shall not be limited to newly manufactured articles. The original stock or article, whether it be a used article or not, shall be subject to the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.12)  
Sec. 18-62. - Person. 
"Person" shall include any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, co-operative, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the state, any parish, city, municipality, state or public board, public commission or public or semi-public corporation, political subdivision, district or instrumentality or other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.14)  
Sec. 18-63. - Purchaser. 
"Purchaser" shall mean any person who acquires or receives any tangible personal property or the privilege of using any tangible personal property or receives any services pursuant to a transaction subject to taxes under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.15)  
Sec. 18-64. - Retail sale or sale at retail. 
"Retail sale" or "sale at retail" shall mean a sale to a consumer or to any person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property and a sale of services, as hereinafter set forth, and shall mean and include all such transactions as the collector, upon investigation finds to be in lieu of sales; provided, that sales for resale must be made in strict compliance with the rules and regulations issued by the collector. Any dealer making a sale for resale, which is not in strict compliance with the rules and regulations, shall himself be liable for payment of the tax. The term "sale at retail" does not include sales of materials for further processing into articles of tangible personal property for sale at retail, nor does it include an isolated or occasional sale of tangible personal property by a person not engaged in such business, except the isolated or occasional sale of vehicles, which are hereby defined to be sales at retail and as such are subject to the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.16)  
Sec. 18-65. - Retailer. 
"Retailer" shall mean and include every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail or for distribution, or use or consumption, or storage to be used or consumed in this town or any person rendering services taxable hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.17)  
Sec. 18-66. - Sale. 
"Sale" shall mean any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter, lease or rental, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means, whatsoever, of tangible personal property, for a consideration, and includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for consumers who furnish, either directly or indirectly, the materials used in fabrication work, and the furnishing, preparing, or serving, for a consideration, of any tangible personal property, consumed on the premises of the person furnishing, preparing or serving such tangible personal property. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the seller retains title as security for the payment of the price shall be deemed a sale. The term "sale" shall also include the "sales of services" which means and includes the following: 
(1)  The furnishing of sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins by hotels; 
(2)  The sale of admissions to places of amusement, to athletic entertainment other than that of schools, colleges and universities; and recreational events, and the furnishing, for dues, fees or other consideration, of the privilege of access to clubs or the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement, entertainment, athletic or recreational facilities, but shall not include membership fees or dues of nonprofit civic organizations; 
(3)  The furnishing of storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots and trailer parks; 
(4)  The furnishing of printing or overprinting, lithographic, multilith, blueprinting, photostating or other similar services or reproducing written or graphic matter; 
(5)  The furnishing of laundry, cleaning, pressing and dyeing services, including by way of extension and not of limitation, the cleaning and renovation of clothing, furs, furniture, carpets, and rugs, and the furnishing of storage space for clothing, furs and rugs; 
(6)  The furnishing of cold storage space and the furnishing of the service of preparing tangible personal property for cold storage, where such service is incidental to the operation of storage facilities; 
(7)  The furnishing of repairs to tangible personal property, including by way of illustration and not of limitation, the repair and servicing of automobiles and other vehicles, electrical and mechanical appliances and equipment, watches, jewelry, refrigerators, radios, shoes, and office appliances and equipment. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.18)  
Sec. 18-67. - Sales price. 
"Sales price" shall mean the total amount for which tangible personal property is sold, including any services, except services for financing, that are part of the sale valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, and includes the cost of material used, labor or service costs, except costs for financing which shall not exceed the legal interest rate and a service charge not to exceed six (6) per cent of the amount financed, and losses; provided that, cash discounts allowed and taken on sales shall not be included, nor shall the sales price include the amount charged for labor or services rendered in installing, applying, remodeling or repairing property sold. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.19)  
Sec. 18-68. - Storage. 
"Storage" shall mean and include any keeping or retention in this town of tangible personal property for use or consumption in this town or for any other purpose other than for sale at retail in the regular course of business. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.20)  
Sec. 18-69. - Tangible personal property. 
"Tangible personal property" shall mean and include personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. The term "tangible personal property" shall not include the sale at retail of that property in the regular course of business. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.21)  
Sec. 18-70. - Use. 
"Use" shall mean and include the exercise of any rights or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership thereof, except that it shall not include the sale at retail of that property in the regular course of business. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.23)  
Sec. 18-71. - Use tax. 
"Use tax" shall include the use, the consumption, the distribution and the storage for use or consumption, as herein defined. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 1.24)  
Secs. 18-72—18-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOSITION OF TAX 
 
Sec. 18-86. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied for a period of fifteen (15) years from and after October 1, 1977, for the purposes stated in the proposition set forth in the preamble to this article, a tax upon the sale at retail, the use, the lease or rental, the consumption and the storage for use or consumption of tangible personal property and upon the sale of services within this town; and the levy of such tax shall be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one per cent of the sales price of each item or article of tangible personal property when sold at retail in this town, the tax to be computed on gross sales for the purpose of remitting the amount of tax due the governing authority and to include each and every retail sale; 
(2)  At the rate of one per cent of the cost price of each item or article of tangible personal property when the same is not sold, but is used, consumed, distributed, or stored for use or consumption in this town, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax; 
(3)  At the rate of one per cent of the gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, where the lease or rental of such property is an established business, or part of an established business or the same is incidental or germane to the business; 
(4)  At the rate of one per cent of the monthly lease rental price paid by the lessee or rentee, or contracted or agreed to be paid by the lessee or rentee to the owner of the tangible personal property; 
(5)  At the rate of one per cent of the gross proceeds derived from the sale of services. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 2.01)  
Sec. 18-87. - Special provisions for rentals. 
(a)  Sales or use taxes paid to this governing authority on the purchase of new motor trucks and new motor tractors licensed and registered for twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more, under the provisions of Section 462 of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 47:462), new trailers and new semi-trailers licensed and registered for sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or more under the provisions of such section for rental may be deducted as a credit against the tax due on the rental of that item of property so that no tax is payable on rental income until the tax paid on the purchase price has not been exceeded. The sales tax paid to another town or taxing authority in the state, or in a town in a state other than Louisiana on the purchase price of property is not deductible from the tax subsequently due on the rental of such property in this town. Property imported by the lessee for use in this town that has been previously used by him in another town is not subject to any tax on the value when imported, but is only subject to the tax that applies on rental payments. 
(b)  If the tax on rental income fails to exceed the credits for sales or use tax paid, no refund is due the purchaser. 
(c)  A dealer in the town who ordinarily purchases personal property for sale and who withdraws a piece of property from stock for rental is not liable for a sales or use tax on the purchase price of the property when withdrawn from stock. Such person is liable only for the tax applicable on the rental income. 
(d)  Any sales tax paid on any maintenance or operation expenses of a rental business is not deductible as a credit against the tax due on rental income; such expenses are part of the cost of doing business and do not constitute a part of the cost of the identical property being rented. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 2.02)  
Sec. 18-88. - Collection and payment generally. 
The tax shall be collected from the dealer, and paid at the time and in the manner provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 2.03)  
Sec. 18-89. - Tax declared additional. 
The tax levied under this article is, and shall be in addition to all other taxes, whether levied in form of sales, excise or license, privilege or property taxes levied by any other ordinance or resolution of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 2.04)  
Sec. 18-90. - Schedule for tax collection. 
The dealer shall collect the tax levied by this article, together with all other applicable sales and use taxes, in accordance with the integrated bracket schedule or schedules prepared and furnished by the state collector of revenue under the authority of Section 304 of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 47:304). Such schedule or schedules shall include, in addition to the tax hereby levied pursuant to the election held on July 9, 1977, all sales taxes levied by the state and any sales tax levied by the parish school board. The dealer will remit that portion of such total taxes representing the tax levied by this article to the collector. Copies of the integrated bracket schedules are available to dealers on request to the town or the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 2.05)  
Sec. 18-91. - Collection in name of town. 
The collection of the tax levied under this article shall be made in the name of the town by the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 2.06)  
Secs. 18-92—18-101. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS FROM TAX 
 
Sec. 18-102. - Exempt tangible personal property. 
The taxes imposed by this article shall not apply to transactions involving the following tangible personal property: 
(1)  The gross proceeds derived from the sale in this town of livestock, poultry and other farm products direct from the farm, provided that such sales are made directly by the producers. When sales of livestock, poultry and other farm products are made to consumers by any person, other than a producer, they are not exempted from the tax imposed by this article, provided, however, that every agricultural commodity sold by any person, other than a producer, to any other person who purchases not for direct consumption but for the purpose of acquiring raw products for use or for sale in the process of preparing, finishing or manufacturing such agricultural commodity for the ultimate retail consumer trade, shall be exempted from any and all provisions of this article, including payment of the tax applicable to the sale, storage, use, transfer or any other utilization of or handling thereof, except when such agricultural commodity is actually sold as a marketable or finished product to the ultimate consumer, and in no case shall more than one tax be exacted. 
(2)  The use tax shall not apply to livestock and livestock products, to poultry and poultry products, to farm, range and agricultural products when produced by the farmer and used by him and members of his family. 
(3)  Where a part of the purchase price is represented by an article traded in, the sales tax is payable on the total purchase price less the market value of the article traded in. 
(4)  The sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in this town of the following tangible personal property is hereby specifically exempted from the tax imposed by this article: Gasoline, steam, water (not including mineral water or carbonated water or any water put up in bottles, jugs or containers, all of which are not exempted) electric power or energy, newspapers, fertilizer and containers used for farm products when sold directly to the farmer, natural gas, fuel oil and coal when used for boiler fuel, new trucks, new automobiles and new aircraft withdrawn from stock by factory authorized new truck, new automobile and new aircraft dealers, with the approval of the state collector of revenue and titled in the dealer's name for use as demonstrators, and the sale of prescription drugs under the Pharmaceutical Vendor program of Title XIX of the Social Security Act as administered by the state health and human resources administration. 
(5)  The sales of materials, equipment and machinery which enter into and become component parts of ships, vessels, including commercial fishing vessels, or barges, of fifty (50) tons load displacement and over, built in Louisiana nor to the gross proceeds from the sale of such ships, vessels or barges when sold by the builder thereof. 
(6)  The sales of materials and supplies to the owners or operators of ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce, where such materials and supplies are loaded upon the ship or vessel for use or consumption in the maintenance and operation thereof; nor to repair services performed upon ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or in interstate coastwise commerce; nor to the materials and supplies used in such repairs where such materials and supplies enter into and become a component part of such ships or vessels; nor to laundry services performed for the owner or operators of such ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce, where the laundered articles are to be used in the course of the operation of such ships or vessels. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to drilling equipment used for oil exploitation or production unless such equipment is built for exclusive use outside the boundaries of the state and is removed forthwith from the state upon completion. 
(7)  The sale at retail of seeds for use in the planting of any kind of crops. 
(8)  The sale of casing, drill pipe and tubing in the town for use offshore beyond the territorial limits of the state for the production of oil, gas, sulphur and other minerals or vessels leased for such purposes or for the providing of services to those engaged in such production. 
(9)  The sale or use of any materials, supplies or products for use in connection with any phase of the construction of the Toledo Bend Dam Project on the Sabine River. 
(10)  The sale of admission tickets by Little Theatre organizations. 
(11)  The sale of admission tickets by domestic nonprofit corporations or by any other domestic nonprofit organization known as a symphony organization or a society or organization engaged in the presentation of musical performances; provided that this exemption shall not apply to performances given by out-of-state or nonresident symphony companies, nor to any performance intended to yield a profit to the promoters thereof. 
(12)  The amount paid by the operator of a motion picture theatre to a distributing agency for use of films of photoplay. 
(13)  The sale at retail of pesticides used for agricultural purposes, including particularly, but not by way of limitation, insecticides, herbicides and fungicides. 
(14)  The sale at retail of tangible personal property purchased within the town for use exclusively beyond the territorial limits of the town. If tangible personal property purchased tax free under the provisions of this section is later brought into this town for use herein, the property shall be subject to the use tax as of the time it is brought into the town for use herein, subject to the credit provided in section 18-138. If the first use of tangible personal property purchased in the town for use beyond the territorial limits of the town occurs in a city or parish of the state or in a city or county in a state other than Louisiana which imposes a sales or use tax, exemption provided herein shall apply only if: 
a.  The purchaser is properly registered for sales and use tax purposes in a city or parish in the state or in a city or county in a state other than Louisiana, wherein such tangible personal property is used, and regularly reports and pays sales and use tax in such other city or parish in the state or in a city or county in a state other than Louisiana; and 
b.  The city or parish in the state or the city or county in a state other than Louisiana in which the first use occurs grants on a reciprocal basis a similar exemption on purchases within that city or parish in the state or city or county in a state other than Louisiana for use in this town; and 
c.  The purchaser obtains from the collector a certificate authorizing him to make the nontaxable purchases authorized under this section. 
(15)  The amounts paid by radio and television broadcasters for the right to exhibit or broadcast copyrighted material and the use of film, video or audio tapes, records or any other means supplied by licensors thereof in connection with such exhibition or broadcast. 
(16)  The purchase or rental by private individuals of machines, parts therefor and materials and supplies which a physician has prescribed for home rental dialysis. 
(17)  No new or additional sales or use tax shall be applicable to sales of materials or services involved in lump sum or unit price construction contracts entered into and reduced to writing prior to October 1, 1977 or to sales or services involved in such contracts entered into and reduced to writing within ninety (90) days thereafter, if such contracts involve contractual obligations undertaken prior to such date and were computed and bid on the basis of sales taxes at the rates effective and existing prior to such date. 
(18)  Purchases of equipment used in fire fighting by bona fide organized public volunteer fire departments. 
(19)  The sale of admissions to entertainment events furnished by recognized domestic nonprofit charitable, educational and religious organizations when the entire proceeds from such sales, except for necessary expenses in connection with the entertainment events, are used for the purposes for which the organizations furnishing the events were organized. 
(20)  Sales of tangible personal property at, or admission charges for, events sponsored by domestic, civic, educational, historical, charitable, fraternal or religious organizations, which are nonprofit, when the entire proceeds, except for the necessary expense connected therewith, are used for educational, charitable, religious or historical restoration purposes. 
The exemption provided herein shall not apply to any event intended to yield a profit to the promoter or to any individual contracted to provide services or equipment, or both, for the event. 
This section shall not be construed to exempt regular commercial ventures of any type such as bookstores, restaurants, gift shops, commercial flea markets and similar activities that are sponsored by organizations qualifying hereunder which are in competition with retail merchants. 
This section shall not be construed to exempt any organization or activity from the payment of sales or use taxes otherwise required by law to be made on purchases made by these organizations. 
Such exemption shall be available pursuant to regulations prescribed by the collector. 
(21)  Sales or purchases made by blind persons in the conduct of a business which is exempt from license taxes by R.S. 46:305.17. 
(22)  Necessary fees incurred in connection with the installation and service of cable television. Such exemption shall not apply to the purchases made by any cable television system, but shall only apply to funds collected from the subscriber for regular service, installation and repairs. 
(23)  Income on receipts from any coin-operated washing or drying machine in a commercial laundromat as defined in R.S. 47:305.17. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 3.01)  
Sec. 18-103. - Scope of tax. 
(a)  It is not the intention of this article to levy a tax upon articles of tangible personal property imported into this town or produced or manufactured in this town for export; nor is it the intention of this article to levy a tax on a bona fide transaction in interstate commerce. It is, however, the intention of this article to levy a tax on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in this town of tangible personal property after it has come to rest in this town and has become a part of the mass of property in this town. 
(b)  No tax shall be due under this article on the sale of any goods or personal tangible property delivered or services performed outside the territorial limits of the town. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, §§ 3.02, 3.03)  
Secs. 18-104—18-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COLLECTION OF TAX BY DEALER 
 
Sec. 18-115. - Collection from purchaser or consumer. 
The tax levied by this article shall be collected by the dealer from the purchaser or consumer, except as provided for the collection of the tax on motor vehicles in section 18-120. The dealer shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from the purchaser, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the purchaser, as if the tax were a part of the purchase price of the property, or charges for services and payable at the time of the sale; provided, however, that the governing authority shall be joined as a party plaintiff in any action or proceeding brought by the dealer to collect the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.01)  
Sec. 18-116. - Collection by dealers located outside town. 
Every dealer located outside the town making sales of tangible personal property for distribution, storage, use or other consumption in this town shall, at the time of making sales, collect the tax imposed by this article from the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.02)  
Sec. 18-117. - Tax to constitute part of purchase price. 
The dealer shall, as far as practicable, add the exact amount of the tax imposed under this article, or the average equivalent thereof, in conformity with the rules and regulations to be issued by the collector, to the sale price or charge and shall be a debt from the purchaser or consumer to the dealer, until paid, and shall be recoverable at law, in the same manner as other debts. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.03)  
Sec. 18-118. - Registration and certification of dealers. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to collect all of the taxes imposed by this article, on or before October 1, 1977, or in the case of dealers commencing business after October 1, 1977, or opening new places of business after such date, within three (3) days after such commencement or opening, every dealer purchasing or importing tangible personal property for resale shall file with the collector a certificate of registration in a form prescribed by him. The collector shall, within five (5) days after such registration, issue without charge to each dealer who purchases or imports for resale, a certificate of authority empowering such dealer to collect the tax from the purchaser, and duplicates therefor, for each additional place of business of such dealer. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed in all places of business of the dealer. A dealer who has no regular place of doing business shall attach such certificate to his cart, stand, truck or other merchandising device. Such certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the collector upon the dealer's ceasing to do business at the place therein named. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.04)  
Sec. 18-119. - Requirements of manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers and suppliers. 
A manufacturer, wholesaler dealer, jobber or supplier shall refuse to accept a certificate that any property upon which a tax is imposed by this article is purchased for resale, and shall collect the tax imposed by this article, unless the purchaser shall have filed a certificate of registration and received a certificate of authority to collect the tax imposed by this article; provided, however, that the payment of the tax by such purchaser shall not relieve the purchaser of the duty herein imposed upon such purchaser to collect the tax upon any resale made by him; but such purchaser who shall thereafter file a certificate of registration and receive a certificate of authority to collect the tax may, upon application therefor, receive a refund of the taxes paid by him upon property thereafter resold by him, and upon the receipts from which he shall have collected and paid over to the governing authority the tax herein imposed. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.05)  
Sec. 18-120. - Collection of tax on vehicles. 
The tax imposed by this article upon the sale or use of any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, motorbus, house trailer or any other vehicle subject to the state vehicle registration license tax shall be collected as provided in this section. 
(1)  The tax levied by this article on any such vehicle shall be paid to the vehicle commissioner as the agent of the state collector of revenue at the time of application for a certificate of title or vehicle registration license and no certificate of title or vehicle registration license shall be issued until the tax has been paid. 
a.  The tax levied by this article on the sale of any such vehicle shall be due at the time registration or any transfer of registration is required by the state vehicle registration license tax law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.). 
b.  The tax levied by this article on the use of any such vehicle in this town shall be due at the time first registration in this town is required by the state vehicle registration license tax law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.). 
(2)  Every vendor of such a vehicle shall furnish to the purchaser at the time of sale a sworn statement showing the serial number, motor number, type, year and model of the vehicle sold, the total sales price, any allowance for and description of any vehicle taken in trade, and the total cash difference paid or to be paid by the purchaser between the vehicles purchased and traded in and the sales or use tax to be paid, along with such other information as may be required. All labor, parts, accessories and other equipment which are attached to the vehicle at the time of the sale and which are included in the sale price are to be considered a part of the vehicle. 
(3)  It is not the intention of this section to grant an exemption from the tax levied by this article to any sale, use, item or transaction which has heretofore been taxable and this section shall not be construed as so doing. It is the intention of this section to transfer the collection of sales and use tax on vehicles from the vendor to the vehicle commissioner as agent for the state collector of revenue, and to provide a method of collection of the tax directly from the vendee or user by the vehicle commissioner as agent of the collector of revenue in accordance with an agreement by and between the collector of revenue or the vehicle commissioner as agent therefor and the governing authority, the execution of which agreement is hereby authorized. Such tax so collected for the collector of revenue shall be paid to the governing authority and sent to the collector as soon as possible, and in any event at least once each quarter, all in accordance with the agreement. 
(4)  The provisions contained in section 18-64 which exclude isolated or occasional sales from the definition of a sale at retail are not to apply to the sale of vehicles which are the subject of this subsection. Isolated or occasional sales of vehicles are hereby defined to be sales at retail and as such are subject to the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.06)  
Sec. 18-121. - Tax to be stated separately; offering to absorb tax prohibited. 
A person engaged in any business taxable under this article shall not advertise or hold out to the public, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb all or any part of the tax, or that he will relieve the purchaser from the payment of all or any part of the tax. The dealer shall state and collect the tax separately from the price paid by the purchaser, but his failure to do so shall not be available as a defense to the purchaser in any proceedings brought under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.07)  
Sec. 18-122. - Excess collected. 
Where the tax collected for any period is in excess of one per cent, the total collected must be paid over to the collector, less the commission to be allowed the dealer as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.08)  
Sec. 18-123. - Collection when purchaser fails to pay dealer. 
Where the purchaser has failed to pay and a dealer has failed to collect a tax upon a sale, as imposed by this article, then in addition to all other rights, obligations and remedies provided, such tax shall be payable by the purchaser directly to the governing authority, and it shall be the duty of this purchaser to file a return thereof with the collector and to pay the tax imposed thereon to the governing authority within fifteen (15) days after such sale was made or rendered. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.09)  
Sec. 18-124. - Compensation of dealer for collection. 
For the purpose of compensating the dealer in accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this article, each dealer shall be allowed two (2) per cent of the amount of tax due and accounted for and remitted to the collector in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due by him if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 4.10)  
Secs. 18-125—18-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - COLLECTION OF TAX FROM DEALER 
 
Sec. 18-136. - Collection by collector. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be collectible by the collector on behalf of the governing authority from all persons engaged as dealers. 
(1)  The collector is duly authorized and empowered to carry into effect the provisions of this article, and in pursuance thereof to make and enforce such rules as he may deem necessary. Such regulations when promulgated shall have the full force and effect of law. Promulgation shall be accomplished by publication at least one time in the official journal of the town. 
(2)  The collector may employ such personnel, including legal counsel on a fee or salary basis, as are necessary to assist in the collection of the taxes imposed hereunder. 
(3)  Any duly authorized representative or deputy of the collector, when acting under his authority and direction, shall have the same power as is conferred upon the collector by this article. 
(4)  The collector may conduct hearings and administer oaths, and examine under oath, any dealer and the directors, officers, agents and employees of any dealer, and any other witness, relative to the business of such dealer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 5.01)  
Sec. 18-137. - Collection of tax on imported personal property used by dealer. 
On all tangible personal property imported, or caused to be imported, from other states or other political subdivisions of this state, or any foreign country, and used by him, the dealer shall pay the tax imposed by this article on all articles of tangible personal property so imported and used, the same as if the articles had been sold at retail for use or consumption, in this town. For the purpose of this article, use or consumption, or distribution, or storage of tangible personal property, shall each be equivalent to a sale at retail, and the tax shall thereupon immediately be levied and be collected in the manner provided herein, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax in any event. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 5.02)  
Sec. 18-138. - Credit against use tax paid in other political subdivisions. 
A credit against the use tax imposed by this article shall be granted to taxpayers who have paid a similar tax upon the sale or use of the same tangible personal property in another city or parish in the state, or city or county in a state other than Louisiana. The credit provided herein shall be granted only in the case where the city or parish in the state, or the city or county in a state other than Louisiana to which a similar tax has been paid grants a similar credit as provided herein. The proof of payment of the similar tax to another city or parish in the state, or to a city or county in a state other than Louisiana shall be made according to rules and regulations promulgated by the collector. In no event shall the credit be greater than the tax imposed by this governing authority upon the tangible personal property which is the subject of the use tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 5.03)  
Secs. 18-139—18-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RETURNS AND PAYMENT OF TAX 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Payment to be monthly. 
The tax levied under this article shall be due and payable by all dealers monthly on the first day of the month. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 6.01)  
Sec. 18-152. - Returns required. 
For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable under this article, it shall be the duty of all dealers on or before the twentieth day of the month following the month in which this tax shall become effective to transmit to the collector, upon forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by him, returns showing the gross sales, purchases, gross proceeds from lease or rental, gross payments for lease or rental, gross proceeds derived from sales of services, or gross payment for services, as the case may be, arising from all taxable transactions during the preceding calendar month or during the part of the preceding calendar month, running from October 1, 1977 to the end of such month. Thereafter, like returns shall be prepared and transmitted to the collector by all dealers, on or before the twentieth day of each month, for the preceding calendar month. Such returns shall show such further information as the collector may require to enable him to correctly compute and collect the tax herein levied. Such returns shall be signed by the dealer filing the same, and his signature thereon shall constitute a warranty on the part of the dealer that he has read and examined the returns and that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, the same are true, correct and complete. Every dealer at the time of making the return required hereunder shall compute and remit to the governing authority the required tax due for the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 6.02)  
Sec. 18-153. - Tax to be remitted with return. 
(a)  At the time of transmitting the return required under this article to the collector, the dealer shall remit to the governing authority therewith, the amount of the tax due under the applicable provisions of this article, and failure to so remit such tax shall cause the tax to become delinquent. 
(b)  All taxes, interest and penalties imposed under this article shall be paid to the governing authority in the form of remittance required by the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 6.03)  
Sec. 18-154. - Gross proceeds from rental of personal property to be reported. 
Gross proceeds from rentals or leases of tangible personal property where the lease or rental is part of a regularly established business, or the same is incidental or germane thereto, shall be reported and the tax shall be paid with respect thereto, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the collector may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 6.04)  
Sec. 18-155. - Extension of time for filing returns. 
The collector, for good cause, may extend for not to exceed thirty (30) days the time for making any returns required under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 6.05)  
Sec. 18-156. - Dealer declared agent of town. 
For the purpose of collecting and remitting to this governing authority the tax imposed by this article, the dealer is hereby declared to be the agent of this governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 6.06)  
Secs. 18-157—18-167. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - RECORDS AND INSPECTION THEREOF 
 
Sec. 18-168. - Records to be kept by dealers. 
It shall be the duty of every dealer to make a report and pay any tax under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales or purchases or sales of services, as the case may be, taxable under this article, and such other books of account as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder, and other information as may be required by the collector, and it shall be the duty of every such dealer moreover, to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all invoices and other records of goods, wares and merchandise or other subjects of taxation under this article; and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours, by the collector or any of his duly authorized agents. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.01)  
Sec. 18-169. - All records to be kept for three years; inspection. 
Each dealer shall secure, maintain and keep, for a period of three (3) years, a complete record of sales of services and tangible personal property received, used, sold at retail, distributed, or stored, leased or rented within this town by the dealer, together with invoices, bills of lading, and other pertinent records and papers as may be required by the collector for the reasonable administration of this article, and all such records shall be open for inspection to the collector at all reasonable hours. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.02)  
Sec. 18-170. - Wholesale dealers, jobbers to keep records of cash or credit sales; required information. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to collect all of the tax imposed by this article, all wholesale dealers and jobbers in this town are hereby required to keep a record of all sales of tangible personal property made in this town, whether such sales be for cash or on terms of credit. The record required to be kept by all wholesale dealers and jobbers shall contain and include the name and address of the purchaser, the date of the purchase, the article purchased and the price at which the article is sold to the purchaser. These records shall be open to inspection of the collector or his duly authorized assistants or deputies at all reasonable hours. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.03)  
Sec. 18-171. - Examination or investigation by collector. 
For the purpose of administering this article, the collector, whenever he deems it expedient, may make or cause to be made by an employee of the department engaged in the administration of this article, an examination or investigation of the place of business, if any, the tangible personal property, and the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts and documents of any dealer. It shall be the duty of every dealer and every director, official, agent or employee of every dealer, to exhibit to the collector or to any such employee of his department charged with the collection of the tax imposed by this article, hereafter referred to as a "deputy," the tangible personal property and all of the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts and documents of the dealer and to facilitate any such examination or investigation as far as it may be in his or their power so to do. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.04)  
Sec. 18-172. - Examination of records of transportation companies. 
For the purpose of enforcing the collection of the tax levied by this article, the collector is hereby specifically authorized and empowered to examine, at all reasonable hours, the books, records and other documents of all transportation companies, agencies or firms operating in this town whether such companies, agencies or firms conduct their business by truck, rail, water, airplane or otherwise, in order to determine what dealers, as provided in this article, are importing or are otherwise shipping articles of tangible personal property which are liable for the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.05)  
Sec. 18-173. - Collector to keep records of official acts; authentication. 
The collector shall keep a record of all of his official acts and shall preserve copies of all rules, decisions and orders made by him or by any deputy of his department in charge of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Copies of such rules, decisions or orders and of any paper or papers filed in any office maintained by him in the administration of this article may be authenticated under his official signature, and when so authenticated, shall be evidence in all courts of the state of the same weight and force as the original thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.06)  
Sec. 18-174. - Records and files of collector deemed confidential; inspection limited. 
The records and files of the collector respecting the administration of this article shall be considered confidential and privileged and neither the collector nor any employee engaged in the administration thereof or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from such records or files or from any examination or inspection of the premises or property of any dealer. Neither the collector nor any employee engaged in such administration or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall be required to produce any of them for the inspection of any person or for use in any action or proceeding except: 
(1)  In an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article; and, 
(2)  When the records or files or the facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceedings. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.07)  
Sec. 18-175. - Permissible use of returns, reports, files. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent: 
(1)  The delivery to a dealer or his duly authorized representatives of a copy of any return, report or other paper filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of any return or report and the items thereof; 
(3)  The inspection by the legal representative of the governing authority of the returns, reports or files relating to the claim of any dealer who shall have brought an action to review or set aside any tax imposed under this article or against whom an action or proceeding has been instituted in accordance with the provisions hereof; 
(4)  The examination of the records and files by the collector or by his duly authorized agents; or 
(5)  The furnishing, in the discretion of the collector, of any information disclosed by the records or files to any official person or body of any other state or of the United States who shall be concerned with the administration of any similar tax by that state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 7.08)  
Secs. 18-176—18-186. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - IMPORTED GOODS 
 
Sec. 18-187. - Permits to import goods. 
In order to prevent the illegal importation into this town of tangible personal property which is subject to the tax, and to strengthen and make more effective the manner and method of enforcing payment of the tax imposed by this article, the collector is hereby authorized and empowered to put into operation a system of permits whereby any person, or dealer, may import tangible personal property by truck, automobile or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having the truck, automobile or other means of transportation seized and subjected to legal proceedings for its forfeiture. Such system of permits shall require the person, or dealer, who desires to import tangible personal property into this town, which property is subject to tax imposed by this article, to apply to the collector or his assistant for a permit stating the kind of vehicle, to be used, the name of the driver, the license number of the vehicle, the kind or character of tangible personal property to be imported, the date, the name and address of the consignee, and such other information as the collector may deem proper or necessary. Such permits shall be free of cost to the applicant and may be obtained at the office of the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 8.01)  
Secs. 18-188—18-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - REMEDIES FOR COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 18-196. - Presumption that property is for sale, use, consumption, etc., in town. 
For the purpose of the enforcement of this article, and the collection of the tax levied hereunder, it is presumed that all tangible personal property, subject to the provisions of this article, imported into this town or held in this town by any dealer is to be sold at retail, used or consumed, or stored for use or consumption in this town, and is subject to the tax herein levied; provided that such presumption shall be prima facie only, and subject to proof furnished to the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.01)  
Sec. 18-197. - Failure to pay tax deemed delinquency; judgment prohibiting doing business. 
Failure to pay any tax due as provided in this article, shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause said tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent, and the governing authority is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the dealer, to show cause in not less than two (2) or more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, after the service thereof, which may be tried out of term and in chambers, and shall always be tried by preference, why the dealer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of business as a dealer, and in case the rule is made absolute, the order thereon rendered shall be considered a judgment in favor of the governing authority, prohibiting such dealer from the further pursuit of said business until such time as he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered as a contempt of court, and punished according to law. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.02)  
Sec. 18-198. - Interest, penalties, attorney's fees for failure to pay tax. 
If the amount of tax due by the dealer is not paid on or before the twentieth day of the month next following the month for which the tax is due, there shall be collected, with the tax, interest upon the unpaid amount, at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum, or fractional part thereof, to be computed from the first day of the month next following the month for which the tax is due until it is paid; and in addition to the interest that may be so due there shall also be collected a penalty equivalent to five (5) per cent for each thirty (30) days, or fraction thereof, of delinquency, not to exceed twenty-five (25) per cent in aggregate, of the tax due, when such tax is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date the tax first becomes due and payable, and in the event of suit, attorneys' fees at the rate of ten (10) per cent of the aggregate of tax, interest and penalty. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.03)  
Sec. 18-199. - Estimation, assessment of tax by collector when dealer fails to report and pay; presumption of correctness; specific penalty. 
(a)  In the event any dealer fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided by this article, or in case the dealer makes a grossly incorrect report, or a report that is false or fraudulent, it shall be the duty of the collector to make an estimate for the taxable period of the retail sales, or sales of services, of such dealer, or of the gross proceeds from rentals or leases of tangible personal property by the dealer, and an estimate of the cost price of all articles of tangible personal property imported by the dealer for use or consumption or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in this town and assess and collect the tax and interest, plus penalty, if such have accrued, on the basis of such assessment, which shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the dealer. In the event such estimate and assessment requires an examination of books, records or documents, or an audit thereof, then the collector shall add to the assessment the cost of such examination, together with any penalties accruing thereon. Such costs and penalties when collected shall be placed to the account of the "Sales Tax Fund—1977" in the same manner as are the taxes collected under this article. 
(b)  If any dealer fails to make any return required by this article or makes an incorrect return, and the circumstances indicate willful negligence or intentional disregard of rules and regulations, but no intent to defraud, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided herein, a specific penalty of five (5) per cent of the tax or deficiency found to be due, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were a part of the tax due and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.04)  
Sec. 18-200. - Final return of dealer selling, quitting business; purchasers to withhold taxes from purchase price; personal liability of purchaser. 
If any dealer liable for any tax, interest or penalty hereunder shall sell out his business or stock of goods or shall quit the business, he shall make a final return and payment within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting business. His successor, successors or assigns, if any, shall withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of such taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the collector showing that they have been paid, or a certificate stating that no taxes, interest or penalties are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold purchase money as provided, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest and penalties accrued and unpaid on account of the operation of the business by any former owner, owners or assignors. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.05)  
Sec. 18-201. - Notice to be given creditors, holders of personalty, debtors of delinquent dealer; consent of collector required prior to transfer or disposition. 
In the event that any dealer is delinquent in the payment of the tax provided for in this article, the collector may give notice of the amount of such delinquent by registered mail to all persons having in their possession, or under their control, any credits or other personal property belonging to such dealer, or owing any debts to such dealer at the time of receipt by them of such notice and thereafter any person so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of such credits, other personal property, or debts until the collector shall have consented to a transfer or disposition, or until thirty (30) days shall have elapsed from and after the receipt of such notice. All persons so notified must, within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, advise the collector of any and all such credits, other personal property, or debts, in their possession, under their control or owing by them, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.06)  
Sec. 18-202. - Collector to ascertain true cost of imported goods and assess tax when dealer's invoice does not reflect same; presumption of correctness. 
In the event the dealer has imported tangible personal property and he fails to produce an invoice showing the cost price of the articles which are subject to tax, or the invoice does not reflect the true or actual cost price, then the collector shall ascertain, in any manner feasible, the true cost price and assess and collect the tax with interest, plus penalties, if such have accrued, on the true cost price as assessed by him. The assessment so made shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden shall be on the dealer to show the contrary. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.07)  
Sec. 18-203. - Collector authorized to fix consideration of leases and rentals when false. 
In the case of the lease or rental of tangible personal property, if the consideration given or reported by the dealer does not, in the judgment of the collector, represent the true or actual consideration, then the collector is authorized to fix the same and collect the tax thereon for the governing authority in the same manner as provided in section 18-202, with interest plus penalties, if such have accrued. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.08)  
Sec. 18-204. - Remedy of collector when transportation company refuses examination of records. 
In the event any transportation company, agency or firm shall refuse to permit examination of its books, records and other documents by the collector, the collector may proceed by rule, in term or in chambers, in any court of competent jurisdiction and require the transportation company, agency or firm to show cause why the collector should not be permitted to examine its books, records or other documents, and in case the rule be made absolute, the same shall be considered a judgment of the court and every violation of the judgment as a contempt thereof and punished according to law. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.09)  
Sec. 18-205. - Late, fraudulent return by dealer, notice to appear; hearing. 
If any dealer, subject to make and file a return required by any of the provisions of this article, fails to render such return within the time required, or renders a return which is false or fraudulent, in that it contains statements which differ from the true gross sales, purchases, leases or rentals, or other transactions, taxable under this article, or otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this article, for the taxable period for which the return is made. The collector shall give such dealer fifteen (15) days' notice, in writing, requiring such dealer to appear before him or his assistant, with such books, records and papers as he may require, relating to the business of such dealer, for such taxable period; and the collector may require such dealer, or other agents or employees of such dealer, to give testimony or to answer interrogatories, under oath administered by the collector or his assistants, respecting the sale at retail, the use, or consumption, or distribution, or storage for use or consumption, in this town, or lease or rental of tangible personal property, or other transactions, subject to tax, or the failure to make report thereof, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.10)  
Sec. 18-206. - Collector authorized to apply to court for order to enforce provisions. 
If any dealer fails to make a return, or refuses to permit an examination of his, the dealer's books, records or papers, or to appear and answer questions within the scope of such investigation relating to the sale, use, consumption, distribution, storage, lease or rental of tangible personal property, or sale of services, the collector may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction, for an order requiring such dealer to make such return or requiring the dealer, or his agents or employees, to appear and answer any such questions or permit such examination, and the court or any judge thereof, shall thereupon issue an order, upon such reasonable notice as shall be prescribed therein, to be served upon the dealer or the agents or employees of such dealer, directing him or them to so appear and testify, and to produce such books, records and papers as may be required. Any person, or any member of any firm, copartnership, joint venture, association or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, failing to comply with any such order shall be guilty of contempt, and shall be punished as provided by law in cases of contempt. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.11)  
Sec. 18-207. - Importing taxable property in vehicle without permit deemed attempt to evade; seizure of vehicle and property. 
The importation into this town of tangible personal property which is subject to tax, by truck, automobile or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having first obtained a permit as described in section 18-187 (if the tax imposed by this article on the tangible personal property has not been paid), shall be construed as an attempt to evade payment of the tax and the same is hereby prohibited, and the truck, automobile or means of transportation other than a common carrier, and the taxable property may be seized by the governing authority in order to secure the same as evidence in a trial and the same shall be subject to forfeiture and sale in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.12)  
Sec. 18-208. - Attaching importing property for noncompliance; violations, penalty. 
(a)  The failure of any dealer who imports tangible personal property from outside the town into the town for use or consumption or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in this town, or who imports for lease or rental any tangible personal property subject to the provisions of this article, shall ipso facto make the tax, interest, penalties and costs delinquent and shall be construed as an attempt to avoid the payment of same which shall be sufficient grounds for attachment of such tangible personal property wherever the same may be located or found, whether said delinquent dealer be a resident or nonresident of this town, and whether the tangible personal property is in the possession of the delinquent dealer or in the possession of other persons; provided that it is the intention of this article to prevent the disposition of the tangible personal property in order to insure payment of the tax imposed by this article, together with interest, penalties, and costs, and authority to attach is hereby specifically authorized and granted to the governing authority. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties prescribed in this and section 18-207, any person, or dealer, who shall violate the provisions thereof, upon conviction shall be fined in a sum of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment in jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. And, each importation or shipment by truck, automobile or other means of transportation, other than a common carrier, found to be in violation of the provisions of these sections shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.13)  
Sec. 18-209. - Personal liability of dealers; lien declared; priority. 
The liability of any person or dealer arising from any tax, interest and penalty, or any of them, imposed by this article, from the time they are due, shall be a personal debt of such person, or dealer, to the governing authority recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action at law by the governing authority. Such debts, whether sued upon or not, shall be a lien on all the property of such delinquent person, or dealer, except as against an innocent purchaser for value without notice in the actual course of business, and shall have preference in any distribution of the assets of the person, or dealer, whether in bankruptcy, insolvency, or otherwise. The proceeds of any judgment or order obtained hereunder shall be paid to the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.14)  
Sec. 18-210. - Authority to require bond or security. 
The governing authority may require a bond or other security satisfactory to the collector for the payment of any taxes, fees, interest and penalties, or any of them, imposed pursuant to this article when he shall find that the collection thereof may be prejudiced without such security. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.15)  
Sec. 18-211. - Estimation, assessment by collector when dealer fails to make return; notice demand; prescription of claim. 
If any person, or dealer, shall fail to make a return or report as required by this article, the collector, within three (3) years after the last day on which the omitted report could have been filed without penalty, may make an estimate of the amount of taxes such person, or dealer, is liable to pay under the terms of this article, from any information he is able to conveniently obtain, and according to such estimate so made by him, assess the taxes, fees, penalties and interest due the governing authority from such person, or dealer, give notice of such assessment to such person, or dealer, and must make demand upon him for payment, or otherwise the claim shall prescribe. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.16)  
Sec. 18-212. - Examination, audit of returns; assessment, demand of deficiency. 
After a return or report is filed under the provisions of this article, the collector shall cause to be examined and make such further audit or investigation as he may deem necessary, and if therefrom, he shall determine that there is a deficiency with respect to the payment of any tax due under this article, he shall assess the additional amount of tax, and any penalties and interest, or either of them due the governing authority from such person, or dealer, and make demand upon him for payment. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.17)  
Sec. 18-213. - Arbitrary assessment when collection jeopardized; payment of assessments. 
(a)  If the collector finds that any person, or dealer liable for the payment of any tax under this article designs quickly to depart from this town or to remove therefrom his or its property, subject to any lien under the provisions of this article, or to discontinue business, or to do any other act tending to prejudice or render wholly or partly ineffectual any proceedings that might be instituted to collect such tax, whereby it shall have become important that such proceedings be instituted without delay, the collector may make an arbitrary assessment as herein provided, whether or not any return or report is then due by law, and may proceed under such arbitrary assessment to collect the tax, or demand security for it, and thereafter shall cause notice of such findings to be given to such a dealer, together with a demand for an immediate return or report, and immediate payment of such tax. 
(b)  All taxes, penalties and interest assessed pursuant to the provisions of sections 18-210—18-212, shall be paid within fifteen (15) days after notice and demand shall have been mailed to the dealer liable therefor by the governing authority. If such taxes, penalties and interest so assessed shall not be paid within such fifteen (15) days, there shall be added to the amount assessed, in addition to interest as hereinabove provided, and any other penalties provided by this article, a sum equivalent to five (5) per cent of the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.18)  
Sec. 18-214. - Collection by distraint and sale. 
If any dealer against whom taxes have been assessed under the provisions of this article shall refuse or neglect to pay such taxes within the time prescribed in this article, it shall be lawful for the collector, or his duly authorized representative, who is charged with the enforcement of collection of such taxes, to enforce collection of such taxes, together with such interest and other additional amounts as are added by law, by distraint and sale of any property or rights to property belonging to the delinquent dealer. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.19)  
Sec. 18-215. - Dealer liable for all uncollected taxes. 
Any dealer who shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect the tax as provided in sections 18-115 through 18-124, upon any, every and all retail sales made by him, or his agent, or employee, which is subject to tax, shall be liable for and pay the tax himself. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.20)  
Sec. 18-216. - Violations. 
For any one of the following violations, in addition to being liable for the other penalties provided herein, the party named shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment in jail for not more than three (3) months, or both, in the discretion of the court: 
(1)  Any person who as a purchaser is obligated to report and pay the tax imposed upon any purchase made by him under sections 18-115—18-124 and who fails, neglects and refuses to file a return thereof with the collector and pay the tax imposed thereon, within the time stated after such sale is made; 
(2)  Any dealer who shall fail, neglect or refuse to collect the tax as provided in sections 18-115—18-124, whether by himself or through his agents or employees; 
(3)  Any dealer violating the provisions of sections 18-200 and 18-201; 
(4)  Any dealer who fails to permit an inspection of records by the collector as provided in section 18-168; 
(5)  Any wholesale dealer or jobber in this town who fails to keep records, or fails to permit an inspection thereof by the collector as provided in section 18-170; 
(6)  Any dealer, wholesale dealer or jobber who violates the provisions of sections 18-118 and 18-119; 
(7)  Any dealer who violates the provisions of section 18-169; 
(8)  Any dealer failing or refusing to furnish any return as provided in sections 18-151—18-156, or failing or refusing to furnish a supplemental return, or other data required by the collector; 
(9)  Any dealer required to make, render, sign or verify any return as provided in sections 18-151—18-156, who makes a false or fraudulent return, with intent to evade a tax hereby levied; 
(10)  The president, executive officers, managers and directors of any corporation, who shall violate the provisions of section 18-217; provided that such fine and imprisonment shall not prevent other action against the corporation as otherwise provided in this ordinance for the recovery of the tax, interest and penalties that may be due; and 
(11)  Any person who shall violate any other provisions of this ordinance, punishment for which is not otherwise herein provided. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.21)  
Sec. 18-217. - Corporations not to dissolve, merge, reorganize, withdraw from state until amount due is paid. 
No corporation organized under the laws of this state shall hereafter be dissolved, or effect a merger, reorganization, or consolidation under any law of this state by the action of the stockholders or by the decree of any court until all taxes, fees, penalties and interest imposed on the corporation in accordance with provisions of this ordinance shall have been paid in full. No foreign corporation which has obtained authority from this state to transact business in this town may surrender such authority and withdraw from this state until all taxes, fees, penalties, interest and other charges imposed upon said corporation in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall have been fully paid. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.22)  
Sec. 18-218. - Payment of interest, penalties. 
(a)  Any person or dealer who shall fail to pay any tax levied by this article on or before the day when such tax shall be required by this article to be paid, shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the tax at the rate specified in section 18-198, for each month or fraction thereof that the tax remains unpaid, to be calculated from the date the tax was originally due to the date of actual payment. 
(b)  In addition, such person or dealer shall pay any special penalty or penalties provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.23)  
Sec. 18-219. - Penalties, interest deemed part of tax; waiver for satisfactory explanation. 
All penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be payable to and recoverable by the governing authority in the same manner as if they were part of the tax imposed. If the failure to pay any such tax when due is explained to the satisfaction of the collector, he may remit or waive payment of the whole or any part of any penalty, and may remit and waive payment of any interest charged in excess of the rate of one-half of one per cent per month. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 9.24)  
Secs. 18-220—18-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - REFUNDS AND REIMBURSEMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-231. - Tax credit for returned goods. 
In the event purchases are returned to the dealer by the purchaser or consumer after the tax imposed by this article has been collected or charged to the account of the consumer or user, the dealer shall be entitled to reimbursement of the amount of tax so collected or charged by him, in the manner prescribed by the collector and in case the tax has not been remitted by the dealer to the governing authority, the dealer may deduct the same in submitting his return. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the dealer as to the gross amount of such refunds during the period covered by such sworn statement, which period shall not be longer than ninety (90) days, the governing authority, through the collector, shall issue to the dealer an official credit memorandum equal to the net amount remitted by the dealer for such tax collected. Such memorandum shall be accepted by the governing authority at full face value from the dealer to whom it is issued, in the remittance for subsequent taxes accrued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 10.01)  
Sec. 18-232. - Claim for refund. 
If any dealer shall have given to the collector notice within the time provided in section 18-231, such dealer thereafter, at any time within two (2) years after the payment of any original or additional tax assessed against him, may file with the collector a claim under oath for refund, in such form as the collector may prescribe, stating the grounds thereof. However, no claim for refund shall be required or permitted to be filed with respect to a tax paid, after protest has been filed with the collector as hereinafter provided, or after proceeding on appeal has been finally determined. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 10.02)  
Sec. 18-233. - Overpayment credited against dealer's liability; refund; notice of rejection. 
If, upon examination of such claim for refund, it shall be determined by the collector that there has been an overpayment of tax, the amount of such overpayment shall be credited against any liability of any dealer under this article, and if there be no such liability, the dealer shall be entitled to a refund of the tax so overpaid. If the collector shall reject the claim for refund in whole or in part he shall make an order accordingly and serve notice upon such dealer. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 10.03)  
Sec. 18-234. - Refund for erroneous, illegal collection; certification by collector. 
Where no question of fact or law is involved, and it appears that in the records of the governing authority that any moneys have been erroneously or illegally collected from any dealer, or have been paid by any dealer under a mistake of fact or law, the collector may, at any time within two (2) years of payment, upon making a record in writing of his reasons therefor, certify that any dealer is entitled to such refund and thereupon the collector shall authorize the payment thereof from any appropriation available for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 10.04)  
Sec. 18-235. - Repayment of deposit by dealer. 
When, to secure compliance with any of the provisions of this article any money shall have been deposited with the governing authority by any dealer, and shall have been paid over to the governing authority and the collector shall be satisfied that such dealer has fully complied with all such provisions, the collector shall so certify and authorize repayment from any appropriations available for such purpose to such dealer of such moneys, or such part thereof as the collector shall certify has not been applied by him to the satisfaction of any indebtedness arising under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 10.05)  
Secs. 18-236—18-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - REMEDIES OF THE DEALER 
 
Sec. 18-246. - Right of action created; procedure; interest on refunds. 
A right of action is hereby created to afford a remedy at law for any dealer aggrieved by the provisions of this article; and in case of any such dealer resisting the payment of any amount found due, or the enforcement of any provisions of such laws in relation thereto, such dealer shall pay the amount found due by the collector and shall give the collector notice, at the time, of his intention to file suit for the recovery of the same; and upon receipt of such notice the amount so paid shall be segregated and held by the collector for a period of thirty (30) days; and if suit be filed within such time for recovery of such amount, such funds so segregated shall be further held, pending the outcome of such suit. If the dealer prevails, the collector shall refund the amount to the claimant, with interest at the rate of two (2) per cent per annum covering the period from the date the funds were received by the governing authority to the date of refund. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 11.01)  
Sec. 18-247. - Competent courts for action; service of process. 
This division shall afford a legal remedy and right of action in any state, city or federal court, having jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter, for a full and complete adjudication of any and all questions arising in the enforcement of this article, as to the legality of any tax accrued or accruing or the method of enforcement thereof. In such actions service shall be upon the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 11.02)  
Sec. 18-248. - Legal remedy for certain causes of action; effect of payment under protest. 
This division shall be construed to provide a legal remedy in the state, city or federal courts, by action of law, in case such taxes are claimed to be an unlawful burden upon interstate commerce, or the collection thereof, in violation of any Act of Congress or the United States Constitution, or in any case where jurisdiction is vested in any of the courts of the United States; provided that upon request of the dealer and upon proper showing by such dealer that the principle of law involved in an additional assessment is already pending before the courts for judicial determination, the dealer, upon agreement to abide by the decision of the courts may pay the additional assessment under protest, but need not file an additional suit. In such cases the tax so paid under protest shall be segregated and held by the collector until the question of law involved has been determined by the courts and shall then be disposed of as therein provided. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 11.03)  
Sec. 18-249. - Grievance procedure. 
If any dealer shall be aggrieved by any finding or assessment of the collector, he may, within thirty (30) days of the receipt of notice of the assessment or finding, file a protest in writing signed by him or his duly authorized agent, which shall be under oath and shall set forth the reasons therefor, and he may request a hearing. Thereafter, the collector shall grant a hearing to such dealer, if a hearing has been requested, and may make an order confirming, modifying, or vacating any such finding or assessment. The filing of any such protest shall not abate any penalty for nonpayment, nor shall it stay the right of the collector to collect the tax in any manner herein provided unless the dealer shall furnish security of a kind and in an amount satisfactory to the collector. Appeals from the decision of the collector shall be direct to any state, city or federal court of competent jurisdiction as provided for in section 18-247. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 11.04)  
Secs. 18-250—18-259. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18-260. - Collector authorized to carry out provisions. 
The collector is hereby authorized and empowered to carry into effect the provisions of this article and in pursuance thereof to make and enforce such rules as he may deem necessary in administering the provisions of this article and other policies or procedures established by this governing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.01)  
Sec. 18-261. - Collector empowered to make rules and regulations. 
The collector shall have the power to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or the laws and the constitution of this state or of the United States, for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the revenues and penalties imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.02)  
Sec. 18-262. - Preparation, distribution of forms. 
The collector shall design, prepare, print and furnish to all dealers or make available to the dealers, all necessary forms for filing returns, and instructions to insure a full collection from dealers and an accounting for the taxes due, but failure of any dealer to secure such forms shall not relieve such dealer from the payment of the taxes at the time and in the manner herein provided. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.03)  
Sec. 18-263. - Appropriations for cost of enforcement. 
The cost of preparing and distributing the report forms and paraphernalia for the collection of the tax, and of the inspection and enforcement duties required herein, shall be borne by the collector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.04)  
Sec. 18-264. - Prior contracts and imports. 
(a)  In any case where tangible personal property is sold at retail under a contract providing for such retail sale, made and entered into prior to October 1, 1977, and containing the sale price, and delivery is made after October 1, 1977, and such sale is taxable under this article, the seller shall add the tax imposed by this article to the sale price, and collect it from the buyer. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall also apply where such tangible personal property is not sold, but is used, consumed, distributed, stored, leased or rented, and where services taxable hereunder are contracted for before October 1, 1977, except as provided in section 18-102(17). 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to tangible personal property actually imported or caused to be imported into, or stored within, the territorial limits of the town prior to October 1, 1977, if the tangible personal property is actually used or consumed by the person who imported and stored the tangible personal property. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.05)  
Sec. 18-265. - Collector, deputy authorized to receive written oaths. 
It shall be lawful for the collector, or any deputy by him duly designated, to receive the written oath of any person signing any application, disposition, statement or report required by the collector in the administration of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.06)  
Sec. 18-266. - Collector authorized to conduct hearings and examine dealers and others under oath. 
The collector, or any deputy by him duly designated, may conduct hearings and have administered and examined under oath, any dealer and the directors, officers, agents and employees of any dealer, and any other witnesses, relative to the business of such dealer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. Such examinations or hearings shall be at a time convenient to the dealer within fourteen (14) days after requested by the collector in writing. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.07)  
Sec. 18-267. - Method of giving notice to dealers. 
Any notice required to be given by the collector pursuant to this article, may be given by personal service on the dealer for whom it is intended, or be mailed to the dealer for whom it is intended, addressed to such dealer at the address given in the last report filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article, or if no report has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of its receipt by the dealer to whom it is addressed. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.08)  
Sec. 18-268. - Records maintained by collector; authentication; fee. 
The collector shall keep a record of all of the official acts, and shall preserve copies of all rules, decisions and orders made by him and by any deputy of his department in charge of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Copies of such rules, decisions or orders and of any paper filed in any office maintained by him in the administration of this article, may be authenticated under his official signature, and when so authenticated, shall be evidence in all courts of the state of the same weight and force as the original thereof. For authenticating any such copy, he shall be paid a fee of one dollar ($1.00) which shall be deposited in the "Sales Tax Fund—1977." 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.09)  
Sec. 18-269. - Provisions not to alter legal remedies. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive the dealer of any remedy in the review of any tax, or in any proceedings to collect the tax given such dealer by any other law, or to deprive the governing authority of any remedy for the enforcement of this article through any procedure or remedies expressly provided in this article imposing the tax herein levied or in any other law, nor shall this ordinance be construed as repealing or altering any such laws, ordinances or resolutions. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.10)  
Sec. 18-270. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article be held invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have passed this article, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be so declared invalid. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.11)  
Sec. 18-271. - Tax supplemental to other taxes. 
The tax levied in this article is declared to be supplemental and in addition to all other taxes levied by and under the authority of the governing authority of any kind or nature. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 12.12)  
Sec. 18-272. - Collector as agent and trustee for town. 
It is hereby recognized that the tax levied in this article is being levied by and on behalf of the governing authority as herein provided and that the collector is acting as agent for the governing authority for the purpose of administration and collection of the tax. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 14.01)  
Secs. 18-273—18-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS AND REVENUES 
 
Sec. 18-281. - Deposited in special fund. 
All taxes, revenues, funds, assessments, moneys, penalties, fees or other income which may be collected or come into possession of the collector as an agent of the governing authority under any provision or provisions of this article shall be promptly deposited by the collector for the account of the governing authority in a special fund designated "Sales Tax Fund—1977," sometimes herein referred to as the "sales tax fund," which fund shall be established and maintained as sacred funds of the governing authority, provided, however, any amount which is paid under protest or which is subject to litigation may be transferred to another account established by the collector pending final determination of the protest or litigation. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 13.01)  
Sec. 18-282. - Payment of administrative costs. 
Out of the funds on deposit in the "sales tax fund," the collector shall first pay all reasonable and necessary expenses of collecting the tax levied hereby and administering the provisions of this article as well as the various administrative procedures established herein. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 13.02)  
Sec. 18-283. - Use of proceeds after paying administrative costs. 
In compliance with the special election of Saturday, July 9, 1977, authorizing the tax, after all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of collection and administering the tax have been paid as provided in section 18-282, the remaining balance of the sales tax proceeds shall be available for appropriation and expenditure by the governing authority, solely for the purposes designated in the proposition authorizing the levy of the tax, as approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the town voting in a special election held therein on Saturday, July 9, 1977, including, but not limited to, payment of any bonds issued for the purpose of making capital improvements as provided in the proposition. 
(Ord. of 8-9-77, § 13.03)  
Secs. 18-284—18-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENT 
 
Sec. 18-291. - Levied, 2002. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of a special election held in the town on October 18, 1997, there be and there is hereby levied for an additional period of ten (10) years from and after June 1, 2002, for the purpose stated in the proposition attached hereto as Exhibit A [on file in the office of the town clerk], a one (1) percent sales and use tax upon the sale at retail, the use, the lease or rental, the consumption, and the storage for use or consumption of tangible personal property and upon the sale of services within the town (the "tax"), all in the manner and subject to the provisions and terms of those portions of R.S. Ch. 2, Title 47, as amended (the "sales tax law"), applicable to sales and use taxes levied by local governments and ordinances adopted by this governing body on May 5, 1987, and March 22, 1988, providing for the levy and collection of an identical amount of sales and use taxes in the town for a fifteen (15) year period ending May 31, 2002, (collectively, the "prior sales tax ordinance"). Except as to the term for which the tax is to be levied and purposes for which the tax can be expended as set forth in the proposition attached as Exhibit "A" hereto, all provisions of the prior sales tax ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  The tax shall be collected on the basis of the applicable integrated bracket schedule prescribed by the Collector of Revenue, State of Louisiana, pursuant to R.S. 47:304. The dealers shall remit to the parish the proportionate part of the tax collected in accordance with said integrated bracket schedule. 
(c)  The tax levied hereby shall be assessed, imposed, collected, paid and enforced in the manner as provided by the sales tax law applicable to the assessment, imposition, collection, payment and enforceability of sales and use taxes of local governments and the prior sales tax ordinance. All of the provisions of the prior sales tax ordinance and the sales tax law applicable to the assessment, imposition, collection, payment and enforcement of sales and use taxes by local governments, shall apply to the assessment, collection, payment and enforcement of the tax herein levied as though all such provisions were set forth in full herein. To the extent, if any, that the provisions set forth in this ordinance or the prior sales ordinance conflict at present or in the future with any applicable provision of the sales tax law, the applicable provision of the sales tax law shall be controlling. 
(d)  The obligations and rights of taxpayers and dealers in connection with the tax levied hereby shall be as provided taxpayers and dealers by the provisions of the prior sales tax ordinance and the sales tax law applicable to sales and use taxes levied by local governments. 
(e)  The tax levied by this section is authorized to be collected by a "collector" which term shall mean and include the entity presently collecting the tax on behalf of the town (the Sales Tax Department of the Parish School Board of the Parish of Bienville, State of Louisiana) and such duly authorized assistants or such other person or persons, agency or instrumentality designated by this governing body to handle and accomplish the collection, enforcement and administration of sales and use taxes on behalf of the town. 
(f)  The collector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to carry into effect the provisions of this section, to appoint deputies, assistants or agents to assist it in the performance of its duties, and in pursuance thereof to make and enforce such rules as it may deem necessary, subject to the action of the governing body. 
(g)  For the purpose of compensating the dealer in accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this section, each dealer shall be allowed two (2) percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for and remitted to the collector in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due by him if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(h)  That all taxes, revenues, funds, assessments, moneys, penalties, fees or other income which may be collected or come into the possession of the collector under any provision or provisions of this section relating to the tax shall be promptly deposited by the collector for the account of the governing body in the special fund heretofore established and maintained for the deposit of such proceeds, which fund shall be a separate bank account established and maintained with the regularly designated fiscal agent of the town; provided, however, any amount which is paid under protest or which is subject to litigation may be transferred to a separate account established by the collector with said fiscal agent pending the final determination of the protest or litigation. 
Out of the funds on deposit in such special fund, the collector shall first pay all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of administering and collecting the tax and administering the provisions of this section and as well as the various administrative and enforcement procedures. Such costs and expenses shall be reported by the collector monthly to the governing body. 
In compliance with the said special election of October 18, 1997, authorizing the tax, after all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of collecting and administration of the tax have been paid as provided for above, the remaining balance in such special fund shall be available for appropriation and expenditures by the governing body solely for the purposes designated in the propositions authorizing the levy of the tax. 
(i)  All funds or accounts described herein may be separate funds or accounts or may be a separate accounting within a general or sweeps fund or account containing monies from multiple sources so long as separate accounting of such monies is maintained. 
(j)  If any or more of the provisions of this section shall for any reason be held to be illegal or invalid, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this section, but this section shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provisions had not been contained herein. Any constitutional or statutory provision enacted after the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived which validates or makes legal any provision of this section which would not otherwise be valid or legal, shall be deemed to apply to this section. 
(k)  The tax levied hereby are and shall be in addition to all other taxes, whether levied in the form of sales, excise, or license, privilege or property taxes levied by any other ordinance or resolution adopted by this governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1169, §§ 1—3, 5-5-87; Ord. No. 2012A, §§ 1—11, 11-25-97)  
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing parking limitations or parking prohibitions affecting only specific streets not inconsistent with this code saved from repeal, § 1-5(12); any ordinance regulating speed limits, stop intersections, one-way streets or any other traffic regulations affecting only specific streets and not inconsistent with this code saved from repeal, § 1-5(13); throwing litter from vehicles prohibited, § 11-21; loading of vehicles to prevent litter, § 11-22; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Power of local municipal authorities, R.S. 32:41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - State highway act adopted. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by R.S. 32:41(c), the town hereby adopts the provisions of Title 32, Chapter 1, Revised Statutes of Louisiana, being the Highway Regulatory Act, and all regulations of the state department of highways and the director of public safety adopted pursuant thereto, except for such provisions and regulations as by their nature can have no application in the town, and except as otherwise provided in this Code or by ordinance. Any person violating such provisions or regulations shall be punished as provided in section 1-11.  
Sec. 19-2. - Operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the town while under the influence of alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs, central nervous system stimulants, hallucinogenic drugs or barbiturates. 
(Ord. No. 957, § 1, 9-2-54) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:98.  
Sec. 19-3. - Regulation of trains. 
(a)  Speed. It shall be unlawful for any person to move any railroad train or car within the town at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(b)  Blocking crossings. It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(c)  Warning by use of whistle. Any person running a train into and from the city, shall in all cases, when a train is coming in or going out, blow their whistle so as to give notice of the arrival and departure thereof and shall also blow the same at all places where the track crosses any street therein. 
(Ord. No. 1136, §§ 1, 3, 4, 8-12-80; Ord. No. 1160, § 1, 2-12-85)  
Sec. 19-4. - Use of compression engine brakes or "Jake brakes" prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use an engine brake within the town limits, except in case of emergency. For purposes of this section, an "engine brake" is a braking mechanism which is powered by the exhaust of the vehicle's engine, typically by means of a device to divert the exhaust from the vehicle's engine from its non-braking exhaust system for use in braking. Such a device is commonly referred to as a "Jake brake," and is recognizable by the sudden, loud roar from an engine upon braking when the "Jake brake" is engaged. Observation, upon the braking of a vehicle, of a sudden, loud, engine-centered, braking noise, uncharacteristic when wheel brakes are utilized, shall be prima facie evidence that an engine brake was utilized by the driver of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2051 , 1-11-05)  
Secs. 19-5—19-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARADES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-16. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in this town. 
Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 19-17—19-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 19-26. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 19-27. - Application. 
(a)  Filing. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(b)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(d)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than seven (7) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(e)  Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee of five dollars ($5.00). This fee may be waived in whole or in part by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 2, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 19-28. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for under this division when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the town to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the town; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the town other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.  
Sec. 19-29. - Notice of rejection. 
If the chief of police disapproves the application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant within three (3) days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of his action. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 4, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 19-30. - Alternative. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three (3) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article.  
Sec. 19-31. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article.  
Sec. 19-32. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.  
Sec. 19-33. - Revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article.  
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 10.5; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, Ch. 17; water line improvements in subdivisions, § 17-6(c); sewage disposal improvements in subdivisions, § 17-6(d). 
State Law reference— Water supply, R.S. 33:3811 et seq.; sewage disposal, R.S. 33:3881 et seq.; public utilities, R.S. 33:4161 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 6-71 et seq.; contaminating water supplies, § 9-78. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 20-16—20-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 20-26. - Connection fee. 
All new customers hooking up to the water system shall be charged a fee based on the actual cost of the meter, service lines, valves, couplings and pipe, including installation cost, necessary for the connection. (Mo. of 6-2-70)  
Sec. 20-27. - Monthly rates. 
(a)  The charge for all water and sewer services furnished by the utilities system of the town shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum bill for 3,000 gallons: 
a.  ¾-inch meter ..... $ 10.00 
b.  ¾-inch meter w/multiple users (per user) ..... 10.00 
c.  1-inch meter ..... 13.00 
d.  1-inch meter w/multiple users (per user) ..... 13.00 
e.  1 ½-inch meter ..... 17.00 
f.  2-inch meter ..... 18.00 
g.  3-inch meter ..... 21.00 
h.  4-inch meter ..... 25.00 
i.  6-inch meter ..... 28.00 
j.  6-inch meter w/usage in excess of 12,000,000 gallons of water per month ..... $5,000.00 
Additional charge of $1.25 per 1,000 gallons used in excess of 3,000 gallons. 
(2)  Each user will be charged at the rate of $1.75 per 1,000 gallons. 
(3)  Customers in excess of 12,000,000 gallons per month shall be charged $1.25 per 1,000 gallons thereafter. 
(4)  Bulk users: 
a.  Minimum bill for 1,000 gallons ..... $50.00 
b.  Per 1,000 gallons thereafter ..... 4.00 
(5)  Customers located outside of town limits: 
Minimum bill for 3,000 gallons ..... $20.00 
a.  ¾-inch meter ..... 20.00 
b.  ¾-inch meter w/multiple users (per user) ..... 20.00 
c.  1-inch meter ..... 26.00 
d.  1 ½-inch meter ..... 34.00 
e.  2-inch meter ..... 36.00 
f.  3-inch meter ..... 42.00 
g.  4-inch meter ..... 50.00 
h.  6-inch meter ..... 56.00 
(b)  For all meters installed after the effective date of this section, a deposit shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Per home owner ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Per renter ..... 100.00 
(3)  Per business owner or business renter ..... 100.00 
(4)  Industrial user ..... 500.00 
(c)  Upon the restoration of water service to any user in the event of disconnection for nonpayment of any charge imposed by this section a separate charge of $25.00 shall be required. 
(Ord. of 4-8-69, § 1; Ord. No. 1150, § 1, 9-28-82; Ord. No. 2030, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2032, § 1, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 2107 , § 1, 7-14-07; Ord. No. 2032(A) , § 1, 9-10-13)  
Sec. 20-28. - Billing. 
The town clerk and other employees and representatives of the town are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to bill and collect for all services rendered to customers of the utilities system in accordance with the rates and charges set forth in section 20-27. 
(Ord. of 4-8-69, § 2)  
Sec. 20-29. - Water; furnished separately; for individual use. 
Water shall be furnished by the utilities system of the town separately to each household or other user. Water so furnished shall not be submetered, resold, or shared. 
(Ord. No. 1148, § 1, 7-13-82)  
Secs. 20-30—20-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 6-71 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-41. - Connection required. 
Within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the town to an owner of premises having a structure used for human occupancy, employment or recreation that the town's public sanitary sewerage system is within three hundred (300) feet of any such structure, the owner of the premises shall at his own expense provide suitable toilet facilities therein and shall connect the facilities to the public sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 1, 7-13-71)  
Secs. 20-42—20-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 20-51. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight, or milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of the chemically oxidizable carbonaceous contents found within the wastewater sample, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or parts per million (ppm). 
Federal grant means a grant of money to the town by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, under the provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. 
Industrial cost recovery means recovery by the town from the industrial users of a sewage works of the federal grant allocable to the collection, transmission, treatment and discharge of the waste from such users. 
Industrial user means any nongovernmental user of the town's sewage works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, United States Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A—Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; 
(2)  Division B—Mining; 
(3)  Division D—Manufacturing; 
(4)  Division E—Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services; and 
(5)  Division I—Services; 
except that a user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily sanitary sewage segregated from industrial waste. 
Industrial waste means the liquid waste resulting from industrial or other technical processes, trade or business, distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Normal sewage shall mean sewage having the following limiting characteristics: 
(1)  BOD, 5 day, 20 degree C. 	200 mg/l (max.) 
(2)  Chlorine Demand, 15 min., 68 degree F. 	25 mg/l (max.) 
(3)  Suspended Solids 	200 mg/l (max.) 
(4)  Hydrogen ion Concentration (pH) 	5.0 to 9.5 
(5)  Grease 	100 mg/l (max.) 
(6)  Temperature 	125 degree F. (max.) 
 
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance during the service life of the sewage works for which such works were designated and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
Sanitary sewage means the liquid waste normally originating in quarter inhabited or frequented by human beings and may include human excreta, bath water, kitchen wastes (with or without properly shredded garbage) and laundry waste. 
Sewage works means any and all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension, in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Useful life means the estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated is thirty (30) years. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of sewage works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § I, 3-14-78) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 20-52. - Formula for user charges. 
(a)  A user charge shall be levied on all users of sewage works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works. The amount of the user charge applicable to each user of the sewage works shall be computed by the following formula: 
Cu = Cr / (Vu) Vr 
where: 
Cu 	= 	A user's charge for operation and maintenance (O & M) cost per unit of time. 
Cr 	= 	Total operation and maintenance costs per unit of time. 
Vr 	= 	Total volume contribution from all users per unit of time. 
Vu 	= 	Volume contribution from a user per unit of time. 
 
(b)  When BOD, suspended solids, or other pollutant concentrations from a user exceeds the range of concentration of these pollutants in normal sanitary sewage, a surcharge added to a base charge, calculated by means of the formula shown in subsection (a), will be added. The surcharge will be computed as follows: 
Cs = Bc (B) + Sc (S) + Pc (P) u 
where: 
Cs 	= 	A surcharge for wastewater of excessive strength. 
Bc 	= 	O & M cost for treatment of a unit of BOD. 
B 	= 	Concentration of BOD from a user above the level contained by normal sewage. 
Sc 	= 	O & M cost for treatment of a unit of suspended solids. 
S 	= 	Concentration of suspended solids from a user above the level contained by normal sewage. 
Pc 	= 	O & M cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant. 
P 	= 	Concentration of any pollutant from a user above the level contained by normal sewage. 
 
(c)  For the first year of operation, operation and maintenance costs shall be based upon past experience for existing sewage works or some other rational method. 
(d)  The town shall review user charges annually and revise them periodically to reflect actual sewage works operation and maintenance costs. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § II, 3-14-78)  
Sec. 20-53. - Formula for industrial cost recovery. 
(a)  Industrial cost recovery payments shall be made to the town by each industrial user no less often than one year after such user begins use of the sewage works. 
(b)  An industrial user's charge (industrial cost recovery charge) shall be based on all factors which significantly influence the cost of the sewage works, such as strength, volume and flow characteristics. The monthly charge for each industrial user shall be computed by the following formula: 
IMP = (G v ;minus; C v ;minus; L v ) IMC v + (G BOD ;minus; C BOD ;minus; L BOD ) IMC BOD + (G ss ;minus; C ss ;minus; L ss ) IMC ss 
where: 
IMP 	= 	Industry monthly payment. 
G v 	= 	Federal grant amount allocated to volume cost component. 
C v 	= 	Monthly capacity of sewage works element allocated to volume cost component. 
L v 	= 	Life of sewage works allocated to volume cost component (30 years). 
IMC v 	= 	Industry monthly contributed sewage volume. 
G BOD 	= 	Grant amount allocated to BOD cost component. 
C BOD 	= 	Monthly capacity of sewage works element allocated to BOD cost component. 
L BOD 	= 	Life of sewage works element allocated to BOD cost component (30 years). 
IMC BOD 	= 	Industry monthly contributed BOD. 
G ss 	= 	Grant amount allocated to suspended solids cost component. 
C ss 	= 	Monthly capacity of sewage works element allocated to suspended solids cost component. 
L ss 	= 	Life of sewage works element allocated to suspended solids cost component (30 years). 
IMC ss 	= 	Industry monthly contributed suspended solids. 
 
(Ord. No. 1116, § III, 3-14-78)  
Sec. 20-54. - User charges. 
(a)  The furnishing of the service of collection and disposal of sewerage by the town is hereby declared to be a revenue producing utility. 
(b)  There is hereby established a monthly user charge of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water used on each user of the town's sewer system. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section the term user shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association religious or charitable organization, or governmental body that discharges sewerage into the sewer system of the town. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section sewerage shall be defined to mean any solid, liquid or gas discharged into the sewer system of the town by a user. 
(e)  The user charge imposed by this section shall be based on the number of gallons of water supplied the user by the town during each month at the rate of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per thousand (1,000) gallons of water. Should a user not be supplied water by the town, a meter shall be installed at the user's point of sewerage discharge and the user shall be charged a user charge of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per thousand (1,000) gallons of sewerage discharged. 
(Ord. No. 1102, §§ I—V, 8-2-76)  
Sec. 20-55. - Sewer charges. 
(a)  On all residences, offices, stores, shops, churches and other establishments, except those covered in subsections (b) and (d), there is hereby levied a sewer charge of two dollars ($2.00) per month. 
(b)  On all schools, hospitals, motels, hotels, courthouses, washaterias, processing plants, rest homes, manufacturing concerns or any other commercial establishment whose use of the sewer system is in excess of that required for the average residence or whose water bill when averaged over a six (6) month period would be in excess of ten dollars ($10.00), there is hereby levied a sewer charge of thirty-five (35) per cent of such water bill averaged over a six (6) month period, provided that the first sewer charge for each establishment affected hereby shall be established by computing thirty-five (35) per cent of its water bill averaged over the last six (6) months of the previous year. 
(c)  On July first and January first of each succeeding year, the sewer charge for each establishment affected hereby shall be recomputed and placed into effect by notice given to the owners of the establishments affected thereby. 
(d)  Any establishment which empties into the sewer system wastes and effluent which requires treatment in excess of the average treatment required shall pay a minimum of five dollars ($5.00) per month or thirty-five (35) per cent of its monthly water bill, computed in accordance with subsections (b) and (c), whichever amount shall be greater. 
(e)  All processing plants using as a source for their water supply any water other than town water is hereby levied a sewer charge of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 1065, §§ 1—4, 2-3-70; Ord. No. 1078, 1-25-72)  
Secs. 20-56—20-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2138 , § I, adopted Mar. 14, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 13-2—13-17. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as ch. 20, art. IV, §§ 20-75—20-90. 
 
Sec. 20-75. - Purpose. 
(a)  To provide for the protection of the public from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the town water system's potable water supply. 
(b)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the town water system's potable water supply and non-potable systems/sources. 
(c)  To promote the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control throughout the town water system. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-76. - Authority. 
By the federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, the Louisiana Administrative Code, Title 51: Part XII.344, and the Louisiana Administrative Code, Title 51:XIV.609.F, the water purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any other substances, from entering the public potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-77. - Cross-connection control device or method required. 
Each existing or new structure is required to implement and maintain an adequate cross-connection control device or method for backflow prevention as mandated under state law and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-78. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply only to this article. For those terms not defined in this article, the definitions contained in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code 2013 edition (LSPC, 2013 Edition), and as amended, shall apply. 
Administrative authority means the town water system, or any agent, employee, or officer designated to enforce this bylaw. 
Approved means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification or standard stated or cited in the Code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and authority of the administrative authority. 
Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment means an air gap meeting ASME Standard A 112.1.2—1991 (R 1998) "Air Gaps in Plumbing Systems" or a backflow prevention assembly which is listed by the University of Southern California—Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USCFCCCHR) as having met the requirements of ANSI/AWWA Standard C510-97 or ASSE Standard 1015-1993, "Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assemblies", or ANSI/AWWA Standard C511-97 or ASSE Standard 1013-1993, "Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow Assemblies" for containment. The listing shall include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly must also be listed by the ASSE in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition or other testing agency approved by the administrative authority. This term shall additionally include those backflow prevention assemblies meeting ANSI/ASSE Standard 1047-1995, "Backflow Preventer, Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly", or ANSI/ASSE Standard 1048-1995, "Backflow Preventer, Double Check Detector Assembly". (These detector assembly devices are often times used on fire protection/fire sprinkler systems to detect and monitor unauthorized water usage.) 
Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment in fire protection system means a backflow prevention assembly listed in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition to be used in a fire protection system which also meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and the requirement of the standard Codes adopted by the town. Devices sized smaller than two and one-half (2.5) inches which have not been listed by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and tested by Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) may be allowed if approved by the state fire marshal, and such device is listed in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. Any such device under this definition shall minimally meet the definition of an "approved backflow prevention assembly for containment." In addition, the particular type of device to be used for a particular application/degree of hazard shall be selected and installed in accord with the requirements of Table 609.F.5 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. 
Approved testing agency means an organization primarily established for purposes of testing to approved standards and approved by the administrative authority (e.g., American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), American Water Works Association (AWWA), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM), Underwriters Laboratory (UL), University of Southern California—Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR), etc.). 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the water purveyor's approved public water supply such as, but not limited to, a private well, pond or river. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substance into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any sources other than its intended source. 
Backflow connection means any arrangement whereby backflow can occur. 
Backflow preventer means a device or method to prevent backflow into the potable water system. 
Backflow prevention assembly general tester means those individuals holding a testing certificate from a nationally recognized backflow certification organization approved by the state health officer. Such individuals are not required to be a licensed plumber and are authorized to perform tests of backflow prevention devices and methods. When such devices or methods are located on private property, a backflow prevention assembly general tester is not authorized to install, repair, or maintain such devices or methods. A general tester may perform installation, maintenance or repairs, if the backflow prevention device is on public property, after having obtained approval from the water purveyor. 
Backflow prevention assembly technician means a water supply protection specialist licensed by the state plumbing board pursuant to LA. R.S. 37:1361 et seq., and its implementing regulations (LAC 46:LV.101, et seq.). All water supply protection specialists are state licensed plumbers who hold such a special endorsement on their plumbing license. Such individuals are authorized to test, install, repair, and maintain backflow prevention devices and methods. 
Back-pressure backflow means backflow due to an increased pressure above the supply pressure. This may be due to pumps, boilers, gravity or other sources of pressure. 
Back-siphonage means the flowing back of used, contaminated, or polluted water from a plumbing fixture or vessel into a water supply pipe due to a negative pressure in such pipe. (See "backflow") 
Bylaw. The word "bylaw" or "this bylaw", when used alone, shall mean these regulations, subsequent amendments thereto or any emergency rule or regulation which the administrative authority having jurisdiction may lawfully adopt. 
Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of an air gap or a backflow prevention assembly immediately following the water meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste. Also defined as "high hazard." 
Cross-connection means any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for non-potable, used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition. 
Customer means the owner, operator, or occupant of a building or property which has a water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator of a private water system which has a water service from a public water system. "Customer" shall not include any residential connection used for dwelling purposes, unless: 
(a)  The residence is also used as a business premises and the home-based business or occupation involves operation of a home-based business or occupation which the water purveyor deems a potentially significant and high hazard to the system's water supply; 
(b)  The domestic water service provided is also used for a landscape irrigation system; or 
(c)  A separate water service has been installed for landscape irrigation and other non-domestic purposes. 
Degree of hazard means the rating of a cross-connection or water service which indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution. 
Domestic sewage means the liquid and water-borne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private sewage disposal system. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting internally loaded check valves, four (4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves. 
Existing work means a plumbing system, or any part thereof which has been installed prior to the effective date of this bylaw. 
Fire protection system means any system used for fire protection or suppression with a direct connection to the public water supply, including but not limited to sprinklers, stand-pipes, and Siamese connections. 
High hazard. See contamination. 
High hazard cross connection means a cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to the public health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste. 
Industrial waste means any and all liquid or water-borne waste from industrial or commercial processes, except domestic sewage. 
Isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention assembly is located at the cross-connection rather than at the water service entrance. 
Labeled means equipment or materials bearing a label or listing agency. 
Liquid water means the discharge from any fixture, appliance or appurtenance in connection with a plumbing system which does not receive fecal matter. 
Listed means equipment or materials included in a list published by a listing agency that maintains periodic inspection or current production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or material complies with approved standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. 
Listing agency means an agency accepted by the administrative authority which is in the business of listing or labeling and which maintains a periodic inspection program on current production of listed models, and which makes available a published report of such listing in which specific information is included that the product has been tested to approved standards and found safe for use in a specific manner (e.g., USC-FCCCHR, ASSE, etc.). 
Low hazard. See pollution. 
Low hazard cross-connection means a cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. 
Main means the principal artery of any system of continuous piping to which branches may be connected. 
May is a permissive term. 
Pharmaceutical-grade antifreeze means a food-grade antifreeze such as an inhibited propylene glycol-based fluid. 
Point of entry means the point of connection to the potable water system. 
Point of introduction means the point at which any additive is introduced to the water supply system. 
Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. Also defined as "low hazard." 
Potable water means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the state and city departments of health. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting internally loaded check valves, a differential pressure relief valve, four (4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves. 
Section 609.F.4 refers to the section marked 609.F.4 in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition. 
Sewage means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
Shall. The word "shall" is a mandatory term. 
Table 609.F.5 refers to the table marked 609.F.5 in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition (known as the containment device table). 
Table 609.F.6 refers to the table marked 609.F.6 in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition (known as the fixture isolation table). 
Water service. Depending on the context, "water service" means the physical connection between a public water system and a customer's building, property, or private water system, or the act of providing potable water to a customer. 
Water supply system means the water supply system of a building or premises consisting of the building supply pipe, the water distributing pipes and the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all appurtenances carrying or supplying potable water in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
Water purveyor means the Arcadia town water system. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-79. - Administrative authority. 
(a)  The water purveyor shall have the right to enter, with the consent of the customer, or upon the basis of a suitable warrant issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for cross-connections. 
(b)  The state will approve training programs for "backflow prevention assembly technicians" and register "backflow prevention assembly technicians" who successfully complete a training program approved by the state plumbing board as per LA. R.S. 37:1367(G) and LAC 46:LV.310, all of which applies to licensed plumbers. In addition, the state health officer, through the LSPC, 2013 Edition, does accept certain persons as "general testers" per Section 609.F.9 thereof. Such individuals are known and defined herein as "backflow prevention assembly general testers". The limitations of jurisdiction/authority of "backflow prevention assembly general testers" are described within said definition. 
(c)  The inspection will only be for the water purveyor to make sure that the air gap or backflow prevention device is in place and is the proper cross-connection control device or method used in accord with Table 609.F.5 and Section 609.F.4. 
(d)  The administrative authority and the water purveyor shall maintain records of cross-connection hazard surveys, and the installation, testing, and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies installed for containment purposes. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the administrative authority and water purveyor are authorized to take additional actions which may not be specifically covered herein that are deemed necessary to protect the town water system's water supply from potential or actual cross connections in accord with the requirements of the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-80. - Water services. 
(a)  New water services. 
(1)  Plans shall be submitted to the water purveyor for review on all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard. 
(2)  The water purveyor shall approve the type of backflow prevention assembly or method required for containment based on the requirement of Table 609.F.5 and degree of hazard. If a cross-connection is not listed in Table 609.F.5, the water purveyor shall use Table B1 of the "Manual for the Selection, Installation, Maintenance, and Field Testing of Backflow Prevention Devices" (CAN/CSA Standard B64.10-1994) as a guide to determine the type of device to require. (This document is referred to in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition.) 
(3)  The water purveyor shall require the installation of the appropriate backflow prevention assembly or method for containment before the initiation of water service. 
(b)  Existing water service. 
(1)  Any changes of, or additions to, existing water services shall be treated as new water services for the purpose of this bylaw. 
(2)  The administrative authority will make available to each customer a copy of the standards used to determine the degree of hazard. 
(3)  Each customer shall survey the activities and processes which receives water service and shall report to the water purveyor if cross-connections exist and the degree of hazard. Upon a finding of hazard, the customer shall cause the appropriate backflow prevention assembly or method to be installed in a timely fashion. 
(4)  For existing water services, the water purveyor may inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross-connections are found the water purveyor shall: 
a.  Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow, or 
b.  Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly or method for containment required by the water purveyor has been installed. 
(5)  Failure of the water purveyor to notify a customer that the customer has a high hazard cross-connection and should install backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment in no way relieves the customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-81. - Customer duties. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross-connections exist without approved backflow protection within the customer's premises starting at the point of service from the public potable water system. 
(b)  The customer shall, at the customer's own expense, cause installation, operation, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies required by the administrative authority. The customer shall advise the water purveyor in advance of when a device is to be tested to allow the water purveyor the opportunity to witness the test. 
(c)  Within fifteen (15) days after testing and/or repairs are completed, the customer shall provide the administrative authority with copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow prevention assembly. 
(d)  In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately notify the water purveyor of the incident and take steps to confine the contamination or pollution. Water service will not be restored until corrective action is taken and approved after inspection by the water purveyor. 
(e)  In accordance with Section 609.F.9.d.iii of the LSPC, 2013 Edition, the customer shall maintain records of installations, tests, repairs, overhauls, or replacements of backflow prevention devices or methods for at least five (5) years and, upon request, such records shall be made available to the administrative authority. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-82. - Requirements. 
(a)  Water purveyor requirements: 
(1)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the water purveyor will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the customer by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made. Ordinarily, ninety (90) days will be allowed, however, this time period may be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s) in question. 
(2)  The water purveyor will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer or an air gap for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to ensure satisfactory operation. 
(3)  The water purveyor shall notify the customer by letter of any failure to comply at the time of the first re-inspection or immediately following the first re-inspection. The water purveyor will allow an additional fifteen (15) days for the correction. In the event the customer fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second re-inspection, the water purveyor will notify the customer by letter that the water service to the customer's premises will be terminated within five (5) days from the customer's receipt of such letter. In the event that the customer informs the water purveyor of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the water purveyor but in no case will exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, if the water purveyor determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(5)  The water purveyor shall have on file a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers and/or repairers. All charges for these tests, repairs, etc., will be paid by the customer of the building or property. 
(6)  The water purveyor will begin initial premise inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of this program by the town water system. Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises. 
(b)  Customer requirements: 
(1)  The customer shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises. 
(2)  The customer, after having been informed by a letter from the water purveyor, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and test or have tested, any and all backflow prevention devices or methods on his premises. 
(3)  The customer shall correct any malfunction of the backflow prevention device or method which is revealed by periodic testing. 
(4)  The customer shall inform the water purveyor of any proposed or modified cross-connection and also any existing cross-connection of which the customer is aware but has not been found by the water purveyor. 
(5)  The customer shall not install a bypass around any backflow prevention device or method unless there is a backflow prevention device or method of the same type on the bypass. Customers who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s) or method(s) must supply additional devices or methods necessary to allow testing to take place. 
(6)  The customer shall install backflow prevention devices or methods in a manner approved by the water purveyor and in conformance with the installation requirements of Section 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. In addition, devices having an atmospheric port or discharge shall be installed such that the port or discharge point is located at least twenty-four (24) inches above the highest flood level which may have occurred in the previous ten-year period. 
(7)  The customer shall install only backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the water purveyor. 
(8)  In the event the customer installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purposes which is on the water purveyor's side of the backflow prevention device or method, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer installed. 
(9)  The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semi-annual device or method testing, re-testing in the case that the device or method fails to operate correctly, and second re-inspections for noncompliance with the water purveyor's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-83. - Required backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment. 
(a)  Water service assemblies. An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required for water services having one (1) or more potential cross-connections which the administrative authority classifies as high hazard as defined by Tables 609.F.5 and 609.F.6. 
(b)  Fire protection system assemblies. 
(1)  All proposed installations of fire suppression systems shall be reviewed by the water purveyor to determine the appropriate type of backflow prevention devices or methods required. 
(2)  For all proposed fire suppression systems using antifreeze, a reduced pressure principle (#10 on Table 609.F.5) backflow prevention device shall be installed at the point of entry. The customer shall provide the water purveyor with the design and chemical usage of the fire suppression system. 
(3)  All existing fire suppression systems shall meet the requirements of section 20-82 above. An inspection by a fire suppression specialist shall be done to determine whether antifreeze has been utilized in the suppression system. The inspection shall be done at the expense of the customer. If it cannot be certified that antifreeze has been used, then a backflow prevention device shall be installed as prescribed by Table 609.F.5 and as approved by the water purveyor. Installation shall be at the expense of the customer. The required backflow prevention devices or methods shall be installed at the time the system is repaired or changed, or within twelve (12) months after adoption of this bylaw, whichever occurs first. 
(4)  In the event cross-connections, such as those found in using auxiliary water supply systems or in providing other water additives such as foaming agents, are necessary for the proper operation of the fire suppression system, then an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-84. - Registration. 
(a)  Technician registration. Any backflow prevention assembly technician licensed by the state must register with the administrative authority before performing work within the town water system. 
Any licensed backflow prevention assembly technician shall include his or her state registration number on all correspondence and forms required by or associated with this bylaw. 
(b)  General tester registration. Any backflow prevention assembly general tester shall present a copy of his/her testing certificate from a nationally recognized backflow certification organization and shall register with the administrative authority before performing work within the town water system. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-85. - Non-compliance by registered technicians or general testers. 
(a)  The local registration of a technician or general tester may be revoked or suspended for a period of up to two (2) years for non-compliance with this bylaw. 
(b)  Any of the following conditions constitute non-compliance: 
(1)  Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods; 
(2)  Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies or methods; 
(3)  Failure to meet registration requirements; 
(4)  Related unethical practices. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-86. - Installation of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  The required backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment shall be installed in the manner recommended by the manufacturer and in accord with the requirements of Section 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition, immediately following the meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system from contamination or pollution between the backflow prevention assembly or methods and the water main. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to be protected from flooding. The port or discharge point shall be installed such that it is located at least twenty-four (24) inches above the highest flood level which may have occurred in the previous ten-year period. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall not be installed in underground vaults or pits, unless a gravity drainage system (designed by a state registered engineer) for the particular site has been approved by the state health officer. (The intent of the exception to this section is to possibly allow below grade installations on particular sites or lots having sufficiently hilly ground at the proposed location of the device such that when the vault or pit is constructed it may be equipped with positive gravity drainage openings as to prevent any part of the device from being submerged. A recommended design standard for such an installation may be found in Sections 606.4.1 and 606.4.2 of the 1994 Standard Plumbing Code.) 
(d)  All backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be protected from freezing. Those devices used for seasonal services may be removed in lieu of being protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician prior to service being reactivated. 
(e)  If hot water is used within the water supply system, thermal expansion shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly or method for containment in accordance with Section 623.D of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. 
(f)  Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or methods to a suitable drain through an air gap. 
(g)  No backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be installed in a place where they would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an electrical panel, or above ceiling level. 
(h)  If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment is unacceptable to the customer, another backflow prevention assembly or method of equivalent or higher protection, sized to handle the temporary water flow needed during the time of testing or repair, shall be installed in parallel piping. 
(i)  All backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be installed so that they are accessible for testing. 
(j)  All shut-off valves shall conform with the current edition of the 2013 Edition Louisiana State Plumbing Code requirements for either ball or resilient seat gate valves. Full port ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two (2) inches or smaller, and full port resilient wedge-type shut off valves on assemblies installed in piping larger than two (2) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-87. - Testing of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be performed by a backflow prevention assembly technician or by a backflow prevention assembly general tester registered with the administrative authority. The costs of tests required in the following paragraphs shall be borne by the customer. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be tested upon installation; when cleaned, repaired, or overhauled; when relocated; and, shall be tested and inspected at least once annually. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested in accordance with CAN/CSA Standard B64.10-1994 or ASSE Standard 5010-1998. 
(c)  Any backflow prevention assembly or method which fails a periodic test shall be repaired or replaced by a backflow prevention assembly technician when such assembly is located on private property. When such a device is located on public property, a backflow prevention assembly general tester may repair or replace the device if authorized by the water purveyor. When water service has been terminated for non-compliance, the backflow prevention assembly or method shall be repaired or replaced prior to the resumption of water service. Backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be re-tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician or by a backflow prevention assembly general tester immediately after repair or replacement. 
(d)  The water purveyor may require backflow prevention assemblies or methods to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement. 
(e)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall report the testing of backflow prevention assembly or method to the customer and to the administrative authority within fifteen (15) days of the test. 
(f)  The administrative authority may require, at its own cost, additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies or methods as it shall deem necessary to verify test procedures and results. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-88. - Repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies or methods on private property shall be performed by a licensed plumber holding a special "water supply protection specialist" endorsement on his plumbing license, herein defined as "backflow prevention assembly technician". 
(b)  After obtaining approval from the water purveyor, a "backflow prevention assembly general tester" may perform repairs to backflow prevention assemblies or methods located on public property. 
(c)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall not change the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly or method during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer replacement parts, if available; if not available, shall use replacement parts approved by the water purveyor. 
(d)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall report the repair, overhaul, or replacement of any backflow prevention assembly or method to the customer and to the water purveyor on the form provided by the water purveyor within fifteen (15) days of the repair. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-89. - Customer non-compliance. 
The water service may be discontinued in the case of non-compliance with this article. Non-compliance includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refusal to allow the administrative authority or water purveyor access to the property to inspect for cross-connection; 
(2)  Removal of a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(3)  Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(4)  Providing inadequate backflow prevention when potential or actual cross-connections exist. 
(5)  Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(6)  Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly or method as required by the administrative authority. 
(7)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Sec. 20-90. - Records. 
(a)  The water purveyor will initiate and maintain the following: 
(1)  Master files on customer cross-connections. 
(2)  Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections. 
(3)  Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the state department of health and hospitals—office of public health. 
(b)  Upon request, the water purveyor will submit records of inspection, surveys, tests or corrective actions to the state department of health and hospitals—office of public health. 
(Ord. No. 2138 , § I, 3-14-17)  
Chapter 21 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property in the town saved from repeal, § 1-5(11); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 10.5; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning regulations, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana." The "zoning map" herein referred to is a part of this chapter and is on file in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 1002, Art. 1, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-2. - Purpose. 
The zoning regulations and districts as set forth in this chapter have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, conveniences, order, prosperity and general welfare of the community. They have been designed to lessen congestion in the public streets, secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, and to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town. 
(Ord. No. 1002, Art. 2, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. The word "structure" shall include the word "building" and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
Accessory building: A subordinate building, attached to or detached from the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot. 
Alley: Any public way set aside for public travel, which provides a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Boarding house: Any dwelling in which more than three (3) persons and less than fifteen (15) persons are provided with sleeping facilities and where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation by previous arrangement. 
Buildable area: The area of that part of the lot not included within the yards or open spaces herein required. 
Building: Any structure designed or built or used for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Building, height of: The vertical distance from the established average sidewalk grade or street grade, or finished grade at the building line, whichever is the highest, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of the mansard, or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more families. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for, constructed, or any construction or alterations for, or occupied exclusively by not more than one family; provided, however, that such building is attached permanently to the ground and is not equipped with axles or wheels. 
Dwelling, two-family: A building designed for, constructed, or under construction or alterations for, or occupied by not more than two (2) families; provided, however, that such a building is attached permanently to the ground and is not equipped with axles or wheels. 
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building designed for, constructed, or under construction or alterations for, or occupied by three (3) or more families; provided, however, that such building is attached permanently to the ground and is not equipped with axles or wheels. 
Family: One individual or more persons related by blood or marriage occupying a premise and living as a single housekeeping unit, or a group of not more than four (4) persons living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with a single culinary facility on a nonprofit cost-sharing basis. 
Garage, public: A building or portion thereof other than a private garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
Home occupation: A professional occupation conducted by the resident in a dwelling and including the following: A physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, clergyman, or other similar professional persons; dressmaking and tailoring, provided, that not more than twenty (20) per cent of the floor area of any dwelling unit shall be used for such home occupations; and provided that no windows or other display or sign to advertise such home occupations other than a single sign not more than four (4) inches in width and eighteen (18) inches in length shall be permitted; and provided further that no assistant who is not a resident within the principal building on the premises may be employed. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one principal building and its accessory buildings, including the open spaces required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage on an officially approved street or place. 
Lot of record: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder and/or the assessor's office; or a parcel of land which became legally established and defined by deed or act of sale on or before August 2, 1960. 
Nonconforming use: A land lawfully used, or structure legally existing or used on August 2, 1960, or upon adoption of any amendment hereto, which does not conform with the height, lot area, yard requirements or use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Parking lot: An open space which is used for temporary parking of automobiles and other vehicles. 
Parking space: An all weather surfaced area enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than one hundred and sixty (160) square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street, place or alley by an all weather surfaced driveway at least eight (8) feet in width which affords unobstructed ingress and egress for automobiles. 
Street: A public way set aside for public travel which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The word "street" shall include the words, avenue, road, highway and thoroughfares or any other similar terms. 
Structure: A combination of materials forming a construction which requires more or less permanent location on the ground and includes, among other things, buildings, stadiums, platforms, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, fences and display signs. 
Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair as may be required for the safety of the building. 
Tourist court: A group of buildings designed for guest rooms or dwelling units intended primarily for automobile transients, each unit having a separate entrance opening out-of-doors or into a foyer, with parking space provided on the lot for use by guests of the court, operation of such courts to be supervised by a person in charge at all hours. Tourist courts include auto-courts, motels, motor courts, motor hotels and motor-inns. 
Trailer court: Any lot where one or more trailer coaches are parked for living and sleeping purposes with flush toilet and bathing facilities provided on the site and which includes any structures, vehicles or enclosures used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such trailer court. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by a portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, front: An open space extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines, and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the street and the nearest part of the principal building, including covered porches. On corner lots the front yard shall be provided facing the street upon which the lot has its lesser dimensions. 
Yard, rear: An open space extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building, including covered porches. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, side: An open space between the building and the side lot lines and being the required minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the nearest part of the principal building including covered porches. 
(Ord. No. 1002, §§ 3.01—3.27, 8-2-60) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 21-4. - Zoning affects every structure and use. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations as set forth in this chapter. However, buildings which are legally nonconforming with respect to yard areas or height, may be structurally altered or enlarged providing the portion of the building which is altered or the portion of the building which is added is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-5. - Only one principal building on any lot. 
Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of record which abuts at least one street and in no case shall there be more than one main building and its customary accessory buildings on one lot unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-6. - Reduction in lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-7. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to permit nonconforming uses to continue, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this article to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. 
(b)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment to this article and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner, and demolition, elimination and removal of an existing structure in connection with such construction, provided that actual construction shall be diligently carried on until the completion of the building involved. 
(c)  Any structure or use existing on August 2, 1960, or on subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its provisions may be continued but may not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Reestablished after the nonconforming use of the building or land has ceased for a continuous period of six (6) calendar months except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or land is situated provided further that if the lessee of any building or place used or occupied for nonconforming purposes under a bona fide lease shall at any time before the expiration of the lease cease to occupy or use the building or land it shall not be considered vacant until the owner of the building or place shall again obtain legal control of its occupancy and use, but this exemption shall not apply if the lessor for any reason be entitled legally to regain possession and does not by legal or other effective means attempt to do so; 
(3)  A nonconforming use of a building or portion thereof, or of land or a portion thereof, shall not be extended or enlarged except in conformity with this chapter. "Extended" is construed to include attachment of signs to the building, placement of signs, or display material on land outside of the building or by the attachment of racks, balconies, or other projections from the building or in any other manner, provided, however, that dwellings which are nonconforming only as to height and yard areas may be structurally altered or enlarged as provided for in section 21-4; 
(4)  Rebuilt or repaired after damage exceeding seventy-five (75) per cent of the fair sales value of the building immediately prior to damage. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by state, parish or town officials charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-8. - Classification of annexed territory. 
All territory which may be hereafter annexed to the community shall be automatically classified as temporary R-1 residence district until otherwise changed by ordinance after public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.05, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-9. - Obstructions to vision at street intersections prohibited. 
On corner lots in all districts except B-3 central business, within the area formed by the center line of the intersecting street and a line adjoining points on such center line at a distance of eighty (80) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between the height of three and one-half (3½) feet and a height of ten (10) feet above the average grade of each street at the center line thereof. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.06, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-10. - Required yards cannot be used by another building. 
No part of a yard, parking space or other open space required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, parking space required under this chapter for another building. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.07, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-11. - Adjacent contiguous lots below area requirements considered as single parcel. 
If two (2) or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record on August 2, 1960, or upon amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirement established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.08, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-12. - Flashing signs. 
Revolving signs of the type similar to the revolving beacons or flashing lights used by police cars and ambulances are prohibited in all districts irrespective of the color of light used. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4.09, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-13—21-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-26. - Establishment of districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter all area within the corporate limits is hereby divided into districts as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the Town of Arcadia, Louisiana," and such map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the town clerk and bearing the words, "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in Section 21-27 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Arcadia." These districts are as follows: 
R-1 	Residence 
R-2 	Residence 
R-3 	Residence 
B-1 	Neighborhood Shopping 
B-2 	Highway Business 
B-3 	Central Business 
L-1 	[Alcoholic Beverages Retail Sales] 
M 	Industrial 
P-1 	Neighborhood Professional Offices 
T-1 	Mobile Home Subdivision 
T-2 	Transient Mobile Home Park 
T-3 	Travel Trailer Park 
 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 5.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-27. - Boundaries of districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled, "Zoning Map Prepared for the Town of Arcadia, Bienville Parish, Louisiana," dated August 2, 1969, [1960] a revision of the "Zoning Map for Arcadia, Louisiana," dated September, 1959, which map is made a part of this chapter and which is on file with the town clerk in the town hall. 
(b)  Unless otherwise indicated the district boundaries are lot lines, the center lines of streets or alleys, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines or the corporate limits lines as they existed on August 2, 1960. 
(c)  Where the district boundaries, approximately coincide with lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the district boundary line unless otherwise indicated. In cases where district boundaries as shown on the zoning map do not coincide with street lines, alley lines or lot lines, and no dimensions are shown, the location of the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(d)  Where a district boundary divides a lot existing on August 2, 1960, and the major portion of the lot is in the less restrictive district, the regulations relative to that district may extend as well to such portion of the lot, as is not more than twenty (20) feet within the more restrictive district. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 5.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-28. - Boundary changes. 
(a)  When changes are made in district boundaries by amendment to this chapter, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. It will be the duty of the petitioner to file with the building inspector a copy of the approved petition, certified by the town clerk, within ten (10) days after such petition is approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  It will be the duty of the building inspector to record the district boundary change on the official zoning map together with the number of the amending ordinance and the date of its passage within ten (10) days after the approved petition is filed in the office of the building inspector. Any amendment involving changes in district boundaries shall not become effective until after such change and entry has been made on the map. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 5.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-29. - Regulations of areas under water. 
All areas within the corporate limits of the community which are under water and not shown as included within any district, shall be subject to all the regulations of the district adjacent to the water area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they interest. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 5.04, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-30—21-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - R-1 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-36. - Generally. 
Within all R-1 residence districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 7.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-37. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Two-family dwellings; 
(3)  Park, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated by city, state or federal agencies; 
(4)  Public libraries or museums; 
(5)  Public schools both elementary and high, or private schools having a curriculum essentially the same as ordinarily given in a public elementary school or public high school, and private or public nursery schools or kindergartens; 
(6)  Private recreational uses such as tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses operated exclusively for private use and not for commercial purposes; 
(7)  Churches and temples; 
(8)  Private garden, and nurseries for the propagation and cultivation of plants only when said plants, flowers or produce are not offered for sale; 
(9)  Home occupations (see definitions); 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed uses including the leasing of rooms by the family resident on the premises, provided that the area rented or leased does not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the total floor area in any dwelling unit, and providing no arrangements are made for boarding; 
(11)  Bulletin boards for churches, temples, institutions or public buildings only; and signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, pertaining to the rental, lease or sale of a building or land; provided, however, that no more than one sign of the above character shall be permitted on any lot; 
(12)  The renting of one room for the accommodation of not more than two (2) persons providing the room is not equipped with cooking facilities and provided further that no boarding arrangements are made. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 7.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-38. - Height regulations. 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 7.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-39. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  Yards. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
(1)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(2)  Side yards: 
a.  Side yard width (combined width of both side yards) ..... 25 feet 
With a minimum of either side yard ..... 10 feet 
b.  On corner lots the side yard on that side abutting the side street shall be not less than ten (10) feet. However, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable width after providing the interior side yard of a corner lot, existing before August 2, 1960, to less than twenty-four (24) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard ..... 30 feet 
(b)  Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Lot area generally ..... 8,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Lot area per family ..... 4,500 sq. ft. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 7.04, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 21-40. - Off-street parking regulations. 
See article III for off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 7.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-41—21-46. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - R-2 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-47. - Generally. 
Within all R-2 residence districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 8.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-48. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in an R-1 residence district; 
(2)  Three-and four-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings; 
(3)  Accessory buildings incidental to any of the above listed uses including the leasing of rooms by the family residing on the premises provided that the area rented or leased does not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the total floor area in any dwelling unit; 
(4)  Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary, or philanthropic nature, but not penal or mental institutions; 
(5)  Boarding and lodging houses; 
(6)  Fraternities, sororities, private clubs and lodges excepting those, the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business; 
(7)  Hospitals for human care except primarily for mental cases; 
(8)  Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area of a temporary character and pertaining to the offering for rent of rooms in the main building. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 8.02, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-49. - Height regulations. 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 8.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-50. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  Yards. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
(1)  Front yard ..... 20 feet 
(2)  Side yards: 
a.  Side yard width (combined width of both side yards) ..... 20 feet 
With a minimum of either side yard ..... 10 feet 
b.  On corner lots the side yard on that side of the lot abutting the side street shall be not less than six (6) feet. However, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable width after providing the interior side yard of a corner lot, existing before August 2, 1960, to less than twenty-four (24) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard ..... 20 feet 
(b)  Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Lot area generally ..... 5,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Lot area per family ..... 2,500 sq. ft. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 8.04, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1145, § 2, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 21-51. - Off-street parking regulations. 
See article III for off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 8.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-52—21-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-61. - Generally. 
Within all B-1 neighborhood shopping districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 9.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-62. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: Shops and stores for retail trade and service which include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Bakeries (products sold retail on premises); 
(2)  Banks; 
(3)  Barber shops, beauty parlors, chiropodies, massage and similar personal service shops; 
(4)  Bicycle sales and repair shops; 
(5)  Camera shops; 
(6)  Clothes pressing and repair; 
(7)  Clothing stores; 
(8)  Delicatessens; 
(9)  Drugstores and pharmacies; 
(10)  Dry cleaning pickup station; 
(11)  Filling stations; 
(12)  Florists; 
(13)  Garages, parking; 
(14)  Garages, storage; 
(15)  Grocery stores, including meat, fruits and vegetables; 
(16)  Hardware stores; 
(17)  Laundromats; 
(18)  Laundry pickup stations; 
(19)  Locksmith shops; 
(20)  Medical and dental clinics for human patients only; 
(21)  Messenger and telegraph offices; 
(22)  Offices; 
(23)  Parking lots; 
(24)  Photographers' studios; 
(25)  Restaurants and cafes; 
(26)  Shoe repairing shops; 
(27)  Shops for the repair of radios, televisions and similar commodities; 
(28)  Shoe stores; 
(29)  Signs and billboards; 
(30)  Stationery and bookstores; 
(31)  Tailoring, millinery and custom dressmaking shops; 
(32)  Theaters (not drive-in); 
(33)  Variety stores; 
(34)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above listed uses; 
(35)  And similar shops and stores for the conduct of retail business; 
(36)  Residences with commercial establishments incorporated or attached. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 9.02, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-63. - Height regulations. 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 9.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-64. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  Yards. Buildings other than residential hereafter constructed shall be located so as to comply with the following minimum yard requirements: 
(1)  Front yard ..... 20 feet 
(2)  Rear yard ..... 20 feet 
(3)  Side yard: No side yard required except in cases where the commercial lot abuts a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet. However, where a side yard is provided but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet in width. 
(b)  Lot area. Where a lot is improved with a dwelling or used in part for dwelling purposes, the lot area per family and yard area regulations of the R-2 residence district will apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 9.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-65. - Off-street parking, loading and unloading. 
See article III for off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 9.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-66—21-73. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - B-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-74. - Generally. 
Within all B-2 highway business districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 10.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-75. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in a B-1 neighborhood shopping district; 
(2)  Auto sales rooms and used car lots; 
(3)  Bowling alleys; 
(4)  Bus depots; 
(5)  Dancing studios; 
(6)  Funeral homes; 
(7)  Garages, public; 
(8)  Gift shops; 
(9)  Hotels; 
(10)  Tourist courts and trailer courts; 
(11)  And uses similar in character to those listed above. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 10.02, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-76. - Height regulations. 
No building or structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 10.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-77. - Lot regulations. 
Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
(1)  Front yard ..... 20 feet 
(2)  Side yard: 
Commercial lot having its side abutting a residence district ..... 5 feet 
(3)  Rear yard ..... 20 feet 
(4)  When side or rear yards are provided but not required, such side yards shall be not less than three (3) feet and such rear yards shall be not less than five (5) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 10.04, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-78. - Off-street parking, loading and unloading. 
See article III for off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 10.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-79—21-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - B-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-86. - Generally. 
Within all B-3 central business districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 11.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-87. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in a B-2 highway business district, except tourist courts, trailer courts, and used car lots; 
(2)  Antique shops; 
(3)  Art shops; 
(4)  Bookshops; 
(5)  Broadcasting and recording stations; 
(6)  Candy stores; 
(7)  Caterers; 
(8)  Cigar stores; 
(9)  Dry goods stores; 
(10)  Department stores; 
(11)  Express offices; 
(12)  Fish markets; 
(13)  Garages, public; 
(14)  Gyms; 
(15)  Hat stores; 
(16)  Furniture stores; 
(17)  Jewelry stores; 
(18)  Leather goods shops; 
(19)  Musical instrument shops; 
(20)  Newsstands; 
(21)  Newspaper and printing offices; 
(22)  Pawnbrokers; 
(23)  Pool halls; 
(24)  Paint stores; 
(25)  Shoe shining parlors; 
(26)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to above listed uses; 
(27)  And uses similar in character to the above listed uses. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 11.02, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-88. - Height regulations. 
No building or structure shall exceed seventy (70) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 11.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-89. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  Dwellings hereafter constructed must comply with the area and yard regulations of the R-2 residence districts. 
(b)  All other permitted uses shall comply with the following area regulations: 
(1)  Front yards ..... Not required 
(2)  Rear yards ..... 20 feet 
(3)  Side yards ..... Not required 
(4)  However, where side yards are provided, such side yards shall be not less than three (3) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 11.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-90. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
See article III for off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 11.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-91—21-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6.5. - L-1 [ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES RETAIL SALES DISTRICTS][2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1192, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 26, 1994, enacted provisions amending Ord. No. 1177, adopted April 10, 1990. Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 1177 had been included as Div. 6.5, §§ 21-96 and 21-96.1. Sections 1—3 of Ord. No. 1192 have been included as § 21-96 at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage ordinances, R.S. 26:493. 
 
Sec. 21-96. - Created; regulations. 
(a)  There is hereby created an L-1 Zone (district). This zoning shall be required of all retail dealers of beverages of alcoholic content. This zoning shall only be obtained in those districts designated B-3 and B-4 and shall remain subject to all requirements of B-3 and B-4 districts. 
(b)  All businesses in B-3 or B-4 zones presently licensed to sell alcoholic beverages are herein rezoned L-1. 
(Ord. No. 1177, § 1, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 1192, §§ 1—3, 4-26-94) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that this chapter contains no provisions pertaining to B-4 districts.  
Sec. 21-96.1. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to Div. 6.5.  
DIVISION 7. - M INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-97. - Generally. 
Within all M industrial districts, as shown on the zoning maps, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 12.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-98. - Uses permitted. 
(a)  A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Arenas and auditoriums; 
(2)  Bakeries, wholeale; 
(3)  Barge terminals; 
(4)  Blacksmith shops; 
(5)  Book publishing plants; 
(6)  Boot and shoe manufacturers; 
(7)  Bottling works; 
(8)  Broom manufacturers; 
(9)  Building material yards; 
(10)  Cabinet makers; 
(11)  Candy manufacturers; 
(12)  Canning and preserving manufacturers; 
(13)  Cap and hat manufacturers; 
(14)  Car barns; 
(15)  Carpenter shops; 
(16)  Carpet cleaning shops; 
(17)  Cigar manufacturers; 
(18)  Cigarette manufacturers; 
(19)  Cleaning and pressing; 
(20)  Clock factories; 
(21)  Clothing manufacturers; 
(22)  Coal yards; 
(23)  Coffin manufacturers; 
(24)  Coal storage warehouses; 
(25)  Concrete burial vault companies; 
(26)  Condensed milk manufacturers; 
(27)  Contract storage yards; 
(28)  Cosmetic manufacturers; 
(29)  Creamery wholesalers; 
(30)  Dairy wholesalers; 
(31)  Dental laboratories; 
(32)  Electrical power plants; 
(33)  Electrical repairing shops; 
(34)  Electrical sign manufacturers; 
(35)  Enameling and painting shops; 
(36)  Engraving plants; 
(37)  Envelope manufacturers; 
(38)  Express storage and delivery stations; 
(39)  Feed manufacturers; 
(40)  Feed wholesalers; 
(41)  Flour and grain storage and elevators; 
(42)  Food products manufacturers; 
(43)  Fruit and vegetable dyeing plants; 
(44)  Fuel distributing stations; 
(45)  Fuel gas storage stations; 
(46)  Fur warehouses; 
(47)  Furniture storage warehouses; 
(48)  Garage, repair; 
(49)  Garment factories; 
(50)  Gas (illuminating or heating) storage station; 
(51)  Grain elevators; 
(52)  Gravel pits; 
(53)  Grocery wholesalers; 
(54)  Hangars with repair facilities; 
(55)  Hospitals, animal and human; 
(56)  Ice cream manufacturers; 
(57)  Jewelry manufacturers; 
(58)  Power and light manufacturers; 
(59)  Light and power substations; 
(60)  Livery stables; 
(61)  Loose-leaf book manufacturers; 
(62)  Lumberyards; 
(63)  Macaroni manufacturers; 
(64)  Milk bottling plants; 
(65)  Milk depots, wholesale; 
(66)  Millinery and artificial flower manufacturers; 
(67)  Mineral water distillation and bottling plants; 
(68)  Motorcycle repair shops; 
(69)  Moving companies with storage facilities; 
(70)  Newspaper and printing offices; 
(71)  Office equipment and supply manufacturers; 
(72)  Optical goods manufacturers; 
(73)  Organ and piano manufacturers; 
(74)  Medicine manufacturers; 
(75)  Paper book manufacturers; 
(76)  Paper can and tube manufacturers; 
(77)  Paper products companies; 
(78)  Paper sack manufacturers; 
(79)  Perfume manufacturers; 
(80)  Phonograph manufacturers; 
(81)  Photo-engraving companies; 
(82)  Produce warehouses; 
(83)  Pumping stations; 
(84)  Paint shops; 
(85)  Refrigerator manufacturers; 
(86)  Relay stations; 
(87)  Rug cleaning plants; 
(88)  Saddle manufacturers; 
(89)  Sand and gravel pits; 
(90)  Sand and gravel storage yards; 
(91)  Screw and bolts manufacturers; 
(92)  Seed companies; 
(93)  Sheet metal shops; 
(94)  Shirt factories; 
(95)  Silk manufacturers; 
(96)  Soda water manufacturers; 
(97)  Stable and dog kennels; 
(98)  Street railway yards and other appurtenances; 
(99)  Substations for power and light companies; 
(100)  Sporting goods manufacturers; 
(101)  Telephone exchanges; 
(102)  Telephone substations; 
(103)  Thermometer manufacturers; 
(104)  Tin products wholesalers; 
(105)  Tinsmith shops; 
(106)  Tire repair shops; 
(107)  Transfer company, baggage storage; 
(108)  Trunk manufacturers; 
(109)  Upholstery manufacturers; 
(110)  Vulcanizing shops; 
(111)  Warehouses; 
(112)  Wallpaper manufacturers; 
(113)  Watch manufacturers; 
(114)  Water company appurtenances; 
(115)  Water proofing treatment manufacturers; 
(116)  Welding shops; 
(117)  Wholesale produce storage and markets; 
(118)  Wharves; 
(119)  Window manufacturers; 
(120)  Wire brush manufacturers; 
(121)  Wood products manufacturers; 
(122)  Woven good manufacturers; 
(123)  Woodworking shops, small; 
(124)  Worsted goods manufacturers; 
(125)  And uses similar in character to the above listed uses. 
(b)  Any building or premises may be used for any other purpose, except R-1 and R-2 uses, not in conflict with any other local ordinances, provided, however, the following uses must be approved by the town council, and subject to such safeguards as the council may establish after a report by the planning commission: 
(1)  Acid manufacturers; 
(2)  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacturers; 
(3)  Distillation of bones manufacturers; 
(4)  Explosives, manufactured or stored; 
(5)  Fat rendering plant; 
(6)  Fertilizer manufacturers; 
(7)  Gas manufacturers; 
(8)  Garbage, offal or dead animals reduction plants; 
(9)  Glue manufacturers; 
(10)  Petroleum or its products, refiners of; 
(11)  Smelters of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores; 
(12)  Stockyards or slaughterhouses; 
(13)  Wholesale gasoline storage yards; 
(14)  Airports, landing fields and landing strips for aircraft; 
(15)  Any other similar uses which would be objectionable or obnoxious because of danger from explosion or creation of smoke, dust, fumes, odors, gas noise and vibrations and similar conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 12.02, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-99. - Height regulations. 
No building shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in height, except that any building in an M industrial district which adjoins or abuts on a residential district shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height unless it is set back from all lot lines one foot for each foot of additional height above forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 12.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-100. - Lot regulations. 
All buildings hereafter constructed shall be located so as to comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(2)  Rear yard ..... 20 feet 
(3)  Side yard: No side yard required, but where provided not less than three (3) feet in width. No yard will be required for that part of a lot which fronts upon a railroad siding. On lots adjacent to a residential zone all buildings shall be located to provide a minimum of ten (10) feet of side yard width on that side of the building adjacent to the residence district. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 12.04, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-101. - Off-street parking, loading and unloading. 
See article III for off-street parking, loading and unloading requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 12.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-102—21-112. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - P-1 NEIGHBORHOOD PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-113. - Generally. 
Within all P-1 neighborhood professional office districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-114. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: Professional office for general service to the community, which include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Any use permitted in R-1 and R-2 districts; 
(2)  Architectural, planning, engineering offices and other related type of professional services; 
(3)  Dentists, medical doctors, opticians, chiropractors, pathologists, and related medical services offices; 
(4)  Attorneys, certified public accountants; 
(5)  Professional consultants, financial institutions, realty offices and insurance offices. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-115. - Height restrictions. 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-116. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  Yards. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
(1)  Front yards ..... 25 feet 
(2)  Side yards: 
a.  Side yards width (combined width of both side yards ..... 20 feet 
b.  On corner lots the side yard on that side abutting the side street shall be not less than ten (10) feet. However, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable width after providing the interior side yard of a corner lot, existing before August 13, 1974, to less than twenty-four (24) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard ..... 20 feet 
(b)  Lot area: 
(1)  Minimum required lot area ..... 5,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot area required per office ..... 2,500 sq. ft. 
(c)  Commercial business lots: 
(1)  Minimum width limit ..... 100 feet 
(2)  Minimum depth limit ..... 150 feet 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74; Ord. No. 2066 , 10-9-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2066 , adopted Oct. 9, 2007, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as § 21-116(c) herein.  
Sec. 21-117. - Off-street parking regulations. 
See article III for off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Secs. 21-118—21-123. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - T-1 MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS, T-2 TRANSIENT MOBILE HOME PARKS, T-3 TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 
 
Sec. 21-124. - Scope. 
This division deals with the creation, development and use of mobile home subdivisions, transient mobile home parks, and travel trailer parks, the classification of each, and regulations and restrictions of each classification. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-125. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Area regulations: Requirements vary; see the area requirements under the appropriate classification. 
Camper: A portable structure built on or placed on a vehicular chassis and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling. "Camper" shall include pickup coaches, motorized campers and any vehicle, renovated vehicle or accessory to a vehicle which is used as a temporary dwelling. 
Lot: A plot of ground within a subdivision or park designated to accommodate one mobile home or travel trailer unit. This term shall also include the terms "stand" or "stall." 
Mobile home: A movable or portable dwelling built on a vehicular chassis, connected to utilities and designed for year round living on wheels or rigid supports. 
Mobile home subdivision: A unified development of mobile home lots arranged on a tract or site, platted for such purpose, which lots may be sold or leased to owners of mobile homes situated thereon and designated to accommodate mobile homes on a permanent basis. 
Off-street parking: Areas or spaces provided off the street for parking or storage of vehicles. In the case of dedicated streets and roads such spaces shall be off the right-of-way. In the case of privately owned, undedicated streets and roads, such spaces shall be clear of street pavement and ditches. 
Single ownership: Entire subdivision or park is collectively owned by one or more persons, as opposed to separate ownership of individual sites. 
Transient mobile home park: A unified development of mobile home lots arranged on a tract or site under single ownership and designated to accommodate mobile homes for short durations. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling and to be towed behind a motor vehicle and being of an overall length of not more than thirty-two (32) feet. 
Travel trailer park: A unified development of lots arranged on a tract or site, under single ownership, and designated to accommodate travel trailers or campers for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
Uses: Purposes for which a development is designated, intended, occupied or maintained. Refer to the appropriate classification. 
Yard: An open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by other than plants or trees. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 21-126. - Nonconforming uses. 
After August 13, 1974, no mobile home, travel trailer or camper shall be placed or occupied in any area not covered by a zoning classification of T-1, T-2 or T-3. All mobile homes, travel trailers and campers located and occupied on areas not covered by a zoning classification of T-1, T-2 or T-3 are now considered nonconforming use areas and are subject to the provisions of section 21-7. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-127. - Compliance. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall be reason for termination of city utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-128. - T-1 mobile home subdivision regulations. 
(a)  Generally. Within all T-1 mobile home subdivision districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this section shall apply. 
(b)  Uses permitted: All uses permitted and as regulated in an R-2 district. 
(c)  Area regulations: The minimum area to be zoned T-1 mobile home subdivision district shall be ninety thousand (90,000) square feet. Where an adjacent area is already zoned T-1 or T-2, the area of the adjacent development may be used to help satisfy the minimum requirement provided that the combined T-1 and T-2 area will be not less than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet. A nonconforming use area of less than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet which meets all other provisions of this section may be zoned T-1. 
(1)  Minimum lot area ..... 5,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at both ends of mobile home unit ..... 50 feet 
(3)  Minimum lot depth ..... 100 feet 
(4)  Minimum lot frontage ..... 30 feet 
(d)  Yard regulations: Open space for yards shall have the following minimum clearance between lot lines and mobile home unit: 
(1)  Front ..... 20 feet 
(2)  Side ..... 10 feet 
(3)  Rear ..... 10 feet 
(e)  Streets: Streets and roads shall have a minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet and shall be dedicated to public use. Streets shall be paved with a hard surface. Street pavement, shape and drainage features shall meet the specifications of and be acceptable to the town. 
(f)  Off-street parking: Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided on each lot. The minimum area of each space shall be nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
(g)  Special conditions: 
(1)  No mobile home shall be permitted less than one hundred (100) feet from an R-1 residential district or less than fifty (50) feet from an R-2 residential district. If an appropriate permanent screening device of not less than six (6) feet in height is installed at the perimeter, distances may be lessened with the approval of the planning commission. 
(2)  A plat or map of the proposed mobile home subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission along with the zoning application. The plat shall be to scale and shall show accurately the location and dimension of each street, lot line and subdivision boundary line, access from a public street or road and off-street parking spaces. 
(3)  Nonresidential uses within a mobile home subdivision shall comply with regulations as prescribed in division 3 of article II. 
(4)  The base of each mobile home unit shall be skirted with attractive screening device. 
(5)  Not more than one mobile home unit shall be permitted on each minimum lot area. However, when two (2) or more mobile homes are joined together permanently to form one combined structure and used for single-family occupancy, the combined structure shall be considered as a single mobile home unit provided that all other provisions of this section are met. 
(6)  Additional restrictions may be imposed by the planning commission as a recommended condition for granting the application by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-129. - T-2 transient mobile home park regulations. 
(a)  Generally. Within all T-2 transient mobile home park districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this section shall apply. 
(b)  Uses permitted: All uses permitted under a T-1 mobile home subdivision. 
(c)  Area regulations: The minimum area to be zoned T-2 transient mobile home park district shall be forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. Where an adjacent area is already zoned T-2, the area of the adjacent development may be used to help satisfy the minimum area requirement provided that the combined T-2 area will be not less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. A nonconforming use area of less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet which meets all other provisions of this section may be zoned T-2. 
(1)  Minimum lot area ..... 3,500 sq. feet 
(2)  Minimum lot width at both ends of the mobile home unit ..... 35 feet 
(3)  Minimum lot depth ..... 100 feet 
(4)  Minimum lot frontage ..... 25 feet 
(d)  Yard regulations: Open space for yards shall have the following minimum clearances between lot lines and mobile home unit: 
(1)  Front ..... 10 feet 
(2)  Side ..... 5 feet 
(3)  Rear ..... 5 feet 
(e)  Streets: Streets and roads shall be paved with a hard surface. The streets shall be dedicated to the town. 
(f)  Off-street parking: Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided at each lot. The minimum area of each parking space shall be nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
(g)  Special conditions: 
(1)  No mobile home shall be permitted less than one hundred (100) feet from an R-1 residential district or less than fifty (50) feet from an R-2 residential district. If an appropriate permanent screening device of not less than six (6) feet in height is installed at the perimeter, distances may be lessened with the approval of the planning commission. 
(2)  A plan of the proposed transient mobile home park shall be submitted to the planning commission along with the zoning application. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall show accurately the location and dimension of each street, lot line and park boundary line, access from a public street or road and off-street parking spaces. The plan shall include a typical cross-section of the proposed streets showing type and width of pavement, drainage features and the distance from center line of street to lot line. 
(3)  Nonresidential uses within a transient mobile home park shall comply with regulations prescribed in division 3 of article II. 
(4)  Not more than one mobile home unit shall be permitted on each minimum lot area. However, when two (2) or more mobile homes are joined together permanently to form one combined structure and used for single-family occupancy, the combined structure shall be considered as a single mobile home unit provided that all other provisions of this section are met. 
(5)  At least ten (10) per cent of the total park area shall be provided for open space, exclusive of streets and parking spaces, and shall be distributed so as to provide serviceable recreation areas to the park occupants. Pond areas may be used to satisfy any or all of this requirement, excluding sewerage ponds. 
(6)  Additional restrictions may be imposed by the planning commission as a recommended condition for granting the application by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-130. - T-3 travel trailer park regulations. 
(a)  Generally: Within all T-3 travel trailer park districts, as shown on the zoning map, the regulations of this section shall apply. 
(b)  Uses permitted: The following uses are permitted in a T-3 travel trailer park: 
(1)  Parking of one travel trailer or camper per minimum lot area; 
(2)  Occupancy not to exceed thirty (30) days continuous occupancy within the park area per travel trailer or camper. 
(c)  Area regulations: The minimum area to be zoned T-3 travel trailer park district shall be one acre. Where an adjacent area is already zoned T-3, the area of the adjacent development may be used to help satisfy the minimum area requirement provided that the combined T-3 area will be not less than one acre. A nonconforming use area of less than one acre which meets all other provisions of this section may be zoned T-3. 
(1)  Minimum lot area ..... 1,000 sq. feet 
(2)  Minimum lot width ..... 20 feet 
(3)  Minimum lot depth ..... 50 feet 
(d)  Yard regulations: None. 
(e)  Off-street parking: One off-street parking space shall be provided at each lot. In addition, one off-street parking space for each four (4) lots shall be provided and distributed for the convenient use of tenants, guests and service vehicles. 
(f)  Special conditions: 
(1)  A plan of the proposed travel trailer park shall be submitted to the planning commission along with the zoning application. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall show accurately the location of streets and roads, dimensions of lots and park boundaries and location of off-street parking spaces. 
(2)  Mobile homes exceeding an overall length of thirty-two (32) feet shall not be parked in a travel trailer park except on lots specifically noted on the plan thereof as mobile home lots, which lots shall meet the area and yard requirements set out under section 21-129. Under no condition shall such mobile homes occupy space within a travel trailer park for periods exceeding thirty (30) days continuous occupancy, except as noted in subsection (3) below. 
(3)  One mobile home unit may be located within a travel trailer park, upon a lot specifically noted on the plan thereof, and used as a permanent office or residence for the park management. 
(4)  Showers and rest rooms shall be provided for the use of park occupants. Separate showers and rest rooms shall be provided for men and women. Sewer connections shall be to public sewerage facilities or to facilities approved by the board of health. 
(5)  A source of potable drinking water shall be made available for use by park occupants. 
(6)  Nonresidential uses within a travel trailer park shall comply with regulations as prescribed in division 3 of article II. 
(7)  A minimum of twenty (20) per cent of the total park area, exclusive of streets and parking spaces, shall be provided for recreational purposes for use by park occupants. Pond areas may be used to satisfy any or all of this requirement, excluding sewerage ponds. 
(8)  Additional restrictions may be imposed by the planning commission as a recommended condition for granting the application by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(g)  Exception for owner's travel trailer: Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the parking or storage of an unoccupied travel trailer or camper on the owner's property, regardless of the zoning classification of that property. 
(Ord. No. 1089, § 3, 8-13-74)  
Secs. 21-131—21-136. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - PLANNED DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 21-137. - Intent of planned districts. 
Planned districts are intended to be established from time to time by amendments to this chapter consisting of appropriate changes in the boundaries of districts established by this chapter in such a manner as best to fit the general pattern of land use established by this chapter and to further the purposes set forth in section 21-2. Planned districts may be for commercial use, or industrial use. Planned districts and the regulations thereof are intended to insure the groupings of commercial or industrial buildings on a parcel of land in such a manner as to constitute a harmonious, efficient and convenient commercial or industrial area or center, and to provide a means for permitting the establishment of such centers as a part of the development of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 13.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-138. - Site plan prerequisite for approval. 
Any amendment to this chapter by which a planned district would be established shall be enacted only after a site plan for the planned district shall have been reviewed and given preliminary approval by the planning commission. Any such enactment shall become effective only after the site plan has been given final approval by the planning commission and such approval recorded on the plan. The site plan submitted for final approval must be in substantial, but not necessarily exact, conformity with the plans submitted for preliminary approval. Site plans as recorded may be revised by replats approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 13.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-139. - Content of site plan. 
(a)  A site plan for a planned district shall indicate the location of main and accessory buildings on the site and the relation of one to another, the traffic circulation features within and without the site, the height and bulk of buildings, the provisions of off-street parking and loading spaces, the location of other open spaces upon the site, the location and design of announcement signs, the description of uses of building and areas, provided, however, that the uses of buildings and areas which by virtue of the design of the building or area may be occupied by more than one type of enterprise need not be designated. 
(b)  A site plan shall include provisions for landscaping, fences and walls designed to further the purpose of regulations for planned districts and such features shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and maintenance of any use of which they are appurtenant. In considering any site plan for a planned district the planning commission shall assure safety, and convenience of traffic movement, both within the center covered by the plan and with relation to access streets and harmonious and beneficial relations between the center and nearby neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 13.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-140. - Uses permitted. 
A building or land shall be used in planned districts only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Planned commercial districts: 
a.  Commercial recreational establishments, except drive-in theaters and race tracks; 
b.  Establishments processing goods for direct consumption to be sold at retail within the planned commercial district; 
c.  Repair shops; 
d.  Service establishments; 
e.  Warehouses for storage of merchandise to be sold at retail within the planned commercial district. 
(2)  Planned industrial districts. Within planned industrial districts all uses permitted in all M industrial districts shall be permitted providing that the permitted uses in M industrial districts requiring approval by the town council after a report by the planning commission shall be permitted in the planned industrial district under the same procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 13.04, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-141—21-151. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 21-152. - Applicability. 
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used unless the off-street parking spaces required herein are provided. Such parking spaces are not required for any structure or use existing August 2, 1960, however, the parking spaces as specified herein shall be provided for any enlargement or structural alteration to any such existing structure or use. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-153. - Continuation of facilities. 
Required parking spaces associated with a particular use shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner unless a change in the parking requirements of the associated permitted use occurs to permit a corresponding reduction in the parking area required of the associated use. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-154. - Minimum size of parking spaces. 
Each parking space shall contain a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet of area for each vehicle exclusive of necessary drives and other access ways. A driveway, however, may be considered a required parking space for a dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-155. - Street access. 
Each parking space shall have vehicular access to a public street. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-156. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Every parcel of land, which after August 2, 1960, is changed to a parking area for more than ten (10) vehicles, or a drive-in business (except drive-in theaters and used car lots) shall be developed as follows: 
(1)  If such area is subject to wheeled traffic it shall be surfaced with a bituminous material or other impervious surfacing material to make such area useable in wet weather and to prevent dust in dry weather. 
(2)  Where such area is contiguous to a lot in a residential district, and is not separated by a street, alley or other public way, a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge having a height of not less than six (6) feet shall be erected and maintained between such area and the property in the residential district. 
(b)  Any light used to illuminate said parking lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and abutting streets. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.05, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-157. - Parking space requirements. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking space shall be provided on any lot on which any of the following listed uses are hereafter established: 
(1)  Banks: Parking area equal to ground floor area of such bank. 
(2)  Boarding and lodging houses: One parking space for each two (2) rooms offered for occupancy. 
(3)  Churches and temples: One parking space for each ten (10) seats provided in the main auditorium of such place of assembly. 
(4)  Clinics: Parking area equal to twice the gross floor area of such clinic. 
(5)  Clubs and lodges: One parking space for each three (3) members of such club or lodge at the time of construction or structural alteration. 
(6)  Dwellings: One parking space for each dwelling unit. 
(7)  Hospitals: One parking space for each bed in such hospital or institution. 
(8)  Hotels: One parking space for each guest room or suite offered for occupancy by such hotel. 
(9)  Industrial uses: One parking space for each five (5) persons employed or intended to be employed on such lot. In addition to these spaces there shall be provided one parking space for each vehicle used directly in the conduct of such industrial use. 
(10)  Libraries and museums: Parking area equal to that portion of the floor area which is open to the public. 
(11)  Offices, professional and other: Parking area equal to the gross floor area of such office, with a minimum of one parking space provided. 
(12)  Restaurants: Parking area equal to twice the ground floor business area of such restaurant. 
(13)  Schools, public and private: Elementary and junior high schools—One (1) parking space per classroom, laboratory or manual training shop; high school—Three (3) parking spaces per classroom, laboratory or manual training shop. 
(14)  Shops and stores for services and trades: Parking area equal to twice the ground floor business area of such shop or store. 
(15)  Theaters: One parking space for each four (4) seats in such theater. 
(16)  Tourist courts: One parking space for each room available for tourists. 
(17)  Undertaking establishments: Parking area equal to twice the ground floor area of the establishment. 
(18)  Wholesale establishments and warehouses: One parking space for each five (5) employees or for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
(b)  If automobile off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, required parking space may be provided on other off-street property if such space lies within three hundred (300) feet of the main building. Such parking space shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as parking space to be used in conjunction with the principal use and shall be reserved as such through an encumbrance on the title. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.06, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 8-13-74)  
Sec. 21-158. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. No land shall be used or occupied and no structures shall be erected or used for commercial or industrial purposes unless the off-street loading spaces required herein are provided. Such loading spaces are not required for any commercial or industrial structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, provided, however, that off-street loading spaces as specified in this ordinance shall be provided for in any enlargement or structural alteration to any such existing structure or use. 
(b)  Location. The off-street loading spaces required by this ordinance shall be located in all cases on the same lot or parcel of land as the use or structure they are intended to serve. In no case should any required loading space be part of an area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Requirements: 
(1)  For each commercial or industrial enterprise in which commodities are sold, displayed, stored, serviced, repaired, altered or fabricated as the principal use of the enterprise one off-street loading space of at least two hundred (200) square feet in area shall be provided. 
(2)  For each commercial and industrial enterprise of over one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor or ground area in which commodities are sold, displayed, stored, serviced, repaired or altered, or fabricated as the principal use of the enterprise, two (2) off-street loading spaces shall be provided. One off-street loading space shall be at least two hundred (200) square feet in area, and the other off-street loading space shall be at least four hundred fifty (450) square feet in area and having a minimum overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet. 
(3)  Additional off-street loading spaces shall be required when necessary to provide adequate area for off-street loading. Detailed plans for off-street loading space provisions and use may be required for the issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 6.07, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-159—21-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 21-171. - Lot area requirements. 
Where a lot has less area than the minimum requirements for the district within which the lot is located, and was a lot of record in separate ownership from adjacent property at the time of adoption of such requirements, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling or any nondwelling purpose permitted in the district within which the lot is located provided, however, that the yard areas and other requirements of the district are complied with as closely as is possible in the opinion of the board of zoning adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 14.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-172. - Height regulations. 
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Belfries; 
(2)  Chimneys; 
(3)  Church spires; 
(4)  Conveyors; 
(5)  Cooling towers; 
(6)  Cupolas; 
(7)  Derricks; 
(8)  Flag poles; 
(9)  Fire towers; 
(10)  Monuments; 
(11)  Observation towers; 
(12)  Radio and television towers, antennas or aerials; 
(13)  Smoke stacks; 
(14)  Tanks; 
(15)  Transmission towers; 
(16)  Water towers. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 14.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-173. - Group housing projects. 
In the case of a group housing project of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least five (5) acres not subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this chapter to the individual building unit in such housing projects, the application of the terms of this chapter may be varied by the board of zoning adjustment in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will assure substantially the same character of occupancy and intensity of land use no higher and a standard of open space no lower than that permitted by this chapter in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. However, in no case shall the board of zoning adjustment authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the project is located, or a smaller lot area per family than the minimum required in such district, or a greater height, or a larger coverage than the requirements of this chapter in such a district. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 14.03, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-174. - Yard and open space requirements. 
(a)  More than one main institutional, public or semipublic or commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot or tract providing that no such building or portion thereof is located outside the buildable area of the lot. 
(b)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky except where accessory buildings are permitted in a rear or side yard and except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not to exceed eighteen (18) inches, provided, however, that a roof, gutter and eaves may project to the extent of four (4) feet into a required side yard if a minimum distance of three (3) feet remains open to the sky between the farthest projection of such roof, gutter or eaves and the side property line. 
(c)  A porte-cochere, carport or canopy which canopy is attached to the building and has no other support may project into a required side yard provided that every part of the projection of such porte-cochere, or carport, is unenclosed, is removed at least two (2) feet from the nearest side lot line and does not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet in length or more than thirteen (13) feet in height; provided further, that canopies can be located in required front or side yards adjacent to streets on lots occupied by churches, schools, hospitals, clinics, funeral parlors, hotels, public buildings, and institutions of a philanthropic, educational, religious, or eleemosynary nature and such canopies can be supported by other means than attached to the buildings. 
(d)  An open unenclosed, uncovered porch or terrace not exceeding the ground elevation by more than six (6) inches, may project into a required front yard a distance not more than ten (10) feet, but in no case more than half the distance from the required building line to the front property line. This shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed marquees or canopies except where otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 14.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-175. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Fences may be erected along the boundaries of a lot or yard area; however, such fences may not exceed seven (7) feet in height above the surface of the ground provided, however, that fences which are constructed in front yard areas may not exceed four (4) feet in height. No barbed wire or other hazardous material shall be used in fence construction. 
(b)  Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in residence and business districts. 
(c)  Public utilities including electric substations, sewer and water pumping stations, drainage pumping stations, water towers, and buildings and structures of a similar nature may be located in any district when authorized by the board of zoning adjustments, and provided that such uses be placed and operated as to cause the least inconvenience to owners or tenants of adjoining lots and do not cause serious annoyance or injury to occupants of adjoining premises by reason of the emission of odors, fumes, gases, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, light or glare, or other nuisances. 
(d)  Temporary buildings used in connection with construction work only may be located in any district during the period of construction, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. 
(e)  Hospitals and cemeteries may be located in any district when approved by the board of zoning adjustment and subject to such safeguards as the board may establish. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 14.05, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-176. - Regulations of accessory buildings. 
(a)  Except on corner lots, any accessory building that is not a part of the main building may be built in a required side yard, providing such accessory building is not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, nor less than three (3) feet from the nearest interior side lot line. On corner lots accessory buildings are not permitted in required side yards on the side street side, or within any portion of the rear yard area which lies between the side street and the prolongation of the required side yard line into the rear yard area. 
(b)  Accessory buildings not exceeding one story nor fourteen (14) feet in height may be built in required rear yards provided, however, that in any case where accessory buildings are not built on rear lot or side lot lines, such accessory buildings shall not be located less than three (3) feet from either side or rear lot line. 
(c)  The combined gross area of all accessory buildings or portions thereof located in required side and rear yards shall not exceed thirty (30) per cent of the required rear yard area, nor shall more than one accessory building cover any part of the required side yard. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 14.06, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-177—21-188. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning regulations, R.S. 33:4721 et seq.; appointment of board of adjustment, R.S. 33:4727. 
 
Sec. 21-189. - Creation. 
A board of zoning adjustment is hereby created and established in accordance with R.S. 33:4727. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-190. - Composition. 
The board of zoning adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the community, owners of real property, and qualified voters. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-191. - Appointment. 
The members of the board of zoning adjustment shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-192. - Terms. 
The members of the first board of zoning adjustment shall serve respectively, one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years and one for five (5) years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-193. - Removal of members. 
All members of the board of zoning adjustment shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-194. - Filling of vacancies. 
A vacancy on the board of zoning adjustment shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-195. - Chairperson. 
The board of zoning adjustment shall elect its own chairperson who shall serve for one year. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-196. - Secretary. 
The board of zoning adjustment shall have the power and authority to appoint a secretary who shall not necessarily be a member of the board, in which event any payment or salary made to the secretary shall be approved by the council after recommendation by the board. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a true and correct record of all proceedings at both general and special meetings of the board, in a book to be kept specially for that purpose. Certified copies of the minutes of all such proceedings shall be furnished the building inspector and the chairperson of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.06, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-197. - Rules of procedure. 
The board of zoning adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that any rules adopted by the board shall not be effective until approved in writing by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-198. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the board of zoning adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or, in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be public records. All testimony, objections, thereto and ruling thereon, shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the board for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-199. - Appeals to the board. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of zoning adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, commission, board, bureau or any other agency of the community affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the building inspector from whom the appeal is taken, and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The building inspector shall produce all papers, correspondence and records requested by the board of zoning adjustment for any hearing or meeting held by the board. An appeal stays all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the board, after a notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In such cases, proceedings, shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by the civil district court of the parish on application to the board or civil district court of the parish, and notice to the building inspector and on due cause shown. The board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the interested parties, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(c)  A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the building inspector at the time the notice of appeal is filed, which the building inspector shall forthwith pay over to the town clerk to the credit of the general revenue fund of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1002, §§ 15.03, 15.07, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-200. - Powers. 
(a)  The board of zoning adjustment shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of R.S. 33:4721—33:4729 or this chapter. 
(2)  In hearing and deciding appeals, the board shall have the power to grant an exception in the following instances: 
a.  Where the boundary line of a district divides a lot held in single ownership on October 2, 1960, to permit extension of the district to include the entire lot; 
b.  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of the plan, as shown on the map fixing the several districts accompanying and made a part of this chapter, where the actual street layout on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
(3)  The board shall have authority to grant the following variances: 
a.  Permit a variance in the yard requirements, height restrictions, or lot area per family requirements of any district, but only where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of those provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other physical conditions, providing such variance will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare; 
b.  Authorize upon appeal whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this ordinance relating to the use, construction, or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land will impose upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship but only when the board is satisfied that granting such variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a deviation from the comprehensive plan as established by this ordinance, and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected. 
c.  Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any district whenever the use of a building or land is so extraordinary as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or whenever it can be shown that provision of required off-street parking space within three hundred (300) feet of the main building is not feasible and would impose an unreasonable hardship as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience. 
(b)  In consideration of all appeals and all proposed exceptions or variances under the terms of this chapter, the board of zoning adjustment shall, before making any exception or variance from the chapter in a specific case, first determine that it will not impair an adequate supply of air or light to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, morals, comfort or welfare of the inhabitants of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-201. - Action by board. 
(a)  In exercising the powers of section 21-200, the board of zoning adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector. In granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  The concurring vote of a majority of the board of zoning adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any variance of such ordinance. Any person or any officer, department, board, bureau or any other agency of the town, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning adjustment, may present to the civil district court of the parish within thirty (30) days after filing of the decision in the office of the board, a writ of certiorari asking for such relief and under such rules and regulations as are provided for such matters in appropriate legislation of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 15.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-202—21-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning amendments, R.S. 33:4724. 
 
Sec. 21-216. - Initiation of change. 
The council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change the regulations, restrictions or boundaries herein or subsequently established. Such amendments may be initiated: 
(1)  By action of the council by introduction of an ordinance, or by adoption of a motion; or 
(2)  On petition by property owners, by filing with the council through the planning commission, a petition in writing which conforms with the standards and requirements of the planning commission, provided that such petition is duly signed and acknowledged by the owners or authorized agents of not less than fifty (50) per cent of the area of land in which a change of classification is requested. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 16.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-217. - Procedure. 
No amendment to this chapter shall become effective until: 
(1)  There shall have been held a public hearing in relation thereto before the planning commission, at which time interested citizens and parties shall have had an opportunity to be fully heard. 
(2)  Notice of the proposed change and of the time and place of the public hearing shall have been published once a week for three (3) weeks in the official journal of the town. At least twenty (20) days shall elapse between the first publication and the date of the hearing. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, a good faith attempt to notify the owners of record of the properties to be zoned or rezoned in municipal zoning shall be made by the sending of an official notice by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing and subject matter of the regulations and restrictions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, when more than ten (10) parcels are to be zoned or rezoned by enactment of a zoning ordinance, the advertisement in the official journal or a paper of general circulation required herein shall be considered adequate notice to the property owners. 
(3)  After the public hearing as provided above, the planning commission shall have submitted its report and recommendation upon the proposed change to the clerk of the council. If such report is not filed with the clerk of the council within thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing the action and report on such amendment by the commission shall be deemed favorable. 
(4)  A final yea and nay vote shall have been taken on the proposal by the council within ninety (90) days, dated from the introduction of an ordinance in correct form, or the adoption of a motion in correct form by the council, or from the final filing of the petition of property owners or owner to correct form. 
(5)  The provisions of this section do not apply in cases where there is a proposal to enact an entire new ordinance, to change the text as a whole, or to change all the official zoning maps, or both, in which event the procedure set out in R.S. 33:4721—33:4730 shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 16.02, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-218. - Fees. 
Before any action shall be taken as provided in this article, the party proposing or recommending a change in the zoning ordinance, either text change or map change, shall deposit with the clerk of the council the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each text change not involving acreage, or fifty dollars ($50.00) for each acre of land or portion thereof for which a change of classification is proposed or recommended to cover the approximate cost of this procedure, however, the maximum fee shall not exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00) irrespective of the size of the area involved, and under no condition shall such sum or part thereof be refunded for failure of such changes to be adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 16.03, 8-2-60; Ord. No. 1093, § 1, 9-10-74)  
Sec. 21-219. - One-year limitation. 
Whenever a petition is filed requesting or proposing a change in or amendment to a zoning ordinance, and the petition has been finally acted on by the council in accordance with the outlined procedure in this article then the council shall not consider any further petition requesting or proposing the same change or amendment for the same property within a period of one calendar year from the date of the council's final action on the petition. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 16.05, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-220—21-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 21-231. - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a building inspector, appointed by the mayor, who shall have the power to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 17.01, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-232. - Building permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the structure of any building, including accessory buildings, or to commence moving or altering any building, including accessory buildings, until the building inspector has issued a building permit for such work. 
(b)  In applying to the building inspector for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch drawn to scale such plan indicating the shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be altered, or moved, and of any building already on the lot. He shall state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and supply other information required by the building inspector for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed construction as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the town then enforced, the building inspector shall issue a building permit for such construction. If a building permit is refused, the building inspector shall state such refusal in writing with the cause. 
(c)  The issuance of a permit shall in no case, however, be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire automatically. A building permit shall become void twelve (12) months from the date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the project described therein. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 17.04, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-233. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in its use or structure shall be used until the building inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land, building or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending completion. Within three (3) days after notification that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions of this chapter; or, if such certificate is refused, to state refusal in writing with the cause. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 17.05, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-234. - Records. 
A record of all certificates of occupancy, building permits, applications, sketches and plans shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 17.06, 8-2-60)  
Sec. 21-235. - Violations. 
(a)  In case any structure is erected or structurally altered or maintained, or any structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, any proper town official or their duly authorized representatives may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction or alteration or use or other violations, to restrain, to correct or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. The building inspector may call upon the chief of police to furnish the necessary police personnel to carry out his orders. 
(b)  Any resident of the town who believes that a zoning violation is occurring, may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the building inspector. The building inspector shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 17.02, 8-2-60)  
Secs. 21-236—21-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGNS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2139 , §§ 1—13, adopted Mar. 24, 2017, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as art. VIII, §§ 21-251—21-263 herein. 
 
Sec. 21-251. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform, comprehensive sign standards governing the permitting for, application, display, design, construction, installation and maintenance of signs, which are necessary to accomplish the following goals: 
(1)  To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the town by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding architecture and land uses. 
(2)  To create a more attractive business and economic climate, and encourage revitalization by enhancing and protecting the orderly and effective display of signs. 
(3)  To discourage an excessive number of signs, and unsightly and inappropriate signs. 
(4)  To protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from the indiscriminate use and placement of signs, structurally unsafe signs, sign that obscure the vision of pedestrians or motorists, and sign that compete with necessary traffic signals and warning signs. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 1, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-252. - Definitions. 
Definitions for different types of signs and related elements are found in this article, and same shall have the meaning ascribed herein. To the extent that a word is not defined, it shall have the meaning ascribed to same under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 2, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-253. - Sign regulations compatible with zoning code. 
Signs located or proposed to be located within the town are subject to the applicability of the zoning code, however any requests for variances and appeals shall be to the board of aldermen/town council of the town. Any request for variance shall be in writing, and have attached thereto any depictions, maps, or drawings deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 3, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-254. - Sign permit required. 
(a)  Unless specifically permitted as an exempt sign by this article, all signs shall require a sign permit in accordance with this article. Application shall be made in writing, during regular business hours at town hall, and shall contain a drawing, depiction or photograph of the proposed sign and a drawing indicating a proposed lot location, and be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential property and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for commercial property. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from sign permit requirements: 
(1)  Changing of advertising copy or message on an existing legally permitted or legal non-conforming changeable sign or similar approved sign, unless such copy or message conflicts with other limitations as set forth herein. 
(2)  Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of information, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign. 
(3)  Construction signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less. 
(4)  Directional/informational signs of five (5) square feet or less. 
(5)  Nameplates and identification signs of two (2) square feet or less. 
(6)  Political signs within sixty (60) days of any local, state or federal election. 
(7)  Public agency signs or notices, or any sign relating to an emergency. 
(8)  Real estate signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less that notify that the property or premises are for sale, lease, or rent, provided: 
a.  The signs are on the property or premises being advertised. 
b.  Only one (1) sign is placed for each street frontage. 
c.  All signs are removed within thirty (30) days of the sale, lease or rental of the property or premises. 
d.  All such signs are thirty-two (32) square feet or less and contain no commercial message other that the information indicating that the property is available for sale or lease. 
(9)  Window signs or displays in a business or residence. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Point of purchase display signs. 
(12)  Subdivision identification signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less. 
(13)  Any grave marker, headstone, memorial statue, or other similar remembrances that is noncommercial in nature. 
(14)  Names and addresses on postal boxes. 
(15)  Residential address numbers. 
(16)  Names of newspapers and similar publications on their delivery boxes. 
(17)  The posting of privately owned land and/or buildings or structures against trespass, hunting, fishing, swimming or any other activity, and/or the warning of any person against any danger, hazard or condition pertaining to such land and/or buildings and structures. 
(18)  Cornerstones, memorial tablets, and similar markers made of masonry, bronze and other incombustible and durable material and used to indicate, without advertising matter, information relating to the development of the facility on which they are located such as those involved in planning, financing and construction of buildings. 
(19)  Historical signs and markers designating places of historical significance. 
(20)  City entry and park identification signs designating entry points to or parks located in the town. 
(21)  Flags, pennants or insignia of any government, except when such flags are used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. 
(22)  Works of fine art which in no way identify a product or business and which are not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise, which enterprise may benefit or realize direct commercial gain from such display. 
(23)  Temporary decorations or displays clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local or religious holiday celebrations or special events. 
(24)  Traffic and other official signs of any public or governmental agency. 
(25)  Small outdoor signs directed to persons who have already entered the premises, such as filling station fuel pump signs or instructions on using an automatic car wash. To qualify for this exception, no lettering on the sign shall be greater than four (4) inches tall. 
(26)  Menu boards for drive-thru food establishments. 
(27)  Signs indicating special events, such as a fair, carnival, festival, grand opening, sale, or similar temporary activity. 
(28)  Lost dog signs may be placed upon public property for up to three (3) days, and these signs must be removed after the third day. 
(29)  Garage sale signs may be placed on public property two (2) days before the garage sale and removed the day after the sale. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person engaging in the business of erecting, altering, relocating, or constructing a sign without a valid sign permit may have his/her license either suspended or revoked by the building inspector in addition to any fines imposed by the building inspector. Any person who places a prohibited sign and any property landowner or lessor who allows the placement of any sign without a permit as set forth herein shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 4, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-255. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No signs, other than those placed by agencies of government or signs whose placement has been authorized by this article or by another designee of the town, may be erected on public property. Any sign placed on public property without authorization may be removed without notice. 
(b)  No signs may be placed on any private property without prior consent of the owner thereof and, where applicable, issuance of a sign permit. 
(c)  No sign mounted on the exterior of a building may cover any windows or doors. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 5, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-256. - Sign dimension computations. 
(a)  Computation of sign area. 
(1)  The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all lettering, background, emblem, logo, corporate banding, representation, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight (8) lines drawn at right angles. (See Figure 7.1: Sign Measurement Area.) 
Figure 7.1: Sign Measurement Area 
 
(2)  Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area. 
(3)  Double-faced signs with back-to-back sign faces shall be regarded as a single face sign if the distance between each sign face does not exceed two (2) feet at any point. 
(4)  Where a sign contains three-dimensional objects (e.g., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like objects), the sign area shall be measured as the maximum projection of the objects upon a single vertical plane. 
(b)  Measurement of sign height. Sign height is measured as follows: When measuring sign height, the height of the entire structure, including decorative elements, must be included. (See Figure 7.2: Sign Height Computation.) 
(1)  For freestanding signs, height is calculated as the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the sign. 
(2)  For signs attached to buildings, height is calculated as the vertical distance from the base of the building to which a sign is attached to the highest point of the sign. 
(3)  Sign clearance is calculated as the vertical distance from grade or the base of the building to which the sign is attached to the lowest point of the sign. (See Figure 7.3: Sign Clearance.) 
Figure 7.2: Sign Height Computation 
 
Figure 7.3: Sign Clearance 
 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 6, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-257. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Compliance with town codes. All signs constructed, erected, modified, or altered shall comply with the applicable provisions and requirements of the town building code. All electrical fixtures, devices, circuits, conduits, raceways or apparatus used to illuminate, move, or project any sign must be installed and maintained as required in the town electrical code. 
(b)  Wind pressure and direct load requirements. All signs must be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure and receive dead loads as required by the state building codes and ordinances of the town. 
(c)  Sign structure and installation. Supports and braces must be designed as an integral part of the sign. Supports or braces must be hidden from public view to the extent possible. All signs attached to a building must be installed and maintained so that wall penetrations are water-tight and the structure does not exceed allowable stresses of supporting materials. 
(d)  Sign clearance. All signs proposed to overhang any public sidewalk and all freestanding signs shall have a clearance of at least ten (10) feet from the lowest point of the sign, including framework and embellishments, to the finished grade directly below the sign. 
(e)  Maintenance required. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, attractive, clean, and structurally sound condition. The premises surrounding all signs shall be kept free and clear of safety and health hazards, rubbish, high weeds, and grass. 
(f)  Illumination. 
(1)  All lighting must concentrate illumination upon the area of the sign to prevent glare upon the street and adjacent properties. All sign illumination must be designed, located, shielded, and directed to prevent both the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent publicly dedicated roadways and surrounding properties and the distraction of operators of vehicles or pedestrians in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  All sign illumination must meet the requirements of section 37-75 (exterior lighting) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 7, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-258. - Permanent signs. 
The following permanent signs in all districts require a sign permit and are subject to the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Residential districts. The following regulations shall apply to all on-premises signs located in residential zoning districts (see Table 7.1: Signage Standards): 
a.  Signs are allowed as an accessory use to legal, large multi-family and non-residential uses only, including churches, hospitals, schools, and legal non-conforming uses. 
b.  Parking lot directional signs for multi-family. 
1.  A maximum of two (2) parking lot directional signs are permitted for the parking areas of multi-family residential uses (five (5) units+). 
2.  Parking lot directional signs are limited to a maximum height of five (5) feet and a maximum sign area of five (5) square feet. 
c.  Multi-family identification sign. 
1.  One (1) multi-family identification sign is permitted per multi-family use (5+ units) identifying the name of the development and address, wall-mounted or freestanding. 
2.  Multi-family identification signs are limited to twenty-four (24) square feet in area. Freestanding signs are limited to six (6) feet in height. Monument signs are preferred when a freestanding structure is used. 
d.  Residential subdivision identification sign. 
1.  One (1) residential subdivision identification sign is permitted per subdivision development of five (5) residential lots or more. 
2.  Residential subdivision identification signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Residential subdivision identification signs must be located five (5) feet from any lot line within the dedicated street entrance. 
e.  The total size of on-premises signs at any given location shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. When more than one (1) establishment is located in the same building a sign in accordance with the above formula is permitted for each. 
(b)  Non-residential districts. The following regulations shall apply to all on-premises signs located in business (non-residential) zoning districts (see Table 7.1: Signage Standards): 
(1)  Number of signs. 
a.  Signs are allotted to each street frontage on corner lots. 
b.  More than one (1) wall sign may be erected, provided the total square footage allowed is not exceeded. 
c.  Only one (1) freestanding sign (including monument signs) is allowed per street frontage. 
(2)  Electronic message boards including digital signage. 
a.  One (1) freestanding electronic message board to convey information by words, letters, or still images per lot or parcel in compliance with the zoning district regulations. 
b.  The electronic message board must be located with the primary freestanding sign and is included in the total sign square footage. 
c.  The maximum height, allowable sign surface, and all other requirements for freestanding signs shall govern electronic message boards as permitted by the underlying zoning district. 
d.  No animation, flashing, running or twinkle lights. 
(3)  Planned commercial center. 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign limited to an area of one (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage, is allowed per planned commercial center. 
b.  On corner lots, there may be one (1) such sign per street frontage. 
c.  The size of each sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. 
d.  Planned commercial centers shall have coordinated building signage that does not exceed the size allowed for their zoning classification. 
e.  There shall be no separate freestanding signs allowed for individual businesses located in a planned commercial/shopping center. 
Table 7.1: Signage Standards 
Sign Classification 
by Zoning District 	Maximum area in SF 	Min Setback 
in Feet 6 	Max Height 
in Feet 	Total 
Allowed 
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RMH, B-1 				
Freestanding 2 	50 1 	10 	10 	1 
Monument sign 	50 1 	10 	6 	1 
Attached 3 	50 1 	N/A 	N/A 	1 
Freestanding 4, 	1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage, max 100 	10 	35 	1 
Monument sign 	1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage, max 100 	10 	6 	1 
Attached 	1.5 sf/linear foot of building frontage, max 100 	N/A 	N/A 	# of signs 
cannot 
exceed total 
sf allowed 
B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-2 				
Freestanding 4 	1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage, max 100 	10 	35 	1 
Monument sign 	1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage, max 100 	10 	6 	1 
Attached 	1.5 sf/linear foot of building frontage, max 100 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
 
1.  The total area of all on-premises signs at any particular location shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
2.  Nonresidential use, monument sign only. 
3.  Nonresidential use. 
4.  When facing land that is residentially zoned or used, limited to a monument sign only. 
5.  Freestanding and monument signs setbacks to be determined by the planning and zoning division, if applicable. 
6.  Setback is measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 8, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-259. - Prohibited signs. 
It is unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Portable arrow signs. 
(2)  Portable signs, or any prohibited sign designed to be portable, shall not be altered to become permanent. 
(3)  Signs that are considered abandoned or unsafe. 
(4)  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals. 
(5)  Signs that are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other features. 
(6)  Signs that contain certain words, statements or pictures which would be considered obscene or indecent by local community standards or which contain references to sexual activity. 
(7)  Signs that do not comply with the restrictions applicable to the zoning district in which such signs are located. 
(8)  Signs, banners and streamers suspended over or above dedicated streets. 
(9)  Signs that contain or display animation, moving video/pictures or scrolling word advertising. 
(10)  Signs placed on public property or any public right-of-way, subject to the exceptions excluding political signs. 
(11)  Signs placed in any location that would violate any state or federal regulation or law. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 9, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-260. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  General provisions for temporary signs. 
(1)  Any sign listed in section 37-108 (prohibited signs) is also prohibited as a temporary sign. 
(2)  Temporary signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way nor in any area that may constitute a safety hazard. 
(3)  Temporary signs must be related to on-premises services. Non-commercial messages are also permitted. Temporary off-premises signs are prohibited. 
(4)  No temporary sign may be illuminated. 
(5)  Only one (1) temporary sign is permitted per business on a single lot. 
(6)  All temporary signs must remain in good condition during the display period. Throughout the display period, corrective action must be taken immediately should there be any problems with the appearance, condition, or maintenance of the sign and/or support hardware. 
(b)  Permitted temporary signs and advertising devices. 
(1)  Construction signs greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. One (1) temporary sign denoting the architect, engineer and/or general contractor placed on the premises where construction, repair, or renovation is proposed or is in progress may be allowed subject to the following: 
a.  Only one (1) construction sign shall be permitted per site. 
b.  Construction sign permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance or on the date that the first certificate of occupancy is issued for the project for which the permit was acquired, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Real estate signs greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. Temporary signs greater than thirty-two (32) square feet advertising the sale, lease, or rental of non-residential property upon which the sign is located may be allowed for new construction or redevelopment subject to the following: 
a.  Only one (1) real estate sign shall be permitted per site. 
b.  Commercial real estate signs shall be removed from the site upon sale of property. 
(3)  Temporary promotional signs. Temporary promotional signs on site in connection with the opening of a business, major remodeling under an active building permit, new owner of a business, closure of a business, sale, or special events may be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  Such signs shall be limited to three (3) events and an aggregate maximum of thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
b.  Promotional signs that advertise an event shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days before the event and shall be removed within seven (7) days of the event's conclusion. 
c.  Banners, string pennants, and streamers are permitted; however, if the materials become tattered, torn, and/or a litter problem they must be replaced or removed. 
d.  Such signs shall have a maximum total sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
e.  A new business or a business with a new location with no permanent sign may display a banner until their permanent signage is installed. 
(4)  A-frame signs. 
a.  A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area per sign face and four (4) feet in height. 
b.  The use of A-frame signs is limited to business hours only and must be stored indoors at all other times. 
c.  Only one (1) A-frame sign is permitted per business and a minimum twenty-foot separation is required between all A-frame signs. 
d.  An A-frame sign must be placed within twenty (20) feet of the primary entrance of the business, and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other accessibility codes. 
(5)  Point of service display signs. 
a.  Point of service display signs shall be located on or near the display or product dispenser. 
b.  Point of service display signs shall be located within the structure. 
c.  A point of service sign shall not be attached to any light/sign pole or pump island canopy, nor shall they be located in the parking lot or within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 10, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-261. - Repair or removal of signs. 
(a)  Business closure. All business related signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the close of a business. It is the responsibility of the business owner for such removal. If the business owner does not remove the signs by the end of the thirty (30) days, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner. In the case of a building sign cabinet or freestanding sign cabinet that is to remain on the property, either the existing sign face(s) may be turned around or a blank face(s) shall replace the advertising face. 
(b)  Immediate removal. The code enforcement officer, building inspector, chief of police or their designee, may cause a sign to be removed immediately and without notice and stored at the cost of the permit holder, or in the absence of a valid permit, at the cost of the possessor or owner of the sign at a cost of no less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign is in violation of this article, ordinance or other terms of law; 
(2)  The sign presents an immediate threat of danger to the safety of the public; 
(3)  Any sign that is installed after the date this article goes into effect without a permit being issued or without a certificate of insurance on file with the building inspector or both. 
(4)  If the code enforcement officer, building inspector, chief of police or their designee, elects to cause the sign to be removed without notice, he or she shall thereafter give written notice to the permit holder, or to the possessor or owner of the sign, as applicable, stating with reasonable clarity the reason the sign has been removed. 
(c)  If sixty (60) percent or more of an illuminated sign is not working, it must be repaired immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 11, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-262. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  On-premises signs legally existing prior to the adoption of this article and not conforming to these provisions will be allowed to remain (nonconformity does not include UL requirements). Nonconforming signs shall be removed if any one (1) of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The sign is relocated on the same or different premises, or replaced. 
(2)  The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way. 
(3)  The sign is damaged to an extent of one-half (0.5) of its current replacement value. Such sign shall not be rebuilt and shall be removed. (Replacement value shall be determined by the property owner obtaining the cost of the sign's replacement value from several sign companies). 
(4)  There is a change in use, ownership, or occupancy of the premises. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs or repainting of such signs or structures. 
(c)  For planned commercial centers, freestanding signage advertising more than one (1) tenant must be brought into compliance with this article if either a change in ownership for the entire center or if more than fifty (50) percent of tenants are discontinued or changed. Existing signage will be allowed to remain as long as allowed per existing lease agreements. New lease agreements shall reflect the requirements of this article once this article is adopted. 
(d)  Nonconforming temporary signs shall conform to all provisions of this article upon its adoption. These signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of official notification of nonconforming status by the governing authority. 
(e)  Exempt. Signs that are at least fifty (50) years old, are in good condition, are located within a designated historic district, and advertise an existing business, or a sign that is particularly unique in character, design, or history, or that is part of the historic character of a business or building shall be allowed to remain. These signs shall be included in the total square footage allowed the business. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 12, 3-24-17)  
Sec. 21-263. - Enforcement. 
Applicable provisions of this article shall cover all administration, penalties and violations regarding signs in the town. However, the following provisions shall also apply to non-compliant signage. 
(1)  Administration. The requirements of this article shall be administered by the mayor, chief of police and/or their designated representative(s). 
(2)  Inspection authority. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection or re-inspection by the building inspector, public works director or his/her designee and the electrical sign inspector or public works director, if applicable. 
(3)  Removal of non-compliant signs, notice of violation. 
a.  When a violation of this article exists, the code enforcement officer, public works director, chief of police or their designee shall issue a citation to be delivered by certified mail or in person to the owner of the sign and the property owner. The citation shall state the nature of the violation, whether the sign must be repaired or removed, and the amount of time allowed in which to remedy the violation. (At the discretion of the mayor, public works director, chief of police, officer or designee, the time limit on a sign may be extended. The extension shall not exceed thirty (30) days.) The following provide the allotted time to bring signs into compliance: 
1.  For permanent signs, within twenty (20) days of receipt of citation. 
2.  For temporary signs, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of citation. 
3.  For signs that are unsafe or otherwise constitute an immediate danger to public health and safety, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the citation. 
4.  The owner of the sign or the property owner may file an appeal with the board of aldermen/town council. Such appeal shall be in writing, accompanied by the appropriate fee, and be filed within ten (10) days of receipt of the citation. 
b.  Any temporary sign, poster or banner found to be in violation of any section of this article may be removed by the code enforcement officer, building inspector or their designee. The cost of such removal shall be at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per sign and may be charged to the person or entity responsible for the activity described on the sign, poster or banner, and may be collected in addition to any other fines or costs set forth in this article. 
(4)  Non-complying signs, failure to comply with notice. If no action is taken to bring the sign(s) into compliance in accordance with notice given above or within thirty (30) days after the final denial by the town council, then the town shall order the removal of the sign(s) and the cost attributable to the removal shall be paid by the owner of the sign or the property owner. The city may also file and have a lien placed upon real estate for the removal costs. 
(5)  Other violations. In all other cases, and in cases where the code enforcement officer, mayor, public works director or chief of police elects not to use his or her authority to cause the sign to be removed without prior notice, if the permit holder, or the possessor or owner of the sign, as applicable, fails to remove, alter, or otherwise bring the sign into compliance with the provisions and standards of this article, and all applicable building standards of this article, and all applicable building and/or electrical codes, within ten (10) days after notice has been issued, citations for the violations shall be issued. Service of notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, or in person to the owner of the sign or the property owner. The code enforcement officer shall cause the sign to be removed and stored at the expense of the permittee, or possessor or owner of the signs. The cost of storing the sign or signs shall be at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, and may be collected in addition to any other fines or costs set forth in this article. The sign shall be held by the code enforcement officer until such time as the expense of removing and storing the sign has been reimbursed to the code enforcement officer. License and permit violations shall be enforced by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2139 , § 13, 3-24-17) 
