CODE OF ORDINANCES OF CROWLEY, LOUISIANA 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 1986 by Order of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF CROWLEY 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert L. Istre 
Mayor 
____________ 
Clifford Broussard 
Isabella De La Houssaye 
Billie C. Fulkerson 
Dorris Handy, Jr. 
Clarence Helo 
Christopher John 
George Lee Maux 
Sherman A. Wilson 
Jerry Page Harmon (Alderman at Large) 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Thomas K. Regan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kent R. Hoffpauir 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1965 Code, as supplemented through March 29, 1984, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1965 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 9 is numbered 9-1 and the eighth section of Chapter 10 is 10-8. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 3-2 and 3-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-2.1, 3-2.2 and 3-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 4 and 5, it will be designated as Chapter 4.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
    The index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of B. Meade White, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to the officials of the City for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 1102 
    An Ordinance to Amend and Re-enact and to Revise the Ordinances of the City of Crowley, Acadia Parish, Louisiana, and to Consolidate Them into a System of Law to be Known as the Code of Ordinances of Crowley, Louisiana, General Ordinances of the City; to Enact Necessary Legislation in Connection Therewith; and to Repeal Certain Ordinances. 
    BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Aldermen, City of Crowley, Acadia Parish, Louisiana, in regular session, duly convened that: 
    SECTION 1. That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crowley as hereinafter set forth is hereby adopted and enacted into law. 
    SECTION 2. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith or contrary hereto are hereby repealed. 
    SECTION 3. Paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are hereby declared to be severable and should any paragraphs, clauses, sentences or sections of this Code be declared unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, unenforceability or invalidity shall not effect the remaining provisions. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 1413 11- 9-10 Include 39 1414 12-14-10 Include 39 1415 11- 9-10 Include 39 1416 12-14-10 Omit 39 1417  1-11-11 Include 39 1418  2- 8-11 Omit 39 1419  4-12-11 Omit 39 1420  6-14-11 Omit 39 1421  6-14-11 Omit 39 1422  6-14-11 Omit 39 1423  7-12-11 Include 39 1424  8- 9-11 Omit 39 1425  8- 9-11 Omit 39 1426  8- 9-11 Include 39 1427  8- 9-11 Omit 39 1428  9-13-11 Include 40 1429 11- 8-11 Omit 40 1430 12-13-11 Omit 40 1431 12-13-11 Include 40 1432 12-13-11 Include 40 1433 12-13-11 Include 40 1434  1-10-12 Include 41 1435  5- 8-12 Include 41 1436  6-12-12 Include 41 1437  5-24-12 Include 41 1438  7-10-12 Omit 41 1439  7-10-12 Include 41 1440  7-10-12 Omit 41 1441  8-14-12 Omit 41 1442  7-10-12 Omit 41 1443  8-14-12 Include 41 1444  8-14-12 Include 41 1445  8-14-12 Omit 41 1446  9-11-12 Omit 41 1447 10- 9-12 Omit 41 1448 10- 9-12 Include 41 1449 11-13-12 Include 41 1450 11-13-12 Include 41 1451 12-11-12 Omit 41 1452  5-14-13 Omit 42 1453  5-14-13 Include 42 1454  7- 9-13 Omit 42 1455  8-13-13 Omit 42 1456  8-13-13 Include 42 1457  9-10-13 Include 42 1458  9-10-13 Include 42 1459  9-10-13 Include 42 1460 11-12-13 Include 42 1461  1-14-14 Omit 43 1462  7- 8-14 Omit 43 1463  8-12-14 Omit 43 1464  9- 9-14 Omit 43 1465 10-14-14 Omit 43 1466 11-12-14 Include 43 1467  4-14-15 Include 44 1468  5-12-15 Omit 44 1469  6- 9-15 Include 44 1471  8-11-15 Omit 44 1472  2-10-16 Include 45 1473  3- 8-16 Include 45 1474  5-10-16 Omit 45 1475  6-14-16 Include 45 1476  6-14-16 Include 45 1477  7-12-16 Omit 45 1478  8- 9-16 Omit 45 1479  9-13-16 Omit 45 1480 10-11-16 Omit 45 1481 11- 8-16 Include 45 1482 12- 7-16 Include 45 1483 12-13-16 Include 45 Res. of  7-11-17 Omit 46 1484  2-14-17 Omit 46 1485  3-14-17 Include 46 1486  8- 8-17 Omit 46 1487  8- 8-17 Omit 46 1488  8- 9-17 Omit 46 1489 11-14-17 Omit 46  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Crowley, Louisiana." 
State Law reference- Ordinance codification, R.S. 33:1361 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Crowley, Louisiana. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of time allowed or prescribed by law or ordinance, the date of the act, event or default after which the period begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included unless it is a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a legal holiday. 
    A half-holiday is considered as a legal holiday. A legal holiday is to be included in the computation of a period of time allowed or prescribed, except when: 
(1)  It is expressly excluded; 
(2)  It would otherwise be the last day of the period; or 
(3)  The period is less than seven (7) days. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Civ. Pro., Art. 5059. 
    Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other genders. 
    Governing authority. The term "governing authority" shall mean the mayor or the governing body, as the powers or duties may have been assigned in the particular case. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Mayor and board of aldermen, board of aldermen, governing body. The terms "mayor and board of aldermen," "board of aldermen" and "governing body" shall mean the lawfully constituted governing body of the city. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Parish. The words "the parish" or "this parish" shall mean the Parish of Acadia, Louisiana. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to a number of persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Louisiana. 
    Street. The word "street" shall embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, and all other public ways in the city. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed nor taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any violation, punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1965, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, unenforceability or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the governing body without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; amendatory language. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Crowley, Louisiana, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
    In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Crowley, Louisiana, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: ..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code or to commit any act declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, within the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1381, § 1, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Authority to punish by fine up to $500.00 and imprisonment up to 60 days, R.S. 33:401(A)(32). 
Sec. 1-8.1. - Service charges-Judicial building fund. 
    In all cases over which the City Court of Crowley has jurisdiction and each proceeding where a fine is imposed or court costs are awarded to be paid in addition to court costs, the court may impose a service charge not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per filing or in each proceeding wherein the fine or court costs are imposed which money shall be collection in accordance with the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 13:1910. All said monies collected in accordance therewith shall be deposited by the court in an account dedicated exclusively to the acquisition, lease, construction, equipping and maintenance of new and existing court facilities and for the maintenance or payment of any bond or indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 1, 1-12-10) 
Sec. 1-9. - Prisoners to be worked. 
    Any able-bodied prisoner upon whom a jail sentence has been imposed for any violation of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be required to work eight (8) hours during each day, Monday through Saturday, upon any public property of the city during the term of such sentence. In the event any such prisoner should refuse to work on the public property, such prisoner may be incarcerated for an additional period equal to such prisoner's original sentence. 
(Code 1965, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or alter, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-11. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance prescribing zoning regulations, or zoning particular property; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance providing retirement benefits for officers or employees of the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance, or any ordinance levying any tax; 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective only for a stated or limited time; 
(9)  Any ordinance regulating the subdividing of property, or dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with this Code regulating traffic on specific streets or portions thereof or in specific areas of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city, or disconnecting territory from the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing any utility board, or any special district; 
(13)  Any ordinance not in conflict with this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance enacted after April 9, 1985; 
and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Personnel, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 2-1. - Table of organization. 
    The table of organization of the city government is as follows: 

Sec. 2-2. - Governing authority-Number of aldermen. 
    The number of aldermen of the city shall be nine (9). 
(Code 1965, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-3. - Same-Time, place of meetings. 
(a)  In accordance with R.S. § 33:405, as amended, the governing body shall meet for regular monthly sessions in the courtroom/auditorium on the second floor of the Justice Building (old City Hall) located at 426 North Avenue F. Said meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. In the event that the regular meeting day shall fall on a legal holiday, then the regular meeting for said month shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the next following legal day thereafter. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint five (5) members of the governing body to committees, one of whom shall be designated as chair, to committees and designate areas of responsibility for each committee. All committees shall meet for regular monthly sessions on the Wednesday prior to the second Tuesday of each month at 4:00 p.m. in the courtroom/auditorium on the second floor of the Justice Building (old City Hall) located at 426 North Avenue F. The mayor shall designate the order in which committee meetings shall be held beginning at 4:00 p.m. with each committee meeting to follow immediately after the conclusion or recess of the prior committee meeting. In the event the regular meeting day shall fall on a legal holiday, then the regular meeting for said month shall be held on the next following legal day thereafter. All committee meetings which are not completed or commenced by 10:00 p.m. with the expectation to be completed at a reasonable time shall recess until 4:00 p.m. the following afternoon and all committee meetings not held shall continue in sequence until completed. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the committees shall be limited to receipt, review and consideration of matters or items presented and to make a recommendation with regard to those subjects and matters considered which recommendation and information shall be presented to the board of aldermen during a regular or special meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-2; Ord. No. 1199, § 1, 4-8-97; Ord. No. 1459, § 1, 9-10-13) 
Sec. 2-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1402, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, repealed § 2-4, which pertained to the governing authority, mayor to be full-time; compensation for mayor and other officials, and derived from the 1965 Code; Ord. No. 1270, adopted Aug. 12, 2003; Ord. No. 1282, adopted Feb. 10, 2004; Ord. No. 1285, adopted Apr. 13, 2004; Ord. No. 1294, adopted Aug. 10, 2004; Ord. No. 1322, adopted Aug. 9, 2005; Ord. No. 1340, adopted July 11, 2006; Ord. No. 1344, adopted Aug. 8, 2006; Ord. No. 1358, adopted Mar. 13, 2007; Ord. No. 1368, adopted July 30, 2007; Ord. No. 1376, adopted Oct. 9, 2007; Ord. No. 1386, adopted Aug. 12, 2008; and Ord. No. 1397, adopted Aug. 11, 2009. 
Sec. 2-5. - Offices of city marshal and chief of police; duties generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city marshal and/or the chief of police to perform all normal duties and functions of such offices, including, without limitation: 
(1)  To assign police personnel to duty. 
(2)  To make arrests for violations of the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state and nation. 
(3)  To properly book all persons arrested. 
(4)  To accurately keep all necessary records of investigations, arrests, bookings, and final disposition of cases. 
(5)  To keep the jail register, showing the names of persons incarcerated, date and time incarcerated, date released and meals furnished. 
(6)  To accept, receipt for and deposit, in a special account for bonds and fines, all bonds of persons arrested, in accordance with the schedule established by the city judge. 
(7)  To accept, receipt for and deposit, in a special account for bonds and fines, all fines imposed for violations of city ordinances. 
(8)  To properly account for all fines and bonds accepted and to deliver such fines and all forfeited bonds to the city clerk, by check, not less than once each thirty (30) days. 
(9)  To establish, maintain and keep in daily balance an accounting system set up strictly in accordance with the recommendations of the city's auditors. 
(10)  To provide the city judge, city attorney and mayor with copies of all moving traffic violation citations issued and with a monthly report of the disposition of all such cases. 
(11)  To maintain all equipment of the police department in accordance with good practice and procedures established by the governing authority. 
(12)  To obtain from the mayor, prior to purchase or contract, purchase orders for all repairs of equipment and all miscellaneous supplies purchased. 
(13)  To request, when such officer deems advisable or upon the request of the governing authority, that the city fire and police civil service board call and hold eligibility tests. 
(14)  To provide the governing authority with a written report, on or before the date specified by the governing authority each month, reflecting the number of hours of overtime duty performed in the previous month by each police officer and the detailed reasons for and necessity for such overtime duty. 
(15)  To provide the governing authority with a written report, on or before the fifth day of each month, of each occasion on which a police vehicle of the city travels beyond the corporate limits of the city, other than on streets and roads between one part of the city and another part of the city, during the previous month and the purpose, in detail, for which such vehicle traveled beyond such corporate limits. 
(b)  The chief of police may assign all duties hereinabove imposed to personnel of the department, and it shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to require the performance of such duties. 
(Code 1965, § 2-23) 
State Law reference- R.S. 33:423. 
Sec. 2-6. - Elections-City divided into wards. 
    The city shall be divided into four (4) wards, numbered and bounded as follows, to wit: 
(1)  Ward One: Commencing at the point of beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of N. Parkerson Ave. and W. 10th St., thence westerly on W. 10th St. to the intersection with the centerline of Ross Ave., thence northerly on Ross Ave. to the intersection with the centerline of W. 11th St., thence westerly on W. 11th St. to the intersection with the centerline of William Egan Ave., thence southerly on William Egan Ave. to the intersection with the centerline of W. 10th St. thence westerly on W. 10th St. to the intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Crowley, thence northerly thence easterly, thence northerly again, thence easterly, thence southerly, thence westerly, thence southerly, thence southeasterly along the northeastern corporate limits to the intersection with the centerline of E. Northern Ave., thence westerly on E. Northern Ave. to the intersection of the centerline of N. Parkerson Ave., thence southerly on N. Parkerson Ave. to the point of beginning. 

District 1 Plat 
  
(2)  Ward Two: Commencing at the point of beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of E. 14th St. and N. Parkerson Ave., thence northeasterly on E. 14th St. to the intersection of the centerline of N. Avenue J, thence southerly on N. Avenue J to the intersection of the centerline of E. Northern Ave, thence northeasterly and easterly on E. Northern Ave. to the intersection of the eastern corporate limits of the City of Crowley, thence northerly, thence easterly, thence southerly, thence easterly, to the intersection of the centerline of E. Park Dr., thence southerly on E. Park Dr. to the intersection of the centerline of E. Cedar St., thence westerly on E. Cedar St. to the intersection of the centerline of S. Ave. O, thence northerly on S. Avenue O to the intersection of the centerline of Hargrave St., thence westerly on Hargrave St. to the intersection of the centerline of State Hwy 13, also designated as S. Eastern Ave., thence northerly on S. Eastern Ave., to the intersection of the centerline of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, thence southwesterly on the railroad right-of-way to the intersection of the centerline of N. Parkerson Ave., thence northerly on N. Parkerson Ave. to the point of beginning. 

District 2 Plat 
  
(3)  Ward Three: Commencing at the point of beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of W. 10th St. and N. Parkerson Ave., thence southerly on N. Parkerson Ave., to the intersection with the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way that is south of W. Front St., thence southwesterly along the railroad right-of-way to the western corporate limits of the City of Crowley, thence northerly, thence westerly, thence southerly, thence southwesterly, thence northwesterly, thence southwesterly, thence northwesterly, thence northeasterly and easterly along the western corporate limits to the intersection of the centerline of W. 10th St., thence northeasterly on W. 10th St. to the intersection with the centerline of William Egan Ave., thence northerly on William Egan Ave. to the intersection with the centerline of W. 11th St., thence easterly on W. 11th St. to the intersection with Ross Ave., thence southerly on Ross Ave. to the intersection with the centerline of W. 10th St., thence easterly on W. 10th St. to the point of beginning. 

District 3 Plat 
  
(4)  Ward Four: Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of State Hwy. 13, also designated as N. Eastern Ave. and the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, thence southerly on N. Eastern Ave., becoming S. Eastern Ave south of the railroad right-of-way, continuing to the intersection of the centerline of Hargrave St., thence easterly on Hargrave St. to the intersection of the centerline of S. Avenue O, thence southerly on S. Avenue O to the intersection of the centerline of E. Cedar St., thence easterly on E. Cedar St. to the intersection of the centerline of E. Park Dr., thence northerly on E. Park Dr. to the intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Crowley, thence easterly, thence southerly and westerly, thence southerly, thence westerly, thence southerly, thence westerly, thence northerly, thence westerly, thence southerly, thence easterly, thence southerly, thence westerly, thence northerly, thence westerly, thence northerly along the corporate limits to the intersection with the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, thence northeasterly on the railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning. 

District 4 Plat 
  
(Code 1965, § 9-8; Ord. No. 1160, § 1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 1255, § 1, 2-13-02; Ord. No. 1447, §§ I-IV, 10-9-12) 
Sec. 2-7. - Same-Time of election of officers. 
    Municipal elections for the office of mayor, aldermen, alderman-at-large, and chief of police for the city shall be held at the congressional elections in accordance with the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statute, 18:402(b), as amended. The officers elected shall qualify and enter upon the discharge of their duty on the first day of January following their election and shall hold their office for four (4) years. If no election is held on the date here prescribed or if a vacancy in any municipal office elective by the people occurs or if an officer elected fails to qualify, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of Article VI, section 13 of the state constitution, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 1, 1-21-85) 
Sec. 2-8. - Terms of office of elective officers. 
    The terms of office of the mayor, aldermen, alderman-at-large and chief of police, serving on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be extended and they shall continue to serve until their successors are duly elected or appointed shall be sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 1-21-85) 
Sec. 2-9. - Use of city-owned vehicles generally. 
(a)  No vehicle owned or leased by the city shall be used other than in line of official duty. 
(b)  Any official or employee of the city violating this section or ordering or instructing any subordinate official or employee to violate this section, may be dismissed from city employment and shall be liable for any loss or damage suffered by the city or its insurer. 
(Code 1965, § 2-26) 
Cross reference- Personnel, ch. 12; use of police vehicles beyond corporate limits, § 12-12. 
Sec. 2-10. - Liability of city officials and employees for damage to city property. 
    Should any official or employee of the city cause any damage to any movable or immovable property of the city by any negligent act or omission of said official or employee, such official or employee shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the amount of any loss thereby caused to or suffered by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-27) 
Cross reference- Personnel, ch. 12. 
Sec. 2-11. - Municipal planning commission. 
    There is hereby established and created a municipal planning commission for the city, which shall consist of seven (7) members to be designated and appointed as provided by law, all under the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 33:101 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1965, § 2-76) 
Cross reference- For zoning, see Appendix A. 
Sec. 2-12. - Advisory council on aging people-created. 
    There is hereby created, in accordance with Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 46:1601 et seq., as amended, an advisory council on the aging people in and for the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-13. - Same-Appointment, qualifications of members; filling vacancies. 
    The council on the aging people shall be composed of eleven (11) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the governing body for a term concurrent with that of the governing body. The members of the advisory council on the aging people shall be appointed from among the groups and professions within the city who contribute to or are interested in the welfare of the aging, and no more than one-half (1/2) of the members shall be elected officials or paid employees of this city. Whenever a vacancy shall occur among the members of said council, it shall be filled for the remainder at the unexpired term in the manner provided for the appointment of other members of the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-14. - Same-Certificate, record of appointments. 
    As an attestation of the appointment, each member of the advisory council on the aging people shall receive from the mayor a certificate of appointment, and the names of persons so appointed shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-15. - Same-Organization, meetings, minutes. 
    The advisory council on the aging people shall meet within thirty (30) days after appointment of its members and shall elect a chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary. Said council shall organize itself into a working study group to inform itself on problems of the aged and shall set the dates for regular meetings. Minutes of all meetings of the council shall be kept as a record of its activities. 
(Code 1965, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-16. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the advisory council on the aging people to collect facts and statistics and make special studies of conditions pertaining to the employment, health, financial status, recreation, social adjustment or other conditions affecting the welfare of the aging people in the community; to keep abreast of the latest developments in this field of activity throughout the state and the nation; to interpret its findings to the citizens of the community; to provide for a mutual exchange of ideas and information on the community or parish level; to conduct hearings; to make recommendations for needed improvements and additional resources to promote the welfare of the aging; to serve as an advisory body to the governing body in regard to matters having to do with the aging; to coordinate the services of all agencies serving the aging; and to assist and cooperate with the state commission on the aging. 
(Code 1965, § 2-65) 
Sec. 2-17. - Notice of special and rescheduled meetings. 
(a)  Notice of a special or rescheduled meeting shall be in writing. The notice shall include the date, time and place of the meeting and shall specify the objects and purposes for which the meeting is called. The notice shall be signed by the mayor or a majority of the board members. 
(b)  The notice shall be served on the mayor, members of the board of aldermen, chief of police, city attorney and the city clerk, and posted at city hall twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the meeting. 
(c)  The written notice may be served either personally upon or at the domicile of the official or officer to be notified by a designated officer of the city or by transmission thereof by facsimile, e-mail or other electronic means of notification as may be designated by the elected official or officer. Each elected official or officer required to receive notice shall deliver to the city clerk a written election of the preferred means of receipt of notification; whether by personal or domiciliary service, facsimile transmission, e-mail or other electronic means of notification. The return of the call for the special meeting showing the date, time and manner of delivery to each elected officer shall be transcribed upon the minutes of the special meeting by the clerk. 
(d)  The mayor or any officer may waive notice of the meeting in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 2-11-86; Ord. No. 1279, § 1, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-18. - Public power authority-Created; governing authority. 
(a)  The Crowley Public Power Authority is hereby created in accordance with the authority of Article VI, Sections 19, 20, 23 and 37 of the Louisiana Constitution of 1974 and Chapter X of Title 33, and particularly Sections 4172 through 4175, inclusive, of Title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, and other constitutional and statutory authority (collectively, the "Act"). The Crowley Public Power Authority is hereby created as a body corporate and as a political subdivision of the State of Louisiana, with all rights, powers and authority which may be possessed or exercised by public power authorities generally under the Constitution and laws of the State of Louisiana, including any rights, powers, and authorities which may be possessed or exercised by the municipality under law. 
(b)  The governing authority of the City of Crowley, Louisiana, being the mayor and board of aldermen of said city, shall serve ex-officio as the governing authority of the Crowley Public Power Authority hereby created. The Crowley Public Power Authority is hereby named and designated as "Crowley Public Power Authority". 
(Ord. No. 1158, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1158, §§ 1-6, adopted Sept. 14, 1993, has been included herein as §§ 2-18 and 2-19 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-19. - Same-Powers and responsibilities. 
(a)  The public power authority may contract with the City of Crowley and/or any other municipality, public power authority or electric public utility company for the generation, transmission or sale of electric power for a term not exceeding forty (40) years on such terms and conditions as may be specified in written contracts which may be negotiated and executed without notice or approval, except as provided in the Act. 
(b)  The public power authority and the governing authority thereof shall have the power to sue and be sued and shall continue its existence until all bonds, including all refunding bonds, and any other obligations issued by or on behalf of the public power authority shall have been fully and finally paid and discharged. 
(c)  The public power authority shall have such other powers relative to the construction, acquisition, improvement, operation and management of any public power project or improvement as shall be provided in sections 2-18, 2-19, which, by reference, incorporates all powers referred to in the Act and as these sections may hereafter be amended by the governing authority of the City of Crowley from time to time. The public power authority created pursuant to the authority of Act 425 of the 1974 Regular Session of the Louisiana Legislature (which now appears as R.S. 33:4172 through R.S. 33:4174) and hereby ratified and approved, is an authority described in paragraph C of Section 4175 of Title 33. The Crowley Public Power Authority is authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To finance, acquire, construct, operate and maintain facilities and to engage in the generation, production, transmission, distribution, and sale, at wholesale or retail, of electric power and energy and gas. 
(2)  To engage in joint undertakings, whether through joint ownership or otherwise, with one or more persons for any activity authorized or ratified pursuant to this section and Act No. 425 of the 1975 Regular Session of the Legislature. 
(3)  (a)  To enter into contracts, including take and pay contracts, with any person for the purchase or sale of electric power and energy, gas, steam, or other cogeneration byproducts, or related transmission or distribution services, for the acquisition, construction, administration, management, operation or maintenance, of any facility or other property of the authority, in each case without application of the public contract laws; provided, however, that the public contract laws shall apply to contracts entered into by the authority, acting by itself and not in connection with a joint undertaking, for the construction of facilities which are not then in existence or under construction. 
(b)  In connection with any contract providing for the delegation by the authority of management responsibility to any other person with respect to any of its facilities or other properties, such contract shall provide such standards as the governing body of the authority shall deem appropriate to govern the activities of such other person as the agent of the authority. 
(4)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, or otherwise dispose of, or to grant options with respect to, any real or personal property of the authority or interest therein. 
(5)  To borrow money and issue revenue bonds of the authority. 
(6)  To enter upon, use, occupy, and dig up any street, road, or highway or public lands necessary to be entered upon, used or occupied in connection with the acquisition, 
construction, or improvement, maintenance, or operation of facilities or properties of the authority to the same extent as, and in accordance with the provisions of law applicable to, the municipality which created the authority. 
(7)  To exercise the power of expropriation or eminent domain to the same extent as, and in accordance with the provisions of law applicable to, the municipality which created the authority. 
(8)  To do all other acts and things necessary to carry out the purposes and to exercise the powers granted to the authority herein. 
(d)  The Crowley Public Power Authority is authorized from time to time to issue its revenue bonds in such principal amounts as the authority may deem appropriate to carry out any and all of its corporate purposes and powers, including, without limitation, the provision for working capital and appropriate reserves. Such bonds shall be authorized by resolution or resolutions adopted by the governing body of the authority and may be sold in such manner and for such price and shall mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their date as may be determined by the authority. The bonds shall be issued substantially in compliance with any laws authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds without the necessity for the holding of an election or referendum, provided that such bonds shall be subject to the approval of the State Bond Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1158, §§ 3-6, 9-14-93) 
Note- See editor's note, section 2-18. 
Sec. 2-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 1229, adopted April 11, 2000, repealed Ord. No. 1190, adopted Nov. 12, 1996, which pertained to the downtown commercial historic district commission. Similar provisions can be found in Ch. 9.5. 
Sec. 2-21. - Designation and observance of legal holidays, and related matters. 
(a)  The following days are hereby designated as legal holidays and shall be observed by the City of Crowley and all departments of the city as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  In so far as may be practical in the administration of the government, no employee shall work on: 
January 1, New Years Day; 
The third Monday in January, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Birthday; 
Mardi Gras Day; 
Good Friday; 
The last Monday in May, National Memorial Day; 
July 4, Independence Day; 
The first Monday in September, Labor Day; 
November 11, Veterans' Day; 
The fourth Thursday in November, Thanksgiving Day; 
The fourth Friday in November, Friday after Thanksgiving Day; 
December 25, Christmas Day 
(2)  Whenever December 25, January 1 or July 4 fall on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be a holiday; 
(3)  Whenever December 25, January 1 or July 4 fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be a holiday; 
(4)  Whenever the Governor of the State of Louisiana shall, by executive proclamation, authorize the observance of other holidays by the State of Louisiana, the mayor may, by executive proclamation, authorize the observance of said holiday, if such observance is deemed in keeping with efficient administration. 
(b)  All civil service employees who are required to actually work on the designated holidays in subsection (a)(1) hereof, shall receive in addition to the regular compensation to which the employee would be entitled, to extra compensation at one times the usual salary, to be determined by reducing the average monthly salary to an hourly scale; but which, in no event, shall be less than two (2) times the hourly rate payable to the employee for regular time under the law or pay plan in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1220, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-22. - Authorization for transfer of excess funds; dedication and restriction of funds so transferred; minimum amount to be maintained. 
(a)  Authorization for transfer of excess funds. On or after the 1st day of September, 2011, and each successive year thereafter, the city clerk of the City of Crowley shall transfer from the witness fee fund an amount designated in the budget ordinance adopted for the fiscal year 2012 and for each fiscal year thereafter to the capital outlay budget of the City of Crowley Police Department. 
(b)  Dedication and restriction of funds so transferred. All funds so transferred from the witness fee fund to the general fund shall be designated as capital outlay funds and shall be used solely for the purpose of purchasing equipment for the City of Crowley Police Department. 
(c)  Minimum amount to be maintained. 
(1)  The witness fee fund shall at all times maintain a fund balance of not less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) in unencumbered and unexpended funds and which balance shall not be reduced below thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) dollars as a result of a transfer made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) hereof. 
(2)  The annual budget ordinance shall contain a line item identified as witness fee funds and shall be footnoted with a reference to this section and to Louisiana Revised Statutes, Section 15:255(O) requiring an unencumbered balance of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). 
(3)  The city clerk of the City of Crowley shall provide to the mayor and the members of the board of aldermen the amount for witness fees collected and the amount paid to off-duty law enforcement personnel for witness fees for the prior three (3) fiscal years for guidance in determining the amount of revenues necessary to maintain a fund balance of not less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) at all times in the witness fee fund. 
(Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Possession of weapon where alcoholic beverages are sold, § 7-45 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Unlawful acts on licensed premises generally. 
    No person holding a retail dealer's permit and no servant, agent, or employee of the permittee shall do any of the following acts upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless such person submits a driver's license, selective service card or other lawful identification which, on its face, establishes the age of the person as eighteen (18) years or older and there is no reason to doubt the authenticity or correctness of the identification. 
(2)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person. 
(3)  Intentionally entice, aid, or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to visit or loiter in or about any place where alcoholic beverages are the principal commodities sold, handled, or given away. However, the provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit the presence of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years on or about a licensed premises for any function sponsored by a religious or charitable organization with tax exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States or by a fraternal beneficiary society with tax exempt status under section 501(c)(8) of the said code, and no alcoholic beverages are sold, handled, given away, or accessible during the presence of any such person. 
(4)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises, or to solicit patrons for prostitution on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices on the licensed premises: 
(a)  Attire and conduct. The following acts or conduct on licensed premises are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section, and therefore no on-sale permit for alcoholic beverages shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted: 
(i)  To employ or use any person in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(ii)  To employ or use the services of any hostess or other person to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subparagraph (a)(i) above. 
(iii)  To encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
(iv)  To permit any employee or other person to wear or use any device or covering, exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof. 
(b)  Entertainers and conduct. Acts or conduct on licensed premises in violation of this section are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section, and therefore no on-sale permit for alcoholic beverages shall be held at any premises where such conduct and acts are permitted. Live entertainment is permitted on any licensed premises, except that: 
(i)  No permittee shall permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate: 
(aa)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(bb)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(cc)  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals, or nipple of the female breast. 
(ii)  Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (b)(i) hereof, entertainers whose breasts and/or buttocks are exposed to view shall perform only upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least three (3) feet from the nearest patron. 
No permittee shall permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described above. 
(c)  Visual displays. The following acts or conduct on licensed premises are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section, and therefore no on-sale permit for alcoholic beverages shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted: The showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproductions depicting: 
(i)  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(ii)  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(iii)  Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the genitals. 
(iv)  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described above. 
(6)  Sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind or type of alcoholic beverages, the sale, or possession of which is not authorized under the permit. 
(7)  Intentionally conduct illegal gambling, as defined by law, on the premises described in the application for the permit. 
(8)  Employ or permit females, commonly known as B girls, to solicit patrons for drinks and to accept drinks from patrons and receive therefor any commission or any remuneration in any other way. 
(9)  Employ anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years who would be directly involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or employ anyone under the age of eighteen (18) in any capacity in which the sale of alcoholic beverages constitutes the main business of the establishment. If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business and alcoholic beverages are not sold for consumption on the premises, an employee under the age of eighteen (18) years may be permitted to participate in the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages to collect the price and taxes and issue receipts therefor and/or may be permitted to bag packaged alcoholic beverages, where immediate supervision is provided. 
(10)  Allow the sale, dispensing, or distribution of alcoholic beverages in any type of automatic mechanical vending machine activated by the use of a coin, token, or similar instrument. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to establishments exempt from holding permits under this chapter. 
(11)  Permit the playing of pool or billiards by any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or permit such a person to frequent the licensed premises operating a pool or billiard hall. 
(12)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of narcotics or habit forming drugs. 
(13)  Accept food stamp coupons as payment for alcoholic beverages in violation of the provisions of Public Law 88-525 and Regulation 1600.2(i) issued pursuant to that section of the federal statute by the United States Secretary of Agriculture. 
    Violation of this section by a retail dealer's agent, associate, employee, representative, or servant shall be considered the retail dealer's act for purposes of suspension or revocation of the permit. 
    Violation of this section is punishable as provided in section 1-8 and is also sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit. 
    Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by way of renewal, the governing authority may revoke or suspend such permit, as prescribed by this chapter, for violations of this section occurring during the permit period immediately preceding the issuance of such permit. 
Cross reference- Minors in pool rooms, § 11-10. 
State Law reference- For similar provisions, see R.S. 26:88, 26:285. 
Sec. 3-2. - Proximity of on-premises consumption establishment to schools, churches, playgrounds, libraries. 
    No permit or license for consumption on the premises shall be issued where the permittee or licensee proposes to conduct said business in a premises located within three hundred (300) feet of any church, synagogue, library, playground or school, except a school for business education conducted as a business college or school. The measurement of said distance shall be made as a person walks using the sidewalk from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, library, playground or school to the nearest point of the premises to be licensed. 
(Code 1965, § 3-17) 
Cross reference- Prohibited acts in parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, § 7-54; for zoning generally, see App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to limit location, R.S. 26:280. 
Sec. 3-3. - Hours of sale and consumption. 
(a)  Sales generally. The sale of any intoxicating, spirituous, alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors, whether of more or less than six (6) per cent of alcohol by volume, is permitted every day except as hereinafter provided, restricted or prohibited. The prohibitions, exceptions and restrictions set out in this section shall have no application to those days upon which falls New Year's Eve from 6:00 p.m. thereof to 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Sales of beverages of high alcoholic content generally. Except as hereinafter provided, the sale of intoxicating, spirituous, alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors of an alcoholic content of more than six (6) per cent by volume between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, is prohibited. 
(c)  Sales of beverages of low alcoholic content limited generally; exceptions. Except as hereinafter provided, the sale of intoxicating spirituous, alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors of an alcoholic content of less than six (6) per cent by volume between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, is prohibited. 
(d)  Applicability of (a), (b) and (c). The prohibition contained in subsections (a), (b) and (c) shall not be applicable between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday in the City of Crowley, during which hours all license permittees shall be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages of low and high alcoholic content. 
(e)  Motels, etc. Motels, hotels and convention facilities shall be permitted to serve beverages described in subsection (c) between the hours of 12:00 noon Sunday and 12:00 midnight Sunday to legitimate groups, guests and other private functions, but shall be prohibited from opening bars or lounges to the general public, during the hours specified herein, for the purpose of selling the beverages described in subsections (b) and (c). 
(f)  Religious, etc., organizations. Religious, charitable, fraternal, veterans and other private clubs, organizations and facilities, which are nonprofit and tax exempt, licensed under the provisions of this article upon certification of a nonprofit and tax-exempt status by the city clerk shall be permitted to sell beverages described in subsection (c) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. on Sunday and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. The city clerk shall be required to verify this exempt status by permit, but shall not issue the permit unless the applicant shall have provided such clerk with the following information and documents: 
(1)  A certified copy of the charter of organization, club or facility; 
(2)  A current, accurate membership roster; 
(3)  Evidence of tax-exempt status issued by the Internal Revenue Office of the United States, which evidence shall be in the form as is customarily provided by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(g)  Consumption of beverages of high or low alcoholic content. The consumption of intoxicating, spirituous, alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors, whether of more or less than six (6) per cent of alcohol by volume, in any establishment, provided said liquors were provided either through sale or gift by the establishment, between the hours of 2:30 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday and between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, is prohibited. 
(h)  Sales by certain establishments; closings required. Any establishment where intoxicating, spirituous, alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors, whether more or less than six (6) per cent of alcohol by volume, are the principal commodities sold or handled shall close and remain closed continuously between the hours of 2:30 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday and between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday. This subsection includes, but is not limited to, the bar or cocktail lounge portion of any hotel, motel or restaurant. 
(i)  Violations and penalties. Upon the first conviction of violating any of the provisions of this section, the violator's permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be suspended for a period of fifteen (15) days commencing upon the final judgment of said conviction. Upon the second conviction of violating any of the provisions of this section, the violator's permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days commencing the day following the final judgment of said conviction. Upon the third or subsequent conviction of violating any of the provisions of this section, the violator's permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be revoked effective the day following the final judgment of said conviction. 
(Code 1965, § 3-12; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 6-9-87) 
Sec. 3-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1466, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2014, repealed § 3-4, which pertained to drive-in establishments and derived from Code 1965, § 3-13. 
Sec. 3-5. - Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits, open containers prohibited and defined, exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided for herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, including all holders of retail or wholesale dealer permits or licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter, for any agent, employee, servant or other representative of said permittee or licensee to sell alcoholic beverages on streets, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way, public grounds, parking lots or outside any public business or building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content or in immediate possession or control of an open container, bottle, cup, glass, can or other device which is not completely sealed containing alcoholic beverages while standing or walking on public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parks, playgrounds, parking lots, grounds of any business or other public place owned by a governmental entity, including but not limited to the City of Crowley, within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley. 
(c)  (1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages with high and low alcoholic content sold either by the City of Crowley or the International Rice Festival Association as an approved concessionaire during the International Rice Festival and the possession and consumption of such alcoholic beverages by those individuals who have purchased from the City of Crowley, the Crowley Police Department or the International Rice Festival Association an identification badge, armband or other identification device approved by the City of Crowley shall be permitted during the Thursday, Friday and Saturday of the International Rice Festival beginning 5:00 p.m. to midnight on Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to midnight on Friday and 8:00 a.m. to midnight on Saturday. After midnight, all sales of alcoholic beverages shall cease and the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in permitted containers shall cease no later than 12:30 a.m. 
(2)  All permittees/licensees with licensed premises situated within the boundary defined as the International Rice Festival area shall make available on the premises an International Rice Festival identification device approved by the City of Crowley to any person upon exiting the licensed premises in possession of an alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  All permittees/licensees shall post at all exits of the licensed premises a sign with red letters no less than three (3) inches in height and two (2) inches in width warning persons that prior to exiting the licensed premises with an alcoholic beverage they must obtain an approved International Rice Festival identification device. 
(4)  All permittees/licensees shall obtain and execute a receipt for a minimum of one package of International Rice Festival identification devices approved by the City of Crowley from the International Rice Festival headquarters no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday of the International Rice Festival. All permittees/licensees shall receive credit for all identification devices returned on or before 5:00 p.m. the Wednesday following the International Rice Festival and shall pay the amount due for all identification devices not returned. 
(d)  Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages by those persons possessing the proper identification device shall be permitted in an open paper, plastic, Styrofoam cup or other similar container within the area of the International Rice Festival which is defined as follows: 
From the intersection of 6th Street and Parkerson Avenue extending one block on either side of Parkerson Avenue to Avenue G, from the western right-of-way of Avenue F to the eastern right-of-way of Avenue G, southerly to the intersection of the centerline of the main railroad track formerly known as the Southern Pacific. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess either on his person, in his/her immediate control, in any automobile or vehicle or in any other manner, any alcoholic beverage of high of low alcoholic content in any public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parks, church ground, school ground, playgrounds, parking lots, grounds of any business or other public place, except that the possession of alcoholic beverages for sale and the consumption thereof shall be permissible in any other public park, place or facility so long as the event is sponsored or co-sponsored by the City of Crowley and/or a non-profit and the non-profit shall have obtained a permit from the mayor and chief of police for a fair, festival, tournament or public event provided that the sponsor and/or co-sponsor has an executed a contract with and/or has paid the rental fee to the City of Crowley or has the permission of the property owner and has obtained a permit to sale and serve alcoholic beverages of low and high alcoholic content on the dates and hours as specified in the permit granted by the mayor and chief. 
    For the purposes of this section, the area designated and defined in the permit or if a building shall be in the area in which the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages may occur. 
(Code 1965, § 3-18; Ord. No. 1129, § 1, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1439, § 1, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 9-10-13) 
Sec. 3-6. - Serving outside of licensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to serve alcoholic beverages outside of the place of business or premises for which the permit and license are granted in accordance with this chapter; provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the delivery of such beverages in unbroken or unopened packages or containers. 
(Code 1965, § 3-15) 
Sec. 3-7. - Consumption, opened containers in package stores. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the operation of a package liquor store or a package wine store under a city license or permit, licensing or permitting the sale of intoxicating liquors or wine in original packages, to permit the use or consumption on the premises, or in any way, directly or indirectly, connected with its premises, of any malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the operation of a package liquor store or package wine store, as foresaid, to allow on the premises any open or unsealed package of any malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquors. 
(Code 1965, § 3-16) 
Secs. 3-8-3-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT, LICENSE, TAXES 

Sec. 3-20. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or in any manner deal in, either directly or indirectly, in the city, any alcoholic beverage without first obtaining from the governing authority an annual permit, expiring on December thirty-first after the date of issuance, to engage in such business and paying the license tax hereinafter provided for in certain cases. 
(b)  Each day's conduct of business by a wholesaler or retailer whose permit has been withheld or refused, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked under the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each day's violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, §§ 3-1, 3-10) 
State Law reference- Local licenses and permits, R.S. 26:73. 
Sec. 3-20.1. - Special event permits. 
(a)  Generally. Special event permits may be issued for the retail sale of beverages of low and/or high alcoholic content for the annual fees listed in section 3-27 and under the same conditions applicable under the terms of this chapter. Those conditions not applicable because of the temporary nature of the permit shall not apply. 
(b)  Duration; restrictions. Special event permits for periods of up to three (3) consecutive days in duration may be issued for circumstances and situations where an event or function lasts up to three (3) consecutive days in duration. In no instance may a special event permit be issued for more than three (3) consecutive days in duration, nor may more than a total of four (4) special event permits be issued to the same person and/or organization in any one calendar year. Such special event permit shall begin at the date/time designated by the chief of police and end at the date/time designated by the chief of police, at which time all authorization shall expire. No permit under this section shall permit the serving of alcohol beyond the closing hours as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Issuance of special permits during International Rice Festival. No special event permit shall be issued during the International Rice Festival save for a special events permit to be issued to the International Rice Festival, Inc. under a cooperative endeavor agreement with the city for the sale of low alcoholic content beverages during the hours permitted on Thursday, Friday and Saturday of the festival and for the sale or distribution of low or high alcohol content beverages at various functions sponsored by the International Rice Festival, Inc. and/or the city, these permits shall include, but shall not be limited to, the booths located at 4th at Parkerson Avenue and 5th at Parkerson Avenue. 
    The following locations and permitees at those locations shall continue to hold permits and may renew annual permits without meeting the conditions of the ordinance and shall be considered a special permit but shall pay the full annual fees as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Ben's Den, 421 North Parkerson Avenue. 
(2)  Petry's Jewelry Store, 223 North Parkerson Avenue. 
(3)  Ben Mitchell, 422 North Parkerson Avenue. 
(d)  Application; special events permit required. Applications for special event permits shall be filed not sooner than ninety (90) calendar days and not later than five (5) calendar days prior to the event or function. Permits shall not be issued to any person who does not file a completed application within the timeframe stated in this subsection. Additionally, the holder of this local special event permit shall provide a copy of the special events permit issued by the state alcohol and tobacco control not later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event or function for which the respective permits have been issued. Failure to provide a copy shall void the special event permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(e)  Nonprofit functions. Temporary special event function permits may be issued to bona fide nonprofit organizations in accordance with this section, and upon the bona fide nonprofit organization providing a copy of the organization's Federal Income Tax return which indicates its nonprofit status for the previous tax year or some form of written documentation from the Internal Revenue Service which indicates its nonprofit status for the year in which the function is sought to be held. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 3-21. - Application for permits; procedures; late charges; requirements for premises. 
(a)  Initial. An applicant for any permit described herein shall file an application with the office of the city clerk on a form provided therefor by the clerk and in the manner required by the governing authority, and the governing authority shall approve or reject the applications hereinafter provided. All applications must be verified by the oath of the applicant. 
(b)  Renewal. Any application for a renewal of a permit at the time of its expiration shall be filed in writing on such form, and shall constitute and be considered as an original application. All applications must be verified by the oath of the applicant. All applications for renewal permits shall be filed with the city clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the license year by the applicant for the ensuring license year, provided that any application for a renewal by an applicant whose application is filed sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the license year of the applicant may continue to operate under the previous year's permit in the event that the application has not been acted upon by the governing authority prior to the expiration of the license year of such applicant. Any application for an initial or renewal permit shall be considered only at regular meetings of the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Late charges. Any application submitted on or after November 1 of the license year shall be subject to a late charge of five (5) per cent of the cost of the permit and all applications filed on or after December 1 of the year shall be subject to a late charge of an additional five (5) per cent for each additional month (thirty (30) days) or fraction thereof as of the date of filing. 
(d)  [Certification.] Any application for an initial or renewal permit shall contain written evidence of certification of the following: 
(1)  Certificate of compliance with state fire codes from the Louisiana State Fire Marshal. 
(2)  Certificate of compliance with all health and sanitation codes from the Louisiana Department of Health and Human Resources or parish sanitarium. 
(3)  Certificate of compliance with all city building, sanitation, electrical, plumbing and other codes as evidenced by the certificate of the city inspector. 
(e)  Application fee. All applications shall be accompanied by an administrative fee in the amount of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) which shall be remitted to the city clerk for new or renewal applications and temporary permits. 
(Code 1965, §§ 3-3, 3-4; Ord. No. 1128, § 1, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 1142, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 1143, § 1, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 1180, § 1, 5-14-96) 
Cross reference- Buildings, construction and related matters, Ch. 5; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 3-22. - Qualifications of permittee. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued except to a person of good moral character, over eighteen (18) years of age, a citizen of the United States, and of the state for a period of not less than two (2) years. 
(b)  No person who has previously been convicted by the courts of this state or any other state or of the United States, or of any foreign country, of any felony, or who, in the opinion of the governing authority is deemed to be of bad moral character or reputation and unworthy shall be competent to obtain a permit or to operate under any permit. 
(Code 1965, § 3-5) 
Sec. 3-23. - Separate permits for each location; nontransferability. 
    Separate permits shall be required for each place where alcoholic beverages, as herein defined, are sold, either at wholesale or retail. All permits, when issued, shall be personal to the permittee and shall not be transferable or assignable. Each such permit and the license issued hereunder shall be for the personal use of the applicant; provided that a duly qualified officer or agent of a firm, corporation or association of persons duly qualified to do business in the state may obtain a permit for same, provided that such officer or agent has the qualifications required for a personal or individual permit and in such application shall designate the firm, corporation or association of persons in whose name said permit is desired. If the business changes hands during the period for which the permit runs, a new permit must be applied for and a new license and permit obtained and paid for. 
(Code 1965, §§ 3-5, 3-6) 
Sec. 3-24. - Refusal to issue permit; suspension, cancellation-Cause; operating without permit and license. 
(a)  The governing authority, under the general police power, shall have the right and authority to refuse to issue or renew any permit or to suspend or cancel any permit previously issued, whenever the governing authority shall deem such refusal to issue or such suspension or cancellation to be advisable and for the general welfare, and whenever any person has conducted or operated a dive or disorderly place; or permitted any place where such beverages are sold or consumed to become a dive or disorderly place, in such manner as to become or constitute a nuisance; or has refused to obey the lawful order of a police officer; or permitted loud noises to emanate therefrom; and otherwise as provided in section 33:4785 of Louisiana Revised Statutes, as amended. The governing authority may deny the application for a permit because of the proposed location of the business, if, in the opinion of the governing authority, the location of the proposed location of the business, if, in the opinion of the governing authority, the location is improper, or is difficult of police regulation or offensive to the neighborhood, or apt to become a nuisance. Any sale of such beverages, either at wholesale or retail, without the permit and license and required, in full force and effect, is hereby prohibited and shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article, any ordinance or act of the legislature of the state regulating the sale or distribution of such beverages shall be sufficient cause for the governing authority to refuse to issue a permit and shall be sufficient cause for the governing authority to impose a monetary fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation and to suspend or revoke any permit previously issued. 
(Code 1965, § 3-8; Ord. No. 1129, § 2, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-25. - Same-Procedure. 
    For any violation of any of the provisions of this article or act of the legislature regulating the sale and distribution of such beverages, the governing authority shall have the right to suspend or revoke any permit and the license issued thereunder after a hearing in chambers, which hearing shall be held in not less than five (5) days after written notice is served on the licensee or permittee, either in person or by leaving same at the licensed premises with any employee, agent or representative of such licensee or permittee, which notice shall state the causes alleged for revocation and the time and place of such hearing or otherwise as provided in Sections 33:4785 through 33:4788, Louisiana Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(Code 1965, § 3-9) 
Sec. 3-26. - Change in place of business. 
    The sale, either at wholesale or retail, where authorized, for such beverages shall be conducted only in the place of business or premises specified and designated in the application for the permit and in the permit issued, and no change of place of business shall be allowed except after written application to and with the approval and consent of the governing authority, who shall have full power to approve or deny any such change in the same manner as is provided for the issuance or rejection of any original application for a permit. 
(Code 1965, § 3-7) 
Sec. 3-27. - License required; taxes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business for which a permit is required herein without first obtaining from the city the proper license to engage in such business. Any person granted a permit shall pay to the city a license tax in the following amount: 
(1)  For the operation of a business under this article where such beverages, the alcoholic content of which is more than six (6) per cent by volume, are sold or distributed to be consumed upon the premises, a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each license. 
(2)  For the operation of a business under this article where such beverages, the alcoholic content of which is more than six (6) per cent by volume, are sold in original or unbroken packages only, and whether sold by such dealer or otherwise, not to be consumed on the premises or in the place of business for which permit is issued, a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each license. 
(3)  For the operation of a business under this article where such beverages, the alcoholic content of which is more than six (6) per cent by volume, are sold or distributed at wholesale only, a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each license. 
(4)  For the operation of a business under this article where beer, ale, porter, wine or fruit juices of an alcoholic content in excess of one-half (1/2) per cent by volume and not more than six (6) per cent by volume are sold or distributed only for consumption on the premises or in the place of business of licensee, a license tax of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year, known as a Class A retail dealer's permit. 
(5)  For the operation of a business under this article where beer, ale, porter, wine or fruit juices of an alcoholic content in excess of one-half (1/2) per cent by volume and not more than six (6) per cent by volume are sold or distributed only for consumption off the premises of licensee, a license tax of sixty dollars ($60.00), known as a Class B retailer dealer's permit. 
(6)  For the operation of a business under this article where beer, ale, porter, wine or fruit juices as described above are sold or distributed at wholesale only, a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00), known as a Class C wholesale dealer's permit for wholesalers who maintain a regular branch or place of business within the corporate limits. 
Provided that the license taxes established in paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3) hereof for the balance of the year, of any person beginning the operation at any of the businesses therein described after June 30 of any year shall be one-half (1/2) of the amounts stated in said subsections. 
(b)  Said payments shall entitle the licensee to a license expiring on December 31 after date of issuance. The suspension, revocation, cancellation, surrender or abandonment of any permit or license at any time shall not entitle the holder to claim or to recover from the city any part or portion of the original fee or sum paid for such permit and license. All permits and licenses issued hereunder shall be nontransferable and are personal to the permittee and licensee. The license tax payments hereinabove provided for shall be due and payable on the first day of January each year, and such payments shall become delinquent on the tenth day of said month. After the delinquency date a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first month, minimum, and thereafter ten (10) per cent of the amount of the license tax per month, or fraction of a month from the due date, shall be charged and collected in addition to said payments, and if sued on or placed in the hands of the city attorney for collection, the delinquent owing for such license shall pay attorney's fees of twenty-five (25) per cent of the aggregate amount of the license and penalty. 
(c)  The exposing of any such beverage, in any quantity whatsoever or the advertising of same for sale or distribution in any place of business within the city shall be deemed sufficient evidence of any intention to sell same, and shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this article to the same extent as if a sale is made without the permit and license herein required. 
(Code 1965, § 3-2; Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 1144, § 1, 3-10-91; Ord. No. 1180, § 2, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 3-28. - Excise tax on beer, etc.-Levied. 
    By virtue of authority granted by Louisiana Revised Statutes, Section 26:493, there is hereby levied, in addition to all other excise, license or privilege taxes presently imposed, a tax on all beer, porter, ale, fruit juices and wine, having an alcoholic content of not less than one-half of one per cent or more than six (6) per cent by volume, of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per standard barrel of thirty-one (31) gallons, or any like rate of any other quantity, or for the fractional parts of such barrel sold for consumption in the city within the meaning and intent of the provisions of such section of the statute. 
(Code 1965, § 3-28) 
Sec. 3-29. - Same-Collection. 
    The tax herein levied shall be collected by all wholesale dealers in the state from their vendees purchasing for consumption in the city on each sale and shall be remitted by said wholesale dealers to the collector of revenue of the state for each month, on or before the twentieth day of each succeeding month, respectively, all in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the collector of revenue and as provided by law. 
(Code 1965, § 3-29) 
Sec. 3-30. - Same-Delinquency; penalty. 
    Failure of the wholesale dealer to collect and remit the tax levied when due, or failure to pay the tax when due by a purchaser for consumption, in the city shall, ipso facto, render each of them liable for the amount of taxes found to be due, together with a penalty of twenty (20) per cent of the amount of tax due, plus an additional amount of ten (10) per cent of the tax and penalty, as attorney's fees if referred to an attorney for collection. 
(Code 1965, § 3-30) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disposal of animal offal and carcasses, § 10-73; livestock prohibited in certain places, § 14-3. 
State Law reference- Authority over livestock at large, R.S. 3:2531. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, including art. II hereof, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Animal means any living domestic or wild creature. 
    Animal control advisory board means that advisory board established and appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen of the city. 
    Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen of the city, including duly commissioned police officers and/or animal control officers as well as any law enforcement officer within the city who is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal control supervisor means that person employed by the mayor and board of aldermen of the city to act as the supervisor of the animal control clinic. 
    Animal shelter means any premises designated by city administrative authority for the impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this chapter. 
    At large means an animal that is not under the direct control of the owner. 
    Breeder or trainer means any person engaged in the business of breeding, training, buying, selling or boarding animals or engaged in the training of animals for guard, sentry, hunting, retrieving, sporting or showing or any legitimate purposes. 
    Circus means a nonresident variety show which features animal acts. 
    Dangerous or vicious animal means any animal that, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, presents a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being, or property if not kept under the direct control of the owner. This definition shall not apply to animals utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. The term "dangerous and vicious animal" includes any animal that according to the records of either the city animal shelter, the city department of animal control, or any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked, endangered, or inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property, or when unprovoked, has chased or approached a person upon the street, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by any of the above-referenced authorities; 
(2)  Has severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fighting, or is trained for fighting other animals. 
    Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of an animal such as by means of a leash, cord, secure fence, or chain of such strength to restrain the animal and controlled by a person capable of restraining the animal, or safe secure restraint within a vehicle. If the controlling person is at all times fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and bearing of the animal, voice control shall be considered direct control when the animal is actually participating in training or in an official showing, obedience, or field event. Direct control shall not be required of animals actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or to government police animals. 
    Impoundment means taking or picking up and confining of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer or any other public officer under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Kennel means any person not engaged in business, owning, harboring, keeping or maintaining four (4) or more animals over the age of six (6) months. 
    Livestock includes, but is not limited to, cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, sheep, swine, goats, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese or other fowl. 
    Microchip identification tag means a duly licensed veterinarian-approved readable data storage device approved for implantation subcutaneously in animals. 
    Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
    Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity owning, harboring or keeping any animal, or in the case of a person under the age of eighteen (18), that person's parent or legal guardian. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days. This definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel. 
    Pet shop means a facility or establishment engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling, trading or boarding animals of any species. 
    Rabies certificate means a written document issued by a duly licensed veterinarian attesting to the date of an immunization of the animal described by name, immunization tag identification number and/or written description and the name, address and phone number of the owner of said animal. 
    Rabies tag means a metal tag issued by a duly licensed veterinarian bearing an immunization number showing the calendar year during which the vaccination was administered. 
    Restraint means an animal secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
    Sanitary conditions means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
    Theatrical exhibit means any exhibition or act featuring performing animals. 
    Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands or securely enclosed within the property limits of the owner's premises. 
    Veterinary clinic or hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the boarding of animals or the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
    Wild or exotic animal means any mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle. 
    Zoological garden means any park or zoo operated by any person for the keeping of animals. 
(Code 1965, § 5-1; Ord. No. 1252, § 1, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 1310, § 1, 2-9-05; Ord. No. 1375, § 1, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 4-2. - Resisting or interfering with officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct, interfere with, hinder, molest or abuse any police officer, animal control officer, humane officer or any other duly authorized officer in the performance of such officer's duties in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 5-21) 
State Law reference- Resisting an officer, R.S. 14:108. 
Sec. 4-3. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird (excluding pigeons) or wild fowl or to rob birds' nest or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, then such health authorities shall meet with the representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of said clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days' actual notice of the time and place of said meetings to the representatives of said clubs. If as a result of said meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, said birds may be destroyed in such manners and in such manner as is deemed advisable by said health authorities under supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1965, § 5-23) 
Sec. 4-4. - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 1182, § 1, adopted May 14, 1996, repealed § 4-4, pertaining to cruelty to animals, as derived from the Code of 1965, § 5-12. 
Sec. 4-5. - Illegal stimuli at exhibits. 
    No theatrical exhibit or act shall be held in which animals are encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, electrical or mechanical devices. 
(Code 1965, § 5-16) 
Sec. 4-6. - Use of live vertebrate as an inducement. 
    No person shall give any live vertebrate animal as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Code 1965, § 5-17) 
Sec. 4-7. - Animals at large prohibited and maintenance of livestock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal defined as livestock to run at large or to tie said livestock to have access to sidewalks or streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Each instance of the running at large of each such animal shall constitute a separate violation of this section and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1965, § 5-2; Ord. No. 1240, § 1, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1375, § 2, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 4-8. - Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat. 
    Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1965, § 5-8) 
Sec. 4-9. - Rabies immunization for dogs and cats; tag-Required. 
    The owners of any dog or other animal of the canine species or cat or other animal of the feline species over the age of three (3) months shall, on or before April first of each year, cause such animal to be immunized or vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian who shall, at the time of such immunization, furnish such owner with a certificate signed by said veterinarian, showing the date of immunization, the name and description of the animal, and the name and address of the owner, and shall furnish the owner a metal tag, which shall be attached to the animal's collar and shall be numbered and shall indicate the calendar year during which such inoculation has been made. The owner shall keep and maintain such metal tag on the animal at all times. 
(Code 1965, § 5-3) 
State Law reference- Rabies control, R.S. 40:1275 et seq. 
Sec. 4-10. - Same-Harboring without complying. 
    No owner shall keep, hold or harbor any animal described in section 4-9 within the city unless such animal has been immunized as provided for in such section and has attached to its collar the metal tag hereinabove referred to. 
(Code 1965, § 5-4) 
Sec. 4-11. - Killing of rabies suspect animal restricted. 
    Except for the protection of the public, no police officer or other person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any animal suspected of being rabid, except after the animal has been placed in quarantine and the diagnosis of rabies made by a licensed veterinarian. If a veterinarian diagnoses rabies in an animal, then the animal shall be humanely killed and the head of such animal sent to a laboratory for pathological examination and confirmation of the diagnosis. Should the animal be killed before diagnosis is made, the head of such animal shall be sent to a laboratory for pathological examination to determine whether or not such animal was rabid. 
(Code 1965, § 5-19) 
Sec. 4-12. - Livestock nuisance and dangerous to public. 
(a)  The maintenance, keeping and possession of livestock is hereby declared to be a danger to the health, welfare and safety of the public and constitutes a nuisance or menace to the health, and safety of the public within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It is the finding of the mayor and board of aldermen that it is necessary that livestock shall be kept under strict sanitary conditions and as such a manner to protect the health, safety and well-being of people residing in close confines of the city and particularly the people directly adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 1375, adopted Oct. 9, 2007, amended § 4-12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 4-12 pertained to swine being prohibited and derived from § 5-9 of the 1965 Code. 
Sec. 4-13. - Jacks and stallions to be kept remote from occupied buildings. 
    No owner shall keep, maintain, stable or harbor any jack or stallion within the city within three hundred (300) feet of any dwelling, house or place of business. 
(Code 1965, § 5-10) 
Sec. 4-14. - Nuisances; noise, trespassing, damaging property. 
    No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such person's animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive, frequent, continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon school grounds, or trespassing upon private property in such manner as to damage property or disturb the occupants thereof, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 1965, § 5-11) 
Sec. 4-15. - Maintenance and cleanliness of premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, keeping or possessing livestock, including but not limited to cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, sheep, swine, goats, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese or other fowl within an enclosure not less than one hundred (100) feet from the property line of any property zoned residential or from any established building or structure used for sleeping, dining, cooking, living, working or playing, including but not limited to any residence or part thereof, outdoor kitchen, garage or carport. 
(b)  Shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or possess cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, sheep, swine, goats, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese cattle, horses, and mules unless the partial land shall have a minimum area of one acre for one such animal and an additional one-fourth (1/4) acre for each additional animal. 
(c)  Shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or possess livestock confined in a building or structure such as a barn, stable or shed unless each animal is provided with a separate space of not less than one hundred forty-four (144) square feet. 
(d)  Shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl whether domesticated or otherwise unless the enclosure includes a shed or other structure shall provide a minimum area of not less than one square foot per bird. 
(e)  All enclosures and other areas to which livestock have access shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition and in such a manner that flies, vectors and other vermin are not attracted and allowed to remain. 
(f)  All buildings or structures for housing livestock and poultry shall provide adequate protection against weather conditions and shall be accessible to the animals at all times and shall be constructed in keeping with the type and quality of construction and compatible and attractive in keeping with the surrounding buildings. Such structures shall have an elevated floor at least six (6) inches above ground level which shall be constructed of concrete or tamped clay. 
(g)  All structures where livestock or poultry are kept or maintained shall be properly cleaned and disinfected daily and the refuse therefrom placed in a closed container and sanitarily disposed of at least once a week. All animals, including livestock and poultry, shall have ample fresh water at all times and shall be adequately fed and maintained at all times. 
(Code 1965, § 5-13; Ord. No. 1375, § 4, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 4-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1310, adopted Feb. 9, 2005, added provisions pertaining to dangerous and vicious dogs to be designated as art. II, §§ 4-50-4-65. In order to maintain categorical standards, § 4-16 has been redesignated as § 4-49. 
Sec. 4-17. - Impounding-Generally, disposition, cost of euthanasia and prosecution not precluded. 
(a)  Unrestrained and animals kept, harbored or maintained in violation of this chapter may be taken by police, the animal control officers or the humane officers and impounded in an animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than ten (10) days unless reclaimed by the owners. Animals not claimed by the owners within ten (10) days shall be humanely destroyed, or disposed of to any person paying all fees and charges due on such animals and otherwise complying with this chapter. 
(b)  Any animal not disposed of in accordance with subsection (a) hereof may, in the discretion of the animal control officer, be sold or disposed of under the provisions of section 4-18 of this article. 
(c)  The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions hereof and disposed of, destroyed or humanely disposed shall pay a fee for euthanasia of the animal as provided for herein and otherwise complying with this chapter. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the impoundment of the animal, nothing shall preclude prosecution for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 5-5; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 9-11-96; Ord. No. 1382, § 1, 4-8-08) 
Sec. 4-18. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Authorized; notice to owner. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer (humane officer, police officer) to take charge of any unrestrained animal or animals/livestock kept, maintained or harbored in violation of this chapter and to impound such animal/livestock in the animal control shelter there to be impounded and detained for a period of not less than ten (10) calendar days. The animal control shelter shall make a reasonable effort to determine the identity of the owner of such impounded animal/livestock and the animal control shelter shall send a notice in substantially the following form to the owner of such animal/livestock, if known, and shall post such notice in a conspicuous location upon the property from which the animal/livestock was taken, if the animal/livestock was not running at large at the time of taking. 

(b)  Forfeit of rights by owner; appeals. Unless the impounded livestock is claimed by its owner in person within ten (10) calendar days of the date given in the notice, all rights to the animal/livestock by the owner shall be forfeited and title shall pass at the end of the ten (10) days to the animal control shelter. Within the ten (10) calendar day period from the date of the notice, the owner of the animal/livestock may appeal the impoundment of the animal/livestock to the animal control officer and the sole question on appeal shall be whether the animal/livestock was correctly impounded for a violation of Chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances. In the event of a timely appeal to the animal control officer all proceedings for the sale of the impounded animal/livestock shall be suspended until disposition of the appeal by the animal control officer. 
(c)  Redemption by owner; fees. The owner of any impounded animal/livestock may upon presentation of satisfactory proof of ownership reclaim the livestock upon payment of the following charges and/or fees, where applicable, unless such animal/livestock has injured someone or has rabies or is suspected of having rabies in which case the animal/livestock must be held for at least ten (10) days for observation: 
(1)  An impounding fee which shall be a minimum of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first impoundment of the animal/livestock, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second impoundment and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third and subsequent impoundments, if any. 
(2)  A boarding fee of a minimum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day the animal/livestock has been impounded. 
(d)  Destruction of diseased or injured animals. Any animal/livestock which is diseased or severely injured at the time of impoundment may at the discretion of the supervisor be destroyed in a humane manner immediately and without waiting the prescribed ten (10) days. This action may be taken if in the opinion of the supervisor the condition of the animal/livestock is such that imminent destruction is necessary as a humane gesture and/or for the protection of other animals and livestock with which the animal/livestock may come into contact. 
(e)  Disposition of unredeemed animals. Any animal/livestock impounded and taken to the animal control shelter and held for the prescribed ten (10) days and not claimed by the owner may be disposed of as determined by the animal control supervisor. 
(Code 1965, § 5-6; Ord. No. 1184, § 2, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 1375, § 6, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 4-19. - Quarantine of biting animal, impounding and housing. 
(a)  Any animal which bites a person shall be impounded and quarantined for ten (10) days. During quarantine, the animal shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal. The owner shall surrender the animal for the quarantine period to an animal control officer who shall quarantine such animal at the animal shelter or, at the owner's request such animal control officer shall place such animal in a veterinary hospital, at such owner's expense. 
(b)  The owner of any animal which shall be impounded and quarantined under the provisions hereof in the animal shelter shall pay a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day for the cost of housing the animal. 
(Code 1965, § 5-18; Ord. No. 1184, § 3, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 4-20. - Notice of violation; early payment penalty. 
    In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, humane officer, or police officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) which may, at the discretion of the animal owner, be paid to the office of the city clerk within seventy-two (72) hours in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event that such penalty is not paid within the time period prescribed, a criminal charge shall be initiated and, upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the owner shall be punished as provided in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1965, § 5-7) 
Sec. 4-21. - Unwanted animals-Euthanasia, animal adoptions and equipment rental. 
(a)  Any owner or person desiring to surrender an animal for adoption or to be humanely destroyed shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  For canines and felines, the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per animal; 
(2)  For all other animals, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus actual cost of disposal; 
(3)  For euthanasia of animals, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) which shall be refunded in the event the animal is adopted. 
(b)  Any person who wishes to adopt an animal which has not been reclaimed or which has been surrendered for adoption shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  Adoption, forty dollars ($40.00) plus fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day for each day the animal is impounded; 
(2)  All required vaccinations and costs. 
(c)  Any person requesting the use of equipment or trap shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the rental of the equipment or trap. In the event the animal trapped is to be surrendered for humane destruction, the person shall pay the cost of euthanasia after required impoundment of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1184, § 4, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 1444, § 1, 8-14-12) 
Sec. 4-22. - Animals contained by electric fencing. 
(a)  Owners of domestic dogs and cats may provide restraint and/or enclosure for the animal by use of underground electrical fencing system consisting of a low voltage confinement system designed, approved and meeting all building and safety codes and shall be inspected and approved by the office of the city inspector. 
(b)  All owners shall provide the owner's animals with sufficient and proper collars or devices which shall be attached to the animal and including thereon the name and address of the owner. 
(c)  All owners shall apply for and receive a permit for the use of the electric fence with the office of the city inspector and shall pay a fee for a permit for the use of said fencing, which fee for permit for use of electric control fencing is fixed as twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(d)  Notwithstanding use of electric fencing, any animal found at large outside of the boundary of the fencing shall be subject to the prohibition of animals running at large within the city as provided in section 4-7 of the Code. 
(e)  Any unrestrained animals shall be subject to impoundment, reclaiming and violations of law as provided for in the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 1, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 4-23. - Fighting of animals prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  Fighting prohibited. No person or persons shall intentionally do any of the following, to-wit: 
(1)  For amusement or gain, cause any animal to fight with another animal or to cause any animal to injure another animal. 
(2)  Permit any act in violation of paragraph (1) to be done on any premises under his charge or control, or aid and abet any such act or activity. 
(3)  Promote, stage, advertise or be employed for the purposes of causing animals to engage in fights. 
(4)  Own, manage or operate any facility kept or used for the purpose of fighting animals. 
(5)  Knowingly attend as a spectator any organized event where fighting of animals occurs or is to occur. 
(b)  Fighting of animals defined. An organized event featuring the combat of two (2) or more animals in which the fighting, killing, maiming or injury or one or more of the animals is a significant feature or main purpose of the event. 
(c)  Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of paragraphs (1)-(5) of subsection (a) shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months or both. 
(Ord. No. 1251, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Sec. 4-24. - Seizure and disposition of animals. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer making arrest under the provisions of section 4-23(a) may take possession of all fighting animals on the premises where the arrest is made or in the immediate possession or control of the person being arrested, whether or not the animals are actually engaged in a fight at the time. 
(b)  Upon conviction of the person so charged, all animals so seized shall be adjudged by the court to be forfeited and the court shall order humane disposition of same in accordance with Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:102.2. 
(c)  For purposes of a seizure, all animals used or employed in violation of the provisions of paragraphs (1)-(5) of subsection 4-23(a) are dangerous, vicious and a threat to the health and safety of the public and are hereby declared to be contraband under the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:102.6. 
(Ord. No. 1251, § 2, 4-10-01) 
Secs. 4-25-4-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1310, adopted Feb. 9, 2005, amended art. II by adding provisions to be designated as §§ 4-50-4-65. Inasmuch as there already exists §§ 4-50-4-65, which pertain to similar subject matter, said new provisions are being treated as superseding Ord. No. 1252, adopted July 10, 2001, as amended by Ord. No. 1296, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, and from which §§ 4-50-4-65 derived. 

Sec. 4-49. - Dangerous and vicious dogs. 
    No owner shall keep or permit to be kept within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley any dogs that have the appearance and characteristics of prominent breeds being fierce, savage, dangerous, wild or vicious. 
(1)  Any animal of a predominant breed which has aggressively bitten, attacked, endangered, or inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property, or when unprovoked, has chased or approached a person upon the street, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by any of the above-referred authorities, shall be declared dangerous and vicious; 
(2)  Any animal of predominant breed which has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property shall be declared dangerous and vicious; or 
(3)  Any dog or animal which has been used primarily or in part for the purpose dog fighting, or is a dog trained for dog fighting, which shows signs and markings of being used for fighting shall be declared dangerous and vicious, except that excluded herefrom are all dogs which are professionally trained for law enforcement use. 
(Code 1965, § 5-15; Ord. No. 1179, § 1, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 1252, § 2, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 4-50. - Animals declared dangerous or vicious. 
(a)  The following animals or breeds of animals are declared to be dangerous or vicious by virtue of their predominate characteristics and represent a real and eminent danger to the public health and safety of person and property, and as such are declared to be subject to the requirements of sections 4-55 and 4-56. 
(1)  Dogs: 
a.  Akita 
b.  Alaskan Malamute 
c.  Chow 
d.  Doberman Pinscher 
e.  German Shepard 
f.  Pit Bull 
g.  Presa Canario 
h.  Siberian Husky 
i.  Staffordshire Bull Terrier 
j.  Wolf Hybrid 
(2)  Nondomestic wildlife, including but not limited to, reptiles, including all snakes. 
(b)  The owners of any of the above animals shall comply with the requirements for keeping dangerous and vicious animals as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-51. - Procedure for declaring an animal dangerous or vicious. 
(a)  An animal control officer or any adult person may request under oath that an animal be classified as dangerous or vicious by submitting a sworn written complaint on a form approved by the department of animal control. Upon receipt of such complaint, the animal control supervisor shall notify the owner of the animal that a complaint has been filed and that an investigation into the allegations set forth in the complaint will be conducted. 
(b)  At the conclusion of an investigation, the animal control supervisor may: 
(1)  Determine that the animal is not dangerous or vicious and, if the animal is impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the animal to its owner; or 
(2)  Determine that the animal is dangerous or vicious and order the owner to comply with the requirements for keeping dangerous or vicious animals set forth herein and, if the animal is impounded, release the animal to the animal's owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for the impoundment. If all impoundment fees have not been paid within ten (10) business days after a final determination that the animal is dangerous or vicious, the animal control supervisor may cause the animal to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-52. - Notification of dangerous or vicious animal declaration. 
(a)  Within five (5) business days after declaring an animal dangerous or vicious, the animal control supervisor shall notify the owner by certified mail of the animal's designation as a dangerous or vicious animal and any specific restrictions and conditions for keeping the animal, as set forth herein. The animal control supervisor also shall notify the chief executive and the police department of the designation of any animal as a dangerous or vicious animal. Such notification shall describe the animal and specifically any particular requirements or conditions placed upon the animal owner. 
(b)  The notice shall inform the animal owner that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the animal control supervisor's finding and designation within five (5) business days after delivery of the dangerous or vicious animal declaration notice. 
(c)  If the animal control supervisor cannot with due diligence locate the owner of an animal that has been seized pursuant to this chapter, the animal control supervisor shall cause the animal to be impounded for not less than five (5) business days. If after five (5) days, the owner fails to claim the animal, the animal control supervisor may cause the animal to be humanely destroyed. 
(d)  Failure of the animal owner to request a hearing shall result in the animal being finally declared a dangerous or vicious animal and shall subject the animal and its owner to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 1, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-53. - Hearing on dangerous or vicious animal declaration. 
(a)  The animal control board shall hold a hearing within fifteen (15) business days after receiving the animal owner's written request for such a hearing. The board shall provide notice of the date, time and location of the hearing to the animal owner by certified mail and to the complainant by regular mail. 
(b)  At a hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the animal's dangerousness or viciousness. Criteria to be considered in a hearing required by this section shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Provocation; 
(2)  Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal; 
(3)  Previous aggressive history of the animal; 
(4)  Observable behavior of the animal; 
(5)  Site and circumstances of the incident; and 
(6)  Statements from interested parties. 
(c)  A determination at a hearing that the animal is in fact a dangerous or vicious animal as defined herein shall subject the animal and its owner to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-54. - Appeal from dangerous or vicious declaration. 
(a)  If the animal control supervisor determines that an animal is dangerous or vicious at the conclusion of a hearing under section 4-53, that decision shall be final unless the animal owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within ten (10) days after receiving notice that the animal has been finally declared dangerous or vicious. The appeal must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the animal control supervisor's determination of dangerousness or viciousness. 
(b)  The appeal shall be commenced upon the filing of a petition and the issuance of a rule to show cause by the owner of the animal that the animal should not be declared a dangerous or vicious animal. This civil rule shall, at the time of its issuance, be fixed for hearing not later than five (5) days, including Sundays, half holidays and holidays, from the date of the issuance. It shall be heard continuously day after day until submitted for adjudication. Upon the trial of the rule to show cause the court shall determine whether or not the animal is a dangerous or vicious animal and then make any order deemed appropriate by the court. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-55. - Keeping of dangerous or vicious animals. 
    The keeping of a dangerous or vicious animal as defined herein shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Leash. No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a dangerous or vicious animal shall allow the animal to exit its kennel, pen or other proper enclosure unless such animal is securely attached to a leash not more than four (4) feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous or vicious animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of controlling the animal is in physical control of the leash. 
(b)  Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous or vicious animal to allow the animal to be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the animal to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the animal shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the animal's breathing or vision. 
(c)  Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous or vicious animal shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a locked pen or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the animal from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The structure must have secure sides and a secure top, or all sides must be at least eight (8) feet high; 
(2)  The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides or the sides must be embedded not less than one foot into the ground; and 
(3)  The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that the animal cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
(d)  Indoor confinement. No dangerous or vicious animal shall be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of the house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure. 
(e)  Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of dangerous or vicious animals shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dangerous Animal." 
(f)  Liability insurance, surety bond. In the event any animal is found to have caused any abrasion, puncture, tear or piercing of the skin by biting a person or domestic animal after impoundment hearing, the owner of said animal shall present to the animal control supervisor proof that the owner has procured liability insurance or a surety bond in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering each animal so declared for any damage or injury that may be caused by each such dangerous or vicious animal. The liability insurance policy or surety bond shall contain a provision requiring that the city department of animal control be notified by the agent issuing the policy or bond or by the company issuing the policy or bond not less than ten (10) days prior to the date the insurance policy or bond is to be canceled, terminated or expired. The liability insurance, or surety bond, shall be obtained prior to the issuing of a permit to keep a dangerous or vicious animal. The animal owner shall sign a statement attesting that the animal owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance policy, or the surety bond, at any time during which the owner possesses the dangerous or vicious animal. The appropriateness of the liability insurance or of the surety bond must be approved by the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
(g)  Notification of escape. The owner or keeper of a dangerous or vicious animal shall notify the department of animal control immediately if such animal escapes from its enclosure or restraint and is at large. Such immediate notification shall also be required if the animal bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. 
(h)  Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner of a dangerous or vicious animal registered with the department of animal control to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any animal found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter shall result in the revocation of the animal's license and the permit providing for the keeping of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-56. - Permit and tag requirement for a dangerous or vicious animal. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous or vicious animal shall, within three (3) business days after the classification of the animal as dangerous or vicious or upon acquisition of such an animal, obtain an annual permit from the department of animal control to harbor the animal. The fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, a red circular tag shall be issued to the owner of the dangerous or vicious animal. The tag shall be worn at all times by the animal to clearly and easily identify it as a dangerous or vicious animal. 
(c)  At the time the permit is issued, the animal shall be implanted with a microchip identification device by a veterinarian or trained animal control officer. 
(d)  The permit for maintaining a dangerous or vicious animal shall be presented to an animal control officer and/or the animal shall be presented for microchip scan and identification upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-57. - Notification of intent to impound. 
(a)  When the animal control supervisor of animal control or his designee intends to impound a animal declared to be dangerous or vicious for violation of any section or part thereof, or when an animal bites a person or domesticated animal, he shall notify the owner or custodian of the animal, by certified mail, of the intended impoundment at least five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, except as provided in section 4-58. 
(b)  The notice of intent to impound shall inform the owner or custodian of the animal that he may request in writing, within five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, a hearing to contest the intended impoundment and finding of violation. 
(c)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the animal for a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request for a hearing. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the animal's owner or custodian requesting such hearing. 
(d)  If the owner or custodian requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), no impoundment shall take place until conclusion of the hearing, except as authorized in section 4-58. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-58. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  A dangerous or vicious animal may be immediately impounded without a pre-impoundment hearing when the animal control supervisor or his designee determines such immediate impoundment is necessary for the protection of public health or safety for violation of any section or part thereof, or when the animal bites a person or domestic animal. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of the animal immediately impounded pursuant to subsection (a) shall be notified of the impoundment by certified mail within five (5) business days after the animal's impoundment. 
(c)  The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner or custodian of the animal that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the impoundment within five (5) business days after the mailing of the notice of impoundment. 
(d)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the animal for a hearing under subsection (c), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after such request. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the animal owner requesting the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-59. - Impoundment hearing. 
(a)  If after a hearing on impoundment, the animal control supervisor or his designee finds no violation of section 4-21, or that the animal has not bitten an individual, the animal shall be returned to its owner or custodian if already impounded, or shall not be impounded as intended. 
(b)  Incident to the findings and conclusions made at the impoundment hearing, the animal control supervisor or his designee may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the animal to ensure the health and safety of the public and the animal. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering such animal(s); 
(2)  Posting of a surety bond or other satisfactory proof of ability to respond in damages in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
(3)  Specific requirements as to size, construction and design of a kennel in which to house the animal; 
(4)  Requirements as to type and method of restraint and/or muzzling of the animal; 
(5)  Registration, permits, photo and microchip identification if not previously completed; and 
(6)  Payment of reasonable fees to recover the costs incurred by the department of animal control in ensuring compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-60. - Destruction. 
(a)  The animal control supervisor of animal control or his designee may order the destruction of an animal that it determines to be extremely dangerous or vicious to public health or safety, an animal that has made an extremely vicious attack upon an individual, or an animal declared dangerous or vicious whose owner is unable or unwilling to adequately restrain it or otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The animal control supervisor or his designee shall give written notice by certified mail of his intention to destroy such animal to the owner or custodian of the animal, who may request in writing, within ten (10) business days after delivery of notice, a hearing to contest the intended destruction. 
(c)  If no hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), the animal shall be destroyed pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), such hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request and the animal shall not be destroyed prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  In the event that any insurance/surety bond is required under this article, and in the event that said insurance/surety bond is canceled for any reason without acceptable replacement, the animal will be subject to automatic humane destruction. 
(f)  The animal owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required for the city to humanely and safely keep the animal during and legal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-61. - Appeal from order of humane destruction. 
    If the animal control supervisor or his designee orders a dangerous or vicious animal to be humanely destroyed pursuant to section 4-21.6, that decision shall be final unless the animal owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of the destruction order. If an appeal is timely filed, the animal control supervisor shall suspend the destruction order pending the final determination of the court. The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the animal control supervisor's destruction order. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-62. - Change of ownership. 
(a)  Any owner of a dangerous or vicious animal who sells or otherwise transfers ownership, custody, or residence of the animal shall, within ten (10) business days after such change of ownership or residence, provide written notification to the department of animal control of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. It also shall be the responsibility of the person transferring ownership or custody of the animal to provide written notification of the animal's classifications as dangerous or vicious to the person receiving the animal. The previous owner shall furnish a copy of such notification to the department of animal control along with written acknowledgment by the new owner of his receipt of such notification. The animal control supervisor of animal control or his designee shall notify the chief executive or the police department of any changes of ownership, custody or residence of the animal within three (3) business days after receiving the required information from the previous animal owner. 
(b)  Any person receiving an animal classified as dangerous or vicious must obtain the required permit, tag and enclosure prior to acquisition of the animal. The new owner shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to obtaining liability insurance, payment of fees, and maintenance, control and ownership of a dangerous or vicious animal. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-63. - Continuation of dangerous or vicious animal declaration. 
    Any animal that has been declared dangerous or vicious by any agency or department of this city, another municipality, county or state shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for the remainder of its life. The person owning or having custody of any animal designated as a dangerous or vicious animal by any municipality, county or state government shall notify the department of animal control of the animal's address and conditions of maintenance within ten (10) days of moving the animal into the city. The restrictions and conditions of maintenance of any animal declared dangerous or vicious by this city, another municipality, county or state shall remain in force while the animal remains in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-64. - Exemption from liability of prosecution. 
    Any citizen, law enforcement personnel, or animal control officer may kill any dangerous or vicious animal, and no citizen, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall be liable for damages or to prosecution by reason of killing any dangerous or vicious animal. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Sec. 4-65. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Nothing to the contrary withstanding, in the event that any animal bites a human being or a domesticated animal, (even without a declaration that the animal is dangerous and/or vicious), that biting animal will be micro-chipped. Any time an animal is brought to the animal control shelter, such animal shall be micro-chipped. In order for the owner or custodian of such animal to retrieve the animal, the owner or custodian must pay any costs incurred by the animal control center, including but not limited to the cost of micro-chipping. At the discretion of the animal control supervisor the process of micro-chipping may be accomplished by the owner or custodian with the owner or custodian's private veterinarian. 
(b)  Any owner wishing to register his animal, not otherwise subject to the provisions of this article, solely for identification purpose may request the registration with implantation of a micro-chip identification device by paying the cost of the permit fee described herein. 
(Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 2-9-05) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED MATTERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention code, § 8-20; Zoning, Appendix A. 
State Law reference- Building regulations generally, R.S. 33:4741 et seq.; removal of dangerous structures, R.S. 33:4761 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Fire limits established. 
    The fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  The area bounded on the north by Mill Street, on the south by Pine Street, on the east by Avenue G, and on the west by Avenue F; 
(2)  The area bounded on the north by the center line of Hutchinson Avenue, on the south by Mill Street, on the east by Avenue H, and on the west by Avenue E; 
(3)  The area bounded on the north by Interstate 10, being the north corporate limits, on the south by the center line of Hutchinson Avenue, on the east by Avenue G to the Northeast Crowley Drain Ditch, and along said drain ditch east to Avenue I extended to Interstate 10, and on the west by Avenue F to its intersection with said drainage ditch, and along said drainage ditch west to its intersection with Avenue D, extended to Interstate 10; 
(4)  The area comprising Blocks 93 and 104. 
(Code 1965, § 6-4) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish fire limits, R.S. 33:4741. 
Sec. 5-2. - Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of regulating the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, installation of mechanical devices and equipment, the use and occupancy and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to such buildings or structures, excluding farm structures and recreational camps, the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code as adopted and amended by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council. The Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code is incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The following nationally recognized codes and standards are hereby adopted fully by reference, to-wit: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 Edition, not including Chapter 1-Administration, Chapter 11-Accessibility, Chapter 27-Electrical and Chapter 29-Plumbing Systems. The applicable standards referenced in that code are included for regulation of construction within this city and the specific appendixes referenced by name or letter designation adopted by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council. 
(2)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition, not including Chapter 1-Administration and the standards referenced in that code for regulation of construction within this city and the specific appendixes referenced by name or letter designation adopted by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council. 
(3)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, not including Parts 1-Administrative, V-Mechanical, VII-Plumbing and VIII-Electrical. The applicable standards referenced in that code are included for regulation of construction within this city. Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures, is also included for mandatory regulation of construction within this city and the specific appendixes referenced by name or letter designation adopted by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council. The enforcement of such standards shall be mandatory only with respect to new construction, reconstruction, additions to homes previously built to the International Residential Code and extensive alterations, Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs is adopted. For the purposes of this part, IRC R301.2.1.1 (Design Criteria) is amended as follows and shall only apply to the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition: 
a.  Amendment of R301.2.1.1 (Design Criteria). 
b.  Item 6, The American Concrete Institute, Guide to Concrete Masonry Residential Construction in High Winds Areas, is added. 
c.  Item 7, Institute for Business and Home Safety, Optional Code-Plus Fortified for Safer Living, is added. 
d.  Item 8, Federal Alliance for Safe Homes, Optional Code-Plus Blueprint for Safety, is added. 
(4)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, and the standards referenced in that code for regulation of construction within this city and the specific appendixes referenced by name or letter designation adopted by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council. 
(5)  Nothing in this part shall be construed so as to prevent the state health officer, acting through the public health of the department of health and hospitals, from enforcing Part XIV (Plumbing) of the State Sanitary Code, the enforcement of which is his statutory and regulatory responsibility. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, and the standards referenced in that code for regulation of construction within this city and the specific appendixes referenced by name or letter designation adopted by the Louisiana Uniform Construction Code Council. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition. 
(8)  Temporary exemption to certification requirement. 
a.  Upon employment or if currently employed and promoted to a specific certification by a parish, municipality or other political subdivision, an individual must be granted a provisional certificate of registration without certification by a recognized code organization or testing agency, provided that such individual is under the supervision of a registered code enforcement officer who is certified by the International Code Council. 
(Code 1965, § 6-1; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 1301, § 1, 2-9-05; Ord. No. 1351, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 1469, § 1, 6-9-15) 
State Law reference- State building code, R.S. 40:1721 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2.1. - Appointment of city inspector, certification and enforcement authority. 
(A)  The city inspector shall be the chief building inspector and enforcement official of the city. 
(B)  The building official and inspector shall enforce only the International Codes and Regulations specifically adopted in this chapter, as amended and required under the provisions of LA. R.S. 40:1730.21. 
(C)  The city inspector and any officials/inspectors shall become certified in accordance with the requirements for certification and education of code enforcement officers, code enforcement inspectors and building officials as required by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 2, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 5-2.2. - Authorization for cooperative agreements and engagement of services from certified third party providers. 
(A)  The mayor of the City of Crowley is hereby authorized to negotiate, establish and execute cooperative agreements with other governmental entities of the State of Louisiana, parishes or municipalities and/or engage certified third party providers to provide services, including but not limited to the review of plans, inspection of premises, enforcement, training or other services as may be deemed necessary or appropriate in his/her sole discretion and with the approval of the city attorney. 
(B)  The mayor of the City of Crowley is hereby further authorized and empowered to negotiate, fix or accept fees and charges with or established by the State of Louisiana or other parish or municipality and/or to negotiate fees or charges with certified third party providers in his/her sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 3, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 5-2.3. - Imposition of fees and charges. 
(A)  No permit(s) required by the uniform code shall be issued until the fee(s) and/or charge(s) for plan review have been paid; plans and specifications have been approved and stamped; and any charge(s) or fee(s) due to other governmental entities or certified third party providers have been paid and evidence thereof has been provided to the office of the inspector. 
(B)  The schedule of charges and fees of governmental entities, including but not limited to the state fire marshal's office, which are included in a cooperative/intergovernmental agreement as authorized herein, the schedule of charges and fees included in the contract(s) with certified third party provider(s) plus all fees and charges for permit(s), inspection(s) and license(s) as may be required under the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crowley relative to buildings and/or construction are hereby imposed and shall be the minimum amount to be charged plus any additional amounts for cost(s) or charge(s) as may be established and/or required under the authorization of the state uniform code and the authority promulgated hereunder, specifically including the charge(s) required under any other provision, article, section, subsection or clause of this Code which establishes or fixes said charges or fees shall remain in effect and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 4, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 5-3. - Amendments to code. 
    The building code is amended to provide as follows: 
(1)  Disregard of unsafe notice to read as follows: "If the person served with a notice or order to remove or repair an unsafe building or structure, or portion thereof, should fail, within a period of thirty (30) days, to commence to comply with the requirements of such notice or order, and thereafter diligently continue to comply therewith, the building official shall advise the city attorney of all of the facts in the case, and shall institute an appropriate action by the governing authority to compel a compliance, or shall take such action as is authorized by Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 33:4761 et seq." 
(2)  Recovery of costs to read as follows: "The municipality shall have a lien and privilege for all costs incurred by such municipality for any emergency work performed under the authority of (1) above, which lien and privilege shall bear against the lot and improvements upon which the building or structure is situated. In order to preserve the lien and privilege, it shall be the duty of the mayor to prepare and sign a sworn statement of facts, giving the description of the property and the approximate cost of such emergency work, which statement of facts the mayor shall cause to be filed and recorded in the mortgage records of the parish within thirty (30) days of the date of commencement of such emergency work, and the municipality shall be entitled to recover the amount of such expense, together with the cost of the lien and twenty (20) per cent attorney's fee and all costs of court, by ordinary process in any court of competent jurisdiction." 
(3)  Damaged buildings: "Any existing frame building, except dwellings, within the fire limits which may hereafter be damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an amount greater than one-half of its then value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be removed and any building within the fire limits so damaged, not to exceed fifty (50) per cent of its then value, may be repaired to the extent of the then value, in any one year. Without exception, no shingle roof within the fire limits shall be repaired with other than incombustible material. Repairing or remodeling of frame buildings within the fire limits for other occupancy shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of its then value in any one year, exclusive of roof covering, which must, in all cases, be of incombustible material." 
(Code 1965, § 6-3) 
Sec. 5-4. - Permit fees. 
(a)  No permit as required by the building code shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this section shall have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid. 
(b)  For a permit and plan review of the construction or alteration of a building or structure, the fee shall be calculated based on the total number of square feet under roof of the building or structure at a rate of forty-five cents ($0.45) per square feet. For a permit without plan review for the construction or alteration of a building or structure, the fee shall be calculated based on the total number of square feet under roof of the building or structure at a rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot. 
(c)  For a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to another or to a new location within the same lot, the fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00) exclusive of any construction or inspection fees necessary to place the building or structure from one lot to another or to a new location within the same lot. 
(d)  For a permit for the removal of a building or structure outside of the corporate limits of the city, the fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(e)  For a permit for the demolition of a building or structure, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(f)  In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder, provided that no refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made; provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued. 
(g)  The term "estimated cost," as used in this section, means the reasonable value of all services, labor, materials, and use of scaffolding and other appliances or devices entering into and necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy; provided that the cost of excavation or grading, and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely for embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building or structure is not deemed a part of such estimated cost. 
(h)  Any person violating any provisions of this article may be punished by a fine according to the following schedule: 
First offense: $200.00 per day per offense 
Second offense: $500.00 per day per offense 
Third offense: $1,000.00 per day per offense 
    Every day any violation continues shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of this article. Unpaid fines shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the aggregate unpaid balance, and after thirty (30) days shall accrue interest at the rate of one percent per month until paid. 
(Code 1965, § 6-16; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 6-11-96; Ord. 1432, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 1449, § 2, 11-13-12) 
Cross reference- Building permit required, App. A, § 8.2; fees for certificate of zoning compliance, App. A, § 8.3. 
State Law reference- Authority to required building permits, R.S. 33:4744. 
Secs. 5-5-5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Interfering with radio or TV reception, § 7-37. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-20. - Inspector-Appointment; salary as fixed; removal; conflict or interest qualifications. 
(a)  Appointment; salary as fixed. The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the governing authority, shall appoint annually for terms of one year, an electrical inspector, who shall receive such salary as may be provide by the governing authority. 
(b)  Removal from office. The electrical inspector shall be removed from office only for cause, after a full hearing by the governing authority. 
(c)  Conflict of interest. No electrical inspector shall be actually engaged in the business of installation and maintenance of electrical wiring, electrical devices, equipment and installations, but may have a financial interest in a concern engaged in such business in the city while holding the office of electrical inspector. Any violation of the provisions of this section by any electrical inspector shall be sufficient cause for removal from office; however, the inspector may also be removed for other just cause. 
(d)  Qualifications. All electrical inspectors shall be competent electricians of good moral character and shall have had at least five (5) years' experience as a journeyman in the practice of the trade or two (2) years' training in electrical engineering and, in addition thereto, two (2) years of practical experience in electrical construction, and shall be well versed in approved methods of electrical construction for the safety of life and property. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10-20-10-22) 
Sec. 5-21. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)  Issuance of permits; approval of work. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to issue all necessary permits for all new electrical installations and for the repair or alteration of all electrical installations and to inspect and approve all electrical installations, repairs and alterations for which permits are issued. 
(b)  Right-of-entry; disconnecting dangerous facilities. The electrical inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building in the city in the discharge of official duties, for the purpose of making any inspections or tests of the installation of electrical wiring, electrical devices, equipment and installations contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the disconnection of all electric current in case of emergency or when electric current is or may be dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department. 
(c)  Maintaining records. The electrical inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and of all other official work performed under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10-23, 10-24, 10-28) 
Sec. 5-22. - Permits required; application, workmanship, moved buildings. 
(a)  No alterations, additions or repairs shall be made to any existing wiring in any building, nor shall any building be wired for the placing of electric lights, electrical devices, equipment or installations, nor shall any alterations be made in the wiring of any building after inspection until and unless a permit therefor is obtained from the electrical inspector, except that minor repair work, such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop cords, may be done without obtaining such permit. 
(b)  Applications for such permits, describing the work to be done shall be made by the person desiring to install same and the permits, when issued, shall be to such applicant. 
(c)  All repair work shall meet the same specifications as that of new installations. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to maintenance and repairs on the premises of a person regularly employing one or more journeymen electricians for that purpose. 
(e)  Whenever a building or structure is moved from one location to another, an electrical permit shall be obtained and, prior to issuance of a certificate of inspection, the electrical inspector shall determine that all electrical wiring and installations in such building or structure comply with the requirements for new construction provided in the code and this article. 
(Code 1965, § 10-25) 
Sec. 5-23. - Inspection-Fees. 
(a)  For the issuance of an electrical permit for residential construction, the inspector shall collect the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00). In addition to the permit fee, an inspection fee shall be charged and collected at the time of the issuance of the required residential electrical permit of thirty dollars ($30.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per circuit. 
(b)  For the issuance of an electrical permit for commercial construction, the inspector shall collect the sum of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). In addition to the permit fee, an inspection fee shall be charged and collected at the time of the issuance of the required commercial electrical permit of forty-five dollars ($45.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per circuit, regardless of type or amp rating. 
(c)  The inspector shall collect the following inspection fees for residential or commercial electrical services as follows: 
    Electrical service, change of service, trailer or pole service: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) 
(d)  The inspector shall collect inspection fees for electrical signs as follows: 
    For each sign: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each transformer or circuit, whether incandescent, flashing, fixed, fluorescent or otherwise. 
(e)  The inspector shall collect inspection fees for all miscellaneous permits not otherwise listed of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1965, § 10-26; Ord. No. 1185, § 2, 6-11-96; Ord. 1432, § 2, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 5-24. - Same-Reinspections; disconnecting current. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall periodically make a thorough reinspection of the installations in buildings of all electrical wiring, electrical devices and electrical material now installed or that may hereafter be installed, within the city, and when the installation of any such wiring, devices or material is found to be a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating the same shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, devices and material in safe condition and have such work completed within fifteen (15) days, or any longer period specified by the electrical inspector in said notice. The electrical inspector is hereby empowered to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, devices and material so found to be defectively installed until the installation of such wiring and material has been made safe as directed by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  The owner, agent or electrician in change of the property found to be defective or hazardous shall pay an additional inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1965, § 10-30; Ord. No. 1185, § 2, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 5-25. - Same-Certification. 
    Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, it shall be the duty of the person installing the same to notify the electrical inspector, who shall inspect the installation within twenty-four (24) hours of the time such notice is given; and if it is found to be fully in compliance with this article and the electrical code and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, the inspector shall issue to such person for delivery to the owner, a certificate of inspection authorizing connection of the electrical service and the turning on of the current. All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment and any person installing such wires shall notify the electrical inspector, giving the inspector twenty-four (24) hours in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed. 
(Code 1965, § 10-29) 
Sec. 5-26. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the inspector shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit therefor, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code or this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code or this article have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the inspector to the electrical board of the city provided for in section 5-40, within ten (10) days of the date of the decision, and either the city or the applicant may appeal from the decision of the electrical board to the state property insurance association within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision of the board. 
(Code 1965, § 10-27) 
State Law reference- Property Insurance Association, R.S. 22:1405 et seq. 
Sec. 5-27. - Liabilities not affected. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party for damages to persons or property caused by any defect in any electrical wiring, electrical devices, equipment and installations, nor shall it be construed that the city has assumed any liability by reason of the inspections authorized herein or the issuance of a certificate of inspection. 
(Code 1965, § 10-1) 
Sec. 5-28. - National Electric Code-Adopted. 
    The National Electrical Code, 1999 edition, adopted and sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association, as hereafter amended, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as fully as if set out at length herein, to govern and control the installation, repair and maintenance of electric wiring and other electrical devices, equipment and installation. 
(Code 1965, § 10-3; Ord. No. 1290, § 2, 7-13-04) 
State Law reference- Required compliance with latest edition of electrical code, R.S. 40:1603. 
Sec. 5-29. - Same-Modification. 
    The electrical inspector, with the approval of the electrical board, shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the code, upon application in writing by the owner of affected property, or such owner's duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the electrical inspector, duly approved by the electrical board or a majority of its member, shall be filed with the city clerk and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 10-7) 
Sec. 5-30. - Same-Compliance. 
    No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless all installations are in strict conformity with the provisions of this article, the National Electrical Code and the statutes of the state and unless they are in conformity with the most approved methods of construction for safety to life and property. 
(Code 1965, § 10-5) 
Sec. 5-31. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall be convicted of violation of any of the provisions of the electrical code, or failure to comply therewith, or of violation or failure to comply with any order made hereunder, or of making any installation in violation or any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or of failure to comply with such an order, as affirmed or modified by the Louisiana Rating and Fire Prevention Bureau or by a court of compensation jurisdiction, or of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall for each and every violation and noncompliance be punished as provided by section 1-8. 
(b)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all violators shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The application of any of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1965, § 10-2) 
Secs. 5-32-5-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICIANS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate electricians, R.S. 33:4782. 

Sec. 5-40. - Board; created, membership. 
    There is created an electrical board for the city, which board is to consist of the city electrical inspector and five (5) other members to be appointed each year by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the governing body. 
(Code 1965, § 10-43) 
Sec. 5-41. - Application for certificate and examination. 
    Any person desiring a journeyman electrician's, master electrician's or electrical contractor's certificate of competency shall make application in writing to the city electrical inspector, requesting that such applicant be permitted to take an examination for such certificate of competency. 
(Code 1965, § 10-44) 
Sec. 5-42. - Fees-Application. 
    The following fees shall be charged each applicant for examination or registration, or both, and shall be paid at the time the application is filed: 
(1)  Master electrician or electrical contractor ..... $50.00 
(2)  Journeyman electrician ..... 25.00 
(Code 1965, § 10-45; Ord. No. 1185, § 4, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 5-43. - Same-Expiration of certificates; renewal. 
    All certificates of competency shall expire on December thirty-first of each year and must be renewed on or before March first of the following year and the following fees shall be charged each applicant for renewal of his certificate of competency: 
(1)  Master electrician or electrical contractor ..... $50.00 
(2)  Journeyman electrician ..... 25.00 
(Code 1965, § 10-50; Ord. No. 1185, § 5, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 5-44. - Effect of not performing work during previous twelve months. 
    In the event that the applicant for renewal has not performed electrical work in the city during the previous twelve (12) month period, the application for registration shall be considered a new application for examination and registration and the fees hereinabove shown shall apply, except in cases of hardship or unusual circumstances, in which event the electrical board may consider the application a renewal application. 
(Code 1965, § 10-46) 
Sec. 5-45. - Examination of masters and contractors. 
    If the board shall find, upon due investigation, that the applicant for a master electrician's certificate of competency or an electrical contractor's certificate of competency is at least twenty-one (21) years of age and has had at least four (4) years' practical experience as a journeyman electrician, or is a graduate of any technical school of recognized standing and, in addition thereto, has had two (2) years of practical experience as a journeyman electrician and is of a good moral character, applicant shall be given the examination. The examination shall be given to the applicant within thirty (30) days after filing of the application, or as soon thereafter as possible; examination papers shall be graded by the board. The applicant shall satisfy such board that such person is a master of such person's trade or calling. 
(Code 1965, § 10-48) 
Sec. 5-46. - Examination of journeymen. 
    If the board shall find, after due examination, that the applicant for a journeyman electrician's certificate of competency is at least twenty-one (21) year of age and has had at least four (4) years' practical experience as an electrician's helper or as a journeyman electrician or is a graduate of any technical school of recognized standing and, in addition thereto, has had one (1) year of practical experience as an electrician's helper or as a journeyman electrician and is of good moral character, applicant shall be given the examination. The examination shall be given the applicant within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application or as soon thereafter as possible; examination papers shall be graded by the board. The applicant shall satisfy the board that such applicant is sufficiently proficient in applicant's trade or calling to qualify as a journeyman electrician. 
(Code 1965, § 10-49) 
Sec. 5-47. - Revocation of certificates. 
    Any certificate granted under this division may be revoked by the board should the licensee fail to comply with the provisions of this article and the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1965, § 10-51) 
Sec. 5-48. - Bond insurance and licenses. 
    Every person, before entering into the business of installing or contracting to install or repair electrical wiring, electrical devices, equipment, signs and other electrical installations operating on a difference of potential of ten (10) volts or more, shall: 
(1)  Obtain the necessary certificates hereinabove required; 
(2)  Obtain and deposit with the electrical inspector an electrical contractor's bond in the principal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by a solvent surety company, which bond shall be conditioned that the principal therein shall faithfully comply with the terms of this article and the National Electrical Code and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all persons interested against all costs, expenses, damage and injuries sustained by the negligence of such principal, principal's agents, servants and employees, failure to comply with the terms of this article and the code in doing work made the subject matter hereof and, otherwise, to be in the form and executed as required by the governing authority. This bond shall be renewed annually before the first day of January, as a prerequisite to the issuance of an electrical contractor's license for that year; and post a policy of adequate insurance; and 
(3)  Obtain from the city clerk all necessary occupational licenses to engage in the business. 
(Code 1965, § 10-53) 
Sec. 5-49. - Established place of business required; display of licenses. 
    Every licensed master electrician shall have and maintain an established place of business in the state displaying a sign in public view and, during regular business hours, shall have a responsible person in attendance at such place of business to receive complaints from the electrical department of the city, or other persons concerned, and must display, in said establishment, all necessary cite and state license tax receipts required by law. 
(Code 1965, § 10-54) 
Sec. 5-50. - Responsibility of electricians. 
    Every person certified by the board and licensed under this article shall be responsible for any defects in construction, insofar as correction thereof is concerned, in all work installed by such person, until such time as a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector, and shall also be so responsible for all defects that may have been concealed by such licensee and discovered by the electrical inspector, or the inspector's duly authorized agent, after a certificate of approval has been issued by such inspector, approving such construction. After the issuance of the certificate of approval, the person in whose name the meter is contracted shall be responsible for all defects caused by such person. 
(Code 1965, § 10-55) 
Secs. 5-51-5-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITION OF PROPERTY, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1378, adopted Jan. 8, 2008, amended art. III, which pertained to housing, consisted of §§ 5-60-5-62, and derived from the 1965 Code, in its entirety to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 5-60. - Dilapidated dangerous structures and unsanitary conditions prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner to allow any unsanitary or unsafe condition or any dilapidated or dangerous building or structure to exist on any lot, place or area owned by such property owner within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 2, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 5-61. - Condemnation of buildings and structures, adoption of state statutes. 
    The provisions of Subpart D of Chapter 14 of Title 33, particularly LA R.S. 33:4761, et seq., are hereby adopted as amended providing authority and the procedures for the condemnation, demolition and removal of buildings within the municipality as same may be amended by Legislature from time-to-time. The procedures provided therein shall be conformed to by the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 3, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 5-62. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions hereof shall be enforced by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 4, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 5-63. - Maintenance of property, buildings and structures. 
    All properties, buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition fit for human habitation or the use for which [it] was intended. All devices, electrical, wiring, plumbing, plumbing fixtures, material, equipment and safeguards required in a building or structure when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good condition and working order. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 5, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 5-64. - Unsafe or dilapidated buildings. 
    All exterior walls, roofs or foundations shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timber or any other condition which may admit rain or dampness into the interior which may cause damage to the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 6, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 5-65. - Unsafe, unsanitary or dilapidated buildings or structures. 
(a)  A lot, building or structure shall be deemed unsafe, unsanitary or dilapidated and unfit for human habitation, uninhabitable or unusable by reason of partial or complete damage or destruction, decay, deterioration, faulty construction, movement or instability of any portion of the structure, support or foundation. 
(b)  A lot, building or structure shall be deemed uninhabitable and unfit for human habitation because of decay, damage, faulty construction, inadequate light, ventilation, plumbing or sanitary facilities, inoperable or otherwise determined by the building inspector to be obsolete, not substantially impaired or otherwise not in accordance with the code requirements. 
(c)  Whenever a lot, building or structure, or a portion thereof, is left open and is unsecured and has not been secured by either placing boards or other material over doors, windows or other points of entry in such a manner [as] to maintain its present condition, to prevent further damage, decay or injury to the public, or when such place becomes an attractive nuisance to children or allows access to permit unlawful acts to occur, said building shall be deemed unsafe and dilapidated. 
(d)  Buildings destroyed or partially destroyed or damaged by natural or other occurrences, acts of God, force majeure, fire or catastrophe and which have remained in such state for more than ninety (90) days shall be deemed unsafe and/or dilapidated. 
(e)  All such lots, buildings and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances and a danger to public health, safety and welfare and shall be condemned, demolished and/or removed unless repaired or rehabilitated and all corrections made to restore said lot, building or structure to conditions as may be required by the fire marshal and/or building inspector. 
(f)  Buildings or structures and/or any portion, appurtenance, ornamentation or accessory thereof, which has been declared a fire hazard due to deterioration, decay, damage, faulty wiring, gas connections or other equipment shall be deemed unsafe and/or dilapidated. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 7, 1-8-08) 
Secs. 5-66-5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING AND GAS FITTING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-70. - Scope. 
    This article shall apply to and include all plumbing work and gas work, installation or equipment installed, constructed or altered in or about a building or structure of any kind, class or character, or to be used for any purpose whatsoever. Where appropriate, the provisions hereof shall be understood to refer also to gas fitters and gas fitting. 
(Code 1965, § 18-1) 
Sec. 5-71. - Plumbing inspector-General duties. 
    The plumbing inspector shall have the duty: 
(1)  To issue all permits for plumbing work; and 
(2)  To inspect and pass upon all plumbing and inspect any plumbing of any character already in use or being constructed which such inspector may have reason to believe is out of repair or imperfect. 
(Code 1965, § 18-3) 
Sec. 5-72. - Same-Authority to stop construction or use of improper plumbing, additional fee. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector shall have the authority, by written order to the owner or agent in charge of any building or premises where any imperfect or out of repair plumbing may be located, or to the plumber in charge of the construction of same, to stop the further construction or use of such plumbing until it has been properly constructed or repaired. 
(b)  The owner, agent or plumber in charge of the construction ordered to cease further construction until such hazard has been corrected shall pay an additional inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1965, § 18-4; Ord. No. 1185, § 6, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 5-73. - Same-Right-of-entry. 
    The plumbing inspector shall have the power to enter any premises in the city at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for the purposes of making any inspection or performing such inspector's powers or duties under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 18-5) 
Sec. 5-74. - Certification of plumbers-Required; board of examiners; procedure. 
(a)  The governing authority shall appoint a board of examiners of plumbers, consisting of the plumbing inspector and five (5) other members who shall serve for a term of one year and who shall meet, organize and adopt rules to carry into effect the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Said board shall give examinations to all applicants for plumbing certificates of competency, provided that no applicant for such examination shall be given an examination unless and until such applicant has had not less than three (3) years' experience as a plumber's apprentice, working under the supervision of a qualified master plumber and holds a certificate issued by the state board of examiners of journeyman plumbers. 
(c)  The board shall designate the time of meetings for the examination of applicants for such certificates or to hear and determine any appeals from the rulings of the inspector or any charges that may be made against any master plumber or any journeyman plumber or for the transaction of any other business. 
(d)  Any person holding an unrevoked and current journeyman plumber's, master plumber's or plumbing contractor's certificate of competency or a license as such from any municipality of the state classified, under the laws of the state, as a city, and a certificate issued by the state plumbing board shall be issued a like certificate of competency of the city, without examination, upon payment of the fees hereinafter shown and the presentation to the plumbing inspector of satisfactory evidence that the applicant holds such certificate or license. 
(e)  All applications shall be in writing in the form required by the plumbing inspector. 
(f)  The following fees shall be charged each applicant for the examination or registration, or both, and shall be paid at the time the application is filed: 
(1)  Master plumber or plumbing contractor ..... $50.00 
(2)  Journeyman plumber ..... 25.00 
(g)  All certificates of competency shall expire on December thirty-first of each year and must be renewed on or before March first of the following year and the following fees shall be charged each applicant for renewal of the certificate of competency: 
(1)  Master plumber or plumbing contractor ..... $50.00 
(2)  Journeyman plumber ..... 25.00 
(h)  In the event that the applicant for renewal has not performed plumbing work in the city during the previous twelve (12) month period, such applicant's application for registration shall be considered a new application for examination and registration and the fees firstly hereinabove shown shall apply, except in cases of hardship or unusual circumstances; in which event, the board of examiners of plumbers may consider the application a renewal application. 
(i)  All journeyman plumbers, master plumbers and plumbing contractors now licensed under the ordinances of the city may apply for and obtain, without examination, certificates of competence for the current year by payment of the renewal fees hereinabove set out. 
(j)  After hearing before the board, any such certificates may be revoked by the board should the licensee fail to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 18-16; Ord. No. 1185, § 7, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 5-75. - Same-Bond and license. 
    Every person, before entering into the business of installing or contracting to install or repair plumbing or house drains or both, in connection with the sewage system of the city, shall: 
(1)  Obtain the necessary certificates hereinabove required; 
(2)  Obtain and deposit with the plumbing inspector a plumbing contractor's bond in the principal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by a solvent surety company, which bond shall be conditioned that the principal therein shall faithfully comply with the terms of this article and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all persons interested against all costs, expenses, damage and injuries sustained by the negligence of such principal, applicant's agents, servants and employees, or failure to comply with the terms of this article in doing work made the subject matter hereof or any other plumbing work and, otherwise, to be in the form and executed as required by the governing authority. Such bond shall be renewed annually before the first day of January, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a plumbing contractor's license for that year; and 
(3)  Obtain from the city clerk all necessary occupational licenses to engage in the business. 
(Code 1965, § 18-17) 
Sec. 5-76. - Plumber responsible for work. 
    The master plumber in charge of the work shall be responsible for the construction and completion, according to this article, of all interior drainage and all supply pipes within the buildings, and their proper connections to the main house drain leading to the public sewer and connection to sewer. 
(Code 1965, § 18-18) 
Sec. 5-77. - Plumbing permits and plans-Required; application; performance of plumbing work. 
(a)  No property owner shall connect to or cause or permit any connection with a city sewer, house sewer or the water supply servicing the city, or erect or install or permit the erection or installation of any plumbing or fixtures to be connected therewith until such property owner or the licensed plumber who is to perform the work has obtained from the plumbing inspector a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be made on the form prescribed, stating the location of the property, with a full and clear description of the work proposed, signed by such property owner or the licensed plumber and agreeing that applicant will conform with the rules and ordinances regulating sewer connections and plumbing. Each 
application shall be accompanied by a diagram and specifications made in duplicate on the form prescribed and furnished by the inspector, showing and describing clearly the location of the building and of the rooms containing the work, the connections with the sewer and water supply, with every pipe, fixture and connection, neatly drawn in ink. If one vertical section cannot be made to show the work fully, other drawings are to be added. In showing extensions, the old work is to be shown in red ink and all new work in black ink. 
(b)  No permit hereunder shall be issued except to the owner of the property on which the work is to be performed or a qualified and licensed plumber. 
(c)  A person who is not a licensed plumber may perform plumbing as defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 37:1377(d) as now enacted or hereafter amended and connections to the house sewer or the city system and to the water supply servicing the city only in accordance with the provisions and exceptions contained in Louisiana Revised Statutes, sections 37:1361 through 37:1379 as now enacted or hereafter amended and only after a permit has been issued for such work when such permit is required by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 18-6) 
Sec. 5-78. - Same-When permit not required. 
    No permit will be required for minor work such as repair of leaks in pipes, traps, drains or faucets or opening up waste or supply pipes or replacing broken fixtures. 
(Code 1965, § 18-6) 
Sec. 5-79. - Same-Approval of plans, issuance of permit. 
    If the application and plans are approved by the inspector, such inspector shall issue a written permit within twenty-four (24) hours after the application is filed. 
(Code 1965, § 18-8) 
Sec. 5-80. - Same-Changes in plans. 
    Approved plans may not be changed unless the change is submitted and approved in the same manner as the original plans. 
(Code 1965, § 18-9) 
Sec. 5-81. - Same-Using same plans for identical systems. 
    The same plans may serve for each of several buildings located together and having identical plumbing systems. 
(Code 1965, § 18-10) 
Sec. 5-82. - Same-Lapse of permits. 
    Each permit shall lapse and become void if the work is not completed within ninety (90) days from the date of the permit, unless a longer period is expressly allowed by the inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 18-11) 
Sec. 5-83. - Same-Fees. 
(a)  The following permit and inspection fees shall be paid at the time a permit is issued: 
(1)  First fixture ..... $10.00 
(2)  Each additional fixture ..... 3.00 
(b)  The term "fixture" shall include, but is not limited to, the following: water closets, catch basins, mud traps, slop sinks, bathtubs, kitchen sinks, urinals, wash trays, wash basins, pantry sinks, drinking fountains, showers, floor drains, fountains and any other type of plumbing fixture. Each waste opening or piping which terminates for future connections shall be considered a fixture. 
(c)  Where more than one inspection is required for any reason, the inspector shall charge and collect an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) [that] shall be charged for each additional inspection required and shall be paid prior to each additional inspection. 
(d)  The following sewer tap permit and inspection fees shall be paid at the time a permit is issued: 
(1)  Sewer tap/no street break: $200.00. 
(2)  Sewer tap/break or cut street of less than one-half width of street: $450.00, plus an additional $100.00 for concrete street. 
(3)  Sewer tap/break or cut street of more than one-half width of street: $800.00, plus an additional $100.00 for concrete street. 
(Code 1965, § 18-12; Ord. No. 1185, § 8, 6-11-96; Ord. 1432, § 3, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 5-84. - Plumbing inspections and tests-Required; procedure. 
    All sewer lines shall be inspected when the pipe has been laid and cemented and before it is covered. As soon as all soil pipes, waste pipes, vent pipes and traps are connected, they shall be tested by the plumber in the presence of the inspector by filling them entirely with water. If any leaks appear, they are to be stopped by removal of the broken or defective pieces, caulking the lead or tightening screw threads but not by use of plumbers cement. The entire height of the pipe system is to be tested at once, unless the building is over three (3) stories in height, in which event the work may be tested in sections, provided no section may be less than three (3) stories in height. In addition to the water test, an approved smoke test or pressure test may be required in the presence of the inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 18-13) 
Sec. 5-85. - Same-Covering unapproved work prohibited. 
    All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. 
(Code 1965, § 18-14) 
Sec. 5-86. - Same-Furnishing water to, using unapproved plumbing. 
    No water shall be turned on, except for inspection, and no plumbing fixtures shall be used, until the inspector has issued a certificate of final inspection and approval. 
(Code 1965, § 18-15) 
Sec. 5-87. - Gas inspection permit. 
(a)  For the issuance of an inspection permit, the inspector shall charge and collect a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  Where more than one inspection is required for any reason, the inspector shall charge and collect an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional inspection. 
(Code 1965, § 13-10; Ord. No. 1185, § 8, 6-11-96; Ord. 1432, § 4, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 5-88. - Gas certificate required before turning gas on. 
    The inspector shall furnish to the gas supplier a copy of each certificate of inspection. It shall be unlawful for the gas supplier to turn gas into any new or altered or repaired system of gas piping until such certificate has been received, but when the inspector has certified to the inspection herein provided, no further inspection by the gas supplier shall be required. 
(Code 1965, § 13-11) 
Sec. 5-89. - Discontinuing gas service to defective installations. 
    Every person learning of a leak or defect in any gas piping or appliance shall forthwith report all facts in connection therewith in writing to the inspector. The inspector shall thereupon inspect all gas equipment at the location named in such report, and if such inspector finds leaks or defects, such inspector may order the gas company to turn off the gas and it shall be unlawful thereafter for the gas company to turn the gas on again until the inspector has certified that such leak has been repaired or removed. 
(Code 1965, § 13-12) 
Sec. 5-90. - Tampering with gas supplier facilities. 
    No one, except the gas supplier owning or supplying gas through the service line, shall at any time turn any valve or cock or in way tamper or make any connection with any gas main, meter, meter connection or gas service pipe between the main and meter. 
(Code 1965, § 13-13) 
Secs. 5-91-5-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION STANDARDS 

Sec. 5-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1290, § 4, adopted July 13, 2004, deleted § 5-100 in its entirety. Former § 5-100 pertained to compliance to the state plumbing code and derived from Code 1965, § 18-32. 
Sec. 5-101. - Louisiana State Plumbing Code; adopted, penalty. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing standards and regulations governing construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure within the city that certain code known as the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2000 edition, published by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as fully as if set out herein at length and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who will violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties for the violation thereof as provided in section 1-8. However, the imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or defects within a reasonable time, and the application of such a penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1290, § 5, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 5-102. - Applicability to old plumbing. 
    All plumbing constructed before November 12, 1930, shall be treated in the same manner as new work. Before connecting with the sewers, an application shall be filed and permit issued, and the work shall be submitted to inspection and test as herein required for new work, such portions being uncovered or removed as may be necessary for this purpose. The inspector is permitted to use reasonable discretion in passing minor defects in old plumbing which cannot be corrected without removing the plumbing. Upon final approval, the certificate of the inspector will show whether certain minor concessions have been made. For all reconstruction, extension or alteration of existing plumbing, a permit shall be in like manner obtained, provided no permit or plans shall be required for the removal of stoppages, the stopping of leaks or the repair of fixtures in which no change shall be made in the kind, size or arrangement of pipes or fixtures. Broken parts are to be replaced with construction as good as new. 
(Code 1965, § 18-2) 
Sec. 5-103. - International Fuel/Gas Code adopted; penalty. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the governing body for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the installation or alteration of gas piping and appliances, demolition and moving of buildings, that certain code printed in pamphlet form known as the International 
Fuel/Gas Code, 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person failing to comply with any provisions of the gas code, or failing to comply with any order of the inspector, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the gas fitter's license of such person may be revoked. 
(Code 1965, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1290, § 6, 7-13-04) 
Secs. 5-104-5-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 1412, adopted Oct. 12, 2010, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, consisted of §§ 5-110-5-130, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1116A, adopted Dec. 7, 1987; Ord. No. 1118, adopted Jan. 12, 1988; Ord. No. 1185, adopted June 11, 1996; and Ord. No. 1187, adopted Aug. 13, 1996. 

Sec. 5-110. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Louisiana has in Louisiana Revised Statutes 38:84 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the board of aldermen of the City of Crowley, Acadia Parish, Louisiana, does adopt the following flood damage prevention ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-111. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Crowley are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-112. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-113. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-114. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park of subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See "flood elevation study." 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway: See "regulatory floodway." 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area: see "area of special flood hazard." 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-115. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-116. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Acadia Parish, Louisiana and Incorporated Area" dated November 26, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated November 26, 2010, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 1413, § 1, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 5-117. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-118. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-119. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
Sec. 5-120. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-121. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. 
This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-122. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city inspector is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-123. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the department of transportation and development, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 5-116, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12 [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations]. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-124. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 5-127(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 5-123(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(c)  The inspector shall make no charge for the issuance of an elevation certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. 1432, § 5, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 5-125. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 5-124(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 5-112). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(i)  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(a)  The criteria outlined in subsections 5-125(1)-(9) are met; and 
(b)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(12)  The inspector shall charge a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the filing of the appeal of the denial for a variance. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-126. - General standards for flood hazard reduction. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designated to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 1413, § 2, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 5-127. - Specific standards for flood hazard reduction. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 5-116, subsection 5-123(8), or subsection 5-128 (3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 5-124(1)(a), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(a)  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
(a)  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(b)  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the longitudinal structural I-beam of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(c)  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The bottom of the longitudinal structural I-beam of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
(c)  Meet the permit requirements of subsection 5-124(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-128. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 5-111, 5-112 and 5-113 of this article. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 5-117; section 5-124; and the provisions of sections 5-126, 5-127, 5-128, 5-129 and 5-130 of this article. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 5-116 or subsection 5-123(8) of this article. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-129. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-116, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
(a)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(b)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 5-124 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-130. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 5-131. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with the conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, for each violation. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a new violation. In addition, the violator shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Crowley from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Secs. 5-132-5-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING BUILDINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 5-140. - Permit-Required to use streets. 
    No house or other building shall be moved on, over, along or across any public street of the city unless and until a permit has been obtained from the city authorizing the use of the public streets for the moving of the house or other building. 
(Code 1965, § 6-27) 
Sec. 5-141. - Same-Application. 
    Written application shall be made to the city for a moving permit, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The height, width and length of the house or building to be moved; 
(2)  The height, from the ground level to the top of the platform, of the truck or trailer to be used in transporting the building; 
(3)  The location of the building and the destination to which it is to be moved; 
(4)  The detailed route to be taken over the city streets; 
(5)  The name and address of the owner of the building; and the name and address of the person engaged in the transporting of the building; 
(6)  The approval of the chief of police of the route proposed in the application; and 
(7)  A plot plan showing the placement on the designated lot. 
(Code 1965, § 6-28) 
Sec. 5-142. - Same-Fees; issuance. 
(a)  Upon making application for a moving permit, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to defray the expense of inspection and approval of the proposed route and a reinspection for damage thereon upon completion of the moving operation. 
(b)  Upon the lapse of twenty-four (24) hours, the approval of the route, the ascertainment that the dimensions of the building are within the limitations provided in section 5-146 and that the applicant has complied with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, posting of the approved bond and the payment of a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00), the city inspector shall issue the necessary permit to applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 6-29) 
Sec. 5-143. - Bond. 
    A permittee under this article shall, at the time of obtaining the permit, deposit with the city clerk a cash bond or bond on which a surety company is surety in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which bond shall provide for the indemnity of the city for any damage done its streets and public property, and for the indemnity of any person damaged, in person or property, by the transporting of the building over the public streets of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 6-33) 
Sec. 5-144. - Police escort required; charges. 
    The permittee shall not move the building on or along the public streets until and unless such permittee is accompanied by a police escort. The charge for such escort shall be five dollars ($5.00) per hour, which amount shall be deposited by the permittee at the time of the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1965, § 6-30) 
Sec. 5-145. - Utility escort required; charges. 
    In the event any moving operation will require any change or alteration in or possibility of damage to any utility facilities, the permittee shall obtain an escort, assigned by the affected utility. The expense of furnishing such escort and of making the necessary temporary alterations of the facilities of such utility shall be estimated by such utility, approved by the city inspector and deposited, by applicant, with such utility, and such applicant shall deliver a duplicate of the deposit receipt to the city inspector prior to the issuance of such permit. All work affecting utility facilities shall be done by or under the supervision of such utility and the permittee shall pay to the utility the actual cost of such escort and work. Should the deposit exceed such expense, such utility shall refund the difference to the permittee. 
(Code 1965, § 6-31) 
Sec. 5-146. - Length, height, width, etc., of load; tree damage prohibited. 
(a)  No building of a width in excess of twenty-six (26) feet or a length in excess of fifty (50) feet or a height, when loaded on the truck or trailer to be used to transport same, in excess of eighteen (18) feet, shall be transported on the public streets of the city; provided that such prohibition shall not apply when such building is to be transported only across any such street. 
(b)  The lower slopes of the roof of the building shall be toward the sides of the street when possible. The city inspector shall inspect and approve the positioning of such building on the vehicle prior to the transporting thereof on the public streets. 
(c)  In the event that the governing authority determines that it is in the public interest that a building exceeding the above dimensions be transported on the public streets, such body may authorize such operation upon compliance by the applicant with all other requirements regulating such movement. 
(d)  The permittee shall not remove, trim, damage or destroy any tree or shrub on any public property except upon the written authorization of the mayor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-32) 
Secs. 5-147-5-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREES AND SHRUBS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Damaging trees in building moving operation, § 5-146; duty to trim over sidewalks, § 13-8. 

Sec. 5-150. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    Arborist: Any person servicing trees in any manner other than one working on such person's own property. 
    Park trees: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names and in all areas owned by the city to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Street trees: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets or ways within the city. 
    Tree service: Work performed on shade or ornamental trees, specifically excluding shrubbery, and including tree removals, planting, trimming, spraying, controlling and fertilizing. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-2) 
Sec. 5-151. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to define, regulate and control the planting, pruning, trimming, replanting, removal, dispose of, care and preservation of trees and shrubs, on the streets and public grounds within the city; to regulate the preservation and replacement of trees; to define certain works and positions; to establish a tree board; to license persons servicing trees; and to provide and establish procedures and practices for fulfilling these purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-1) 
Sec. 5-152. - City tree board-Created; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a city tree board, which shall consist of seven (7) members no less than five (5) of whom shall be citizens of and residents of this city, and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the governing body. 
(b)  The mayor shall be an ex officio member of the tree board. 
(c)  The membership of the tree board shall consist of at least one member who shall be affiliated with the LSU Cooperative Extension Service or the Acadia Parish School System and who, by reason of their profession or educational background or experience, deal with agriculture, horticulture or forestry. 
(d)  The term of office for board members shall be one year. 
(e)  Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-14; Ord. No. 1374, § 1, 9-11-07) 
Sec. 5-153. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, counsel and develop or update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposal of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan shall be presented annually to the governing authority, which upon acceptance and approval by the governing authority shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city. 
(b)  The board, when requested by the governing authority, shall investigate, make findings and reports and recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(c)  The board shall act in an advisory nature to the governing authority in connection with the implementation and work of the comprehensive tree plan. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-15) 
Sec. 5-154. - Same-Meetings; quorum. 
    The board shall meet at least once annually and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-16) 
Sec. 5-155. - Street tree species to be planted. 
    The following list constitutes the official street tree species list for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without the prior written permission of the city tree board. 
Small trees Medium trees Large trees Mimosa Raintree Oak Redbud Spruce Pine Pine Dogwood Willow Pecan Magnolia Soulangea Eucalyptus Magnolia Crepe Myrtle Walnut Elm Bald Cypress Cedar Sycamore  
(Code 1965, § 211/2-26) 
Sec. 5-156. - Spacing. 
    Spacing of trees will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed. No trees may be planted closer than the following: Small trees, thirty (30) feet; medium trees, forty (40) feet; and large trees, fifty (50) feet. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-27) 
Sec. 5-157. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
    The distance trees may be planted from curbs or sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed; and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: Small trees, two (2) feet; medium trees, three (3) feet; and large trees, four (4) feet. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-28) 
Sec. 5-158. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than twenty (20) feet of any street corner, measured from the nearest intersecting curb or curbline. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any fireplug. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-29) 
Sec. 5-159. - Distance from utilities. 
    No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-30) 
Sec. 5-160. - Public tree care; removal of public trees. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure safety when servicing city utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any such tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-31) 
Sec. 5-161. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical are exempted from this section. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-32) 
Sec. 5-162. - Pruning, corner clearance. 
(a)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from a street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of ten (10) feet above the surface of the street or right-of-way. 
(b)  Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any street control device or sign. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-33) 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 14; see also App. A, §§ 3.1303(4), 7.102. 
Sec. 5-163. - Dead or diseased private tree removal. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city shall notify in writing the owners of such trees. Such removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice and in the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the owner. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-34) 
Sec. 5-164. - Arborist's license-Required; fee; exemptions; insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of trimming, planting, pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city, without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company, city department or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. 
(b)  Before any such license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file written evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. 
(c)  The application shall also include a photostatic copy of the person's license issued by the Louisiana Horticulture Commission. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-35) 
State Law reference- Horticulture Commission, R.S. 37:1961. 
Sec. 5-165. - Same-Not transferable. 
    It shall be unlawful to transfer any arborist license to any other person or for any arborist to knowingly allow any other person to use said license. 
(Code 1965, § 211/2-36) 
Secs. 5-166-5-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 5-175. - General provisions. 
(a)  All new construction and renovations which require the issuance of a building permit in Residential Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4; Medical Services District M-5; Transitional Business District C-1; Neighborhood Business District C-2; Highway/Commercial District C-3; Light Industrial District I-1; and Heavy Industrial District I-2, shall meet the following landscaping requirements, except Live Oak Protection Requirements which shall be applicable in all districts. 
(b)  A barrier extending at least fifteen (15) feet in all directions from the trunk or from five (5) feet beyond the drip line to the trunk, whichever is lesser, on any tree that is to be preserved under the provisions of this section, and so indicated on approved site plan, shall be erected and maintained prior to and during all construction. 
(c)  The barrier shall be continuous on at least two (2) feet above the ground. No construction material, equipment or soil deposits may be placed or stored within the barrier. 
(d)  All required plantings shall be maintained in a healthy condition and shall be routinely examined during construction. Plant materials indicated on the site plan that die or become diseased during the construction are to be replaced with the same type and size of plant material originally specified on the landscaping plan. 
(e)  Loading docks and refuse areas shall be screened with a six-foot screen of living or non-living landscape material and shall be in the rear corner of the development. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 5-176. - Green spaces and district regulations. 
(a)  An open front yard shall be required and shall be considered green spaces in all districts except C-4, Central Business District, and shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet across the front of the property. The green space may contain signs and driveways, but shall not be hard surfaced or used for parking. 
(b)  Other yard areas not used for buildings, parking and other structures shall be considered green space and shall at a minimum contain grass or some other standard ground cover and shall conform with the landscaping plans and specifications as approved and filed with the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 1443, § 1, 8-14-12) 
Sec. 5-177. - Perimeter landscaping. 
(a)  All healthy trees of twelve (12) inches caliber or more which are in the green space area abutting improved street frontage and designated on the approved landscape plan at the time of the issuance of building permit must be preserved. A permanent ground cover or other landscaping material must extend fifteen (15) feet in all directions from the trunk or five (5) feet beyond the drip line to the trunk, whichever is lesser, to avoid compaction of the soil over the roots. 
(b)  Along the street frontage designated green areas, there should be a minimum of one tree two and one-half (21/2) inch caliber of at least twelve (12) feet in height per twenty-five (25) linear frontage feet. Credit will be given on a one-to-one basis for existing public shade trees preserved and protected which abut street frontage. For existing structures this applies if major renovations accurse [occur] that require a building permit. 
(c)  Acceptable trees should be Swamp Red Maple, Crepe Myrtle, Nutall Oak, Shumard Oak, Live Oak Bald Cypress, or other pre-approved species. 
(d)  Plantings required under this provision must be in place at the time the building is occupied. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 5-178. - Interior landscaping. 
(a)  All space not required for driveways, building, parking and garage storage areas is considered green space and shall be subject to review by the building inspector in concurrence with the City of Crowley Urban Forester or designee, for the consideration of acceptance parking area landscaping practices as adopted by the American Forestry Association (AFA), International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), Association of Independent Architects (AIA) and other professional standards as may be mutually deemed appropriate. 
(b)  Each separate green space designated to be developed as so indicated on the final accepted landscaping plan shall contain twenty-five (25) square feet or more, with a minimum width dimension of five (5) feet (except front yards) and shall have one two- and one-half-inch caliper tree at least twelve (12) feet in height. 
(c)  Existing trees designated to be preserved in parking areas shall have a permanent ground cover or other landscaping material which must extend fifteen (15) feet in all directions from the trunk or five (5) feet beyond the drip line of the trunk to avoid compaction of soil over the root system. 
(d)  At-grade, non-single family parking lots shall provide minimum ten-foot wide landscape islands at the end(s) of each parking bay and a minimum ten-foot wide landscape island every sixth parking space. Such landscape islands shall include at least one minimum two-inch caliper shade tree from the recommended list of small trees or be approved by the city inspector. Landscape in these islands should preserve and maintain adequate sight lines from the minor lane to the major lane. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 1443, § 2, 8-14-12) 
Sec. 5-179. - Live oak protection requirements. 
    All live oaks seven (7) inches caliper or more within the city limits of the City of Crowley, shall be protected as follows: 
(a)  A tree removal permit shall be obtained. 
(b)  The application for the permit must state in writing that such activity will enhance the health, safety and welfare of the public, or otherwise benefit the public interest, and the applicant must offer evidence to that effect. The building inspector in concurrence with the City of Crowley Urban Forester, or designee, is empowered to issue or deny the permit, within thirty (30) days, based on application and evidence. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cause permanent harm to live oaks covered by this provision. 
(d)  Work may be performed by utility companies within the provisions of Article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 10-12-99) 
Sec. 5-180. - Landscaping plans required (building permits), enforcement. 
(a)  Prior to the cutting, clearing and removal of any trees or plant matter, construction, improvement or development of any property which requires the issuance of a building permit, a landscape plan shall be submitted with the application for a building permit, locating all existing significant shade trees, live oaks and shrubbery clearly noted and plotted on the site plan, together with any plantings, green areas and protection areas required by these regulations. The plot plan shall be drawn to scale. The plot plan shall indicate which trees and shrubs are to be removed and if planting is required, the plan shall show those plantings required by these regulations. 
(b)  A landscape plan shall be submitted with the plot plan designated by name and location, describing the trees, shrubs and plant materials to be removed and/or installed, or if existing, to be used in accordance with the requirements herein. 
(c)  Every effort should be made to preserve as many existing trees as possible and to replace as many trees as possible in the landscaping plan, using acceptable landscaping factors as required herein. 
(d)  Landscaping work shall be completed as part of the total construction package and shall be in place upon final inspection of the building, parking and utilities. 
(e)  An approved list of review landscape contractors, arborists, foresters or others qualified to review landscape plans, shall be designated by the building inspector on a rotating basis to review landscaping plans. A review fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the reviewing landscape official in addition to the building permit fee. 
(f)  No work shall commence on any property until landscape plans have been approved and a building permit issued on any unapproved property or unpermitted project. No further work shall proceed until landscape plans have been approved and permit issued. 
(g)  The approved landscape plan shall constitute an agreement between the City of Crowley and the owner/developer and shall become the legal instrument for enforcing the site and landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 10-12-99) 
Chapter 5.5 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 5.5-1. - Dedication of land. 
    There is hereby dedicated for the exclusive use as a cemetery the following described property, to-wit: 
    That certain tract of land situated in Section 4, Township 10 South, Range 1 East, City of Crowley, Acadia Parish, Louisiana, being more fully described as follows: 
Commencing at a point which is the intersection of the centerline of Ash Street right-of-way (60' right-of-way) and a survey base line which is parallel to the centerline of Avenue D (60' right-of-way) being 2.94 feet to the West (P.O.C.); thence proceed North 89° 52' 00? West a distance of 333.94 feet to a point on the Westerly right-of-way of Avenue C (80' right-of-way); thence proceed along said right-of-way line South 01° 41' 06? East, a distance of 19.47 feet to the point of beginning (P.O.B.). 
Thence South 01° 41' 06? East, a distance of 234.49 feet; 
North 80° 58' 37? West, a distance of 490.05 feet; 
North 00° 11' 12? East, a distance of 127.38 feet; 
North 87° 50' 59? East, a distance of 41.39 feet; 
South 03° 38' 26? East, a distance of 30.01 feet; 
North 87° 50' 59? East, a distance of 10.00 feet; 
South 03° 38' 26? East, a distance of 25.01 feet; 
North 87° 50' 59? East, a distance of 10.00 feet; 
South 03° 38' 26? East, a distance of 5.00 feet; 
North 87° 50' 59? East, a distance of 20.01 feet; 
South 03° 38' 26? East, a distance of 23.66 feet; 
South 80° 58' 37? East, a distance of 68.75 feet; 
North 02° 06' 35? West, a distance of 66.75 feet; 
North 87° 53' 25? East, a distance of 10.00 feet; 
North 02° 06' 35? West, a distance of 25.00 feet; 
North 87° 53' 25? East, a distance of 39.83 feet; 
North 00° 15' 50? East, a distance of 15.00 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 20.00 feet; 
South 00° 15' 50? West, a distance of 30.00 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 31.45 feet; 
South 00° 15' 50? West, a distance of 30.00 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 12.15 feet; 
South 00° 15' 50? West, a distance of 10.00 feet; 
North 89° 44' 10? West, a distance of 8.26 feet; 
South 01° 53' 38? East, a distance of 54.70 feet; 
South 80° 58' 37? East, a distance of 63.03 feet; 
North 00° 26' 08? East, a distance of 93.41 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 10.00 feet; 
North 00° 26' 08? East, a distance of 10.00 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 12.94 feet; 
North 00° 26' 08? East, a distance of 25.00 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 106.86 feet; 
North 00° 26' 08? East, a distance of 20.00 feet; 
South 89° 44' 10? East, a distance of 25.62 feet; 
to the Point of Beginning (P.O.B.), containing 1.51 acres, as per final plat of the South Crowley Cemetery Development by Charles T. Mader, Registered Land Surveyor, dated January 14, 1997, a copy of which is attached hereto and made part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1191, § 1, 1-14-97) 
Sec. 5.5-2. - Division of property. 
    The above described property is hereby subdivided in sections, blocks and plots in accordance with that certain plat of survey of Charles T. Mader dated the fourteenth day of January, 1997, which is attached hereto and made part hereof by reference as Exhibit "A" as if more fully included herein. 
(Ord. No. 1191, § 2, 1-14-97) 
Sec. 5.5-3. - Sale of lots. 
(a)  Authorization and cost. The sale of lots is hereby authorized, which sale shall be executed by the mayor and/or city clerk upon payment of the price and sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per lot, which sum shall be paid cash at the time of the purchase. 
(b)  Procedure for purchase of lots. Sales of lots shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  Lots shall be sold in sequential order beginning from the westernmost plot available in the portion of the cemetery beginning with Block No. 1, Lot No. 1, and shall continue in sequential order. 
(2)  In the event that any lot shown on the plat is found to be occupied by a previous burial or otherwise, any such lot or part of lots so occupied shall be removed from sale availability until such time as appropriate reburial arrangements may be made and/or relocation to a position in a surveyed lot site can be arranged. 
(3)  The Acadia Parish Coroner shall have first preference for the burial of those persons designated pauper in accordance with law and after due certification to the mayor or to the clerk of the city of such status. 
(4)  Upon presentation of appropriate certification the Acadia Parish Coroner shall be furnished with a plot for burial of said pauper at no charge. 
(5)  The city clerk shall issue a sale and burial permit upon the purchase of a plot or the appropriate request by the coroner, which permit shall be furnished as evidence to the funeral director for person for authorization for burial in the appropriate plot. 
(6)  All interments or burials shall be made in conformity with the following rules and regulations, which are hereby established for the cemetery: 
a.  No stacking of tombs aboveground will be permitted; 
b.  All burials shall be in a concrete vault placed below ground, which vault may extend no more than 12 inches above current ground level or shall be covered with an adequate amount of sod to allow grass to grow over; 
c.  Stacking of burials shall be permitted below ground with an appropriate concrete crypt or vault or natural stone vault placed below ground; 
d.  The tops of vaults shall be topped with concrete or stone which shall be sealed. 
(7)  Pauper burials: 
a.  All pauper burials shall be made in conformity with the above rules with the exception that the coroner shall requisition a lot for burial of a pauper after having certified to the mayor and/or clerk that he has made the appropriate investigation and certified the need for a burial space under law; 
b.  Upon said certification a burial permit shall issue to be signed by the mayor or clerk of the city authorizing burial in a designated lot, which shall be recorded in the permanent records for the sale of lots; 
c.  Interments shall be made in a concrete or stone vault in conformity with other rules and regulations. 
(8)  The city clerk shall maintain permanent records of all sales of lots, which sale shall record and memorialize permanently the following information: 
a.  The date of the sale. 
b.  The name of the person purchasing the lot. 
c.  The name of the person to be buried in the plot. 
d.  The amount of the transfer. 
(9)  A permanent record of original sale documents shall be kept and maintained as a permanent archive of the city. 
(10)  The city clerk shall record on a separate document transfers which requisition for paupers by the Acadia Parish Coroner. 
(11)  The city clerk shall maintain a permanent record of all permits which shall show the following information: 
a.  The name of the funeral director and funeral home in charge of the services. 
b.  The date of the burial of the person or persons buried therein. 
c.  Whether said burial is a stacked burial. 
(Ord. No. 1191, § 3, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 8-8-2000) 
Sec. 5.5-4. - Recovery of initial costs to establish cemetery. 
    All funds derived from the sale of lots shall be applied to recover all expenses and costs incurred in the establishment of the cemetery and shall be paid to the general fund until such time as all costs are recovered which have been expended by the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1191, § 4, 1-14-97) 
Sec. 5.5-5. - Fund for maintenance and care. 
    The city clerk shall establish and maintain a separate dedicated fund which shall show the cost of the operation and maintenance of the cemetery and all funds derived from the sale of lots after recovery of all costs and expenses of the initial set-up shall be dedicated to the expense of maintenance and care of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1191, § 5, 1-14-97) 
Chapter 6 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-1. - Local organization created. 
    There is hereby created a local organization for civil defense and for disaster emergencies pursuant to the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes, sections 29:608 and 29:709, as amended. 
(Code 1965, § 7-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Director-Appointment; general duties. 
(a)  The local organization for civil defense and disaster emergencies shall have a director who shall be appointed by the governor on the recommendation of the mayor and who shall have direct responsibility for the organization for civil defense and disaster emergencies, subject to the direction and control of the local governing body under the general direction and control of the governor. 
(b)  The director shall execute and enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the governor. 
(Code 1965, § 7-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same-Preparing plan, recruiting and training personnel. 
    The director is authorized and directed to prepare a detailed plan for civil defense and disaster emergency operations in this city, and to recruit and train personnel in accordance with the plan to the end that when disaster strikes, each member of this local organization will know such member's part and duty. 
(Code 1965, § 7-4) 
Sec. 6-4. - Same-Cooperation by other municipal departments. 
    The director is hereby authorized to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of this city to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies are directed to cooperate and extend such services and facilities to the mayor and the director upon request. 
(Code 1965, § 7-5) 
Sec. 6-5. - Accepting state or federal aid. 
    When the federal or state government or any agency or officer thereof shall offer this city service, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for purposes of civil defense or disaster emergencies, the director on behalf of the governor, with the consent of the governing body, may accept such offer and is authorized to receive such aid and assistance. 
(Code 1965, § 7-3) 
Chapter 7 - CRIMINAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to punish by fine up to $500.00 and imprisonment up to 60 days, R.S. 33:401(A)(32). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - "Principals" defined. 
    All persons concerned in the commission of a violation of an ordinance, whether present or absent, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, aid and abet in its commission, or directly or indirectly counsel or procure another to commit the violation, are principals. 
(Code 1965, § 8-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:24. 
Sec. 7-2. - Accessories after the fact. 
(a)  An accessory after the fact is any person who, after the commission of a violation of an ordinance, shall harbor, conceal or aid the offender, knowing or having reasonable ground to believe that the offender has committed a violation of an ordinance, and with the intent that the offender may avoid or escape arrest, trial, conviction or punishment. 
(b)  An accessory after the fact may be tried and punished notwithstanding the fact that the principal may not have been arrested, tried or convicted or may not be amenable to justice. 
(c)  An accessory after the fact shall be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, not exceeding one-half the maximum provided for a principal offender. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:25. 
Sec. 7-3. - Attempts. 
(a)  Any person who, having a specific intent to violate an ordinance, does or fails to do an act for the purpose of and tending directly toward the accomplishing of such person's object is guilty of an attempt to commit the violation intended; and it shall be immaterial whether, under the circumstances, such person would have actually accomplished the purpose. 
(b)  Mere preparation to commit a violation shall not be sufficient to constitute an attempt; but lying in wait with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a violation, or searching for the intended victim with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a violation, shall be sufficient to constitute an attempt to commit the offense intended. 
(c)  An attempt is a separate but lesser grade of the intended violation; and any person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a violation, although it appears on the trial that the violation intended or attempted was actually perpetrated by such person in pursuance of such attempt. 
(d)  Whoever attempts to commit any violation shall be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, not exceeding one-half of the maximum provided for the violation attempted. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:27. 
Sec. 7-4. - Justification. 
    The fact that an offender's conduct is justifiable, although otherwise criminal, shall constitute a defense to prosecution for any offense based on that conduct. This defense of justification can be claimed under any of the circumstances set out in Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 14:18, as amended, and the statutory provisions therein referred to. 
(Code 1965, § 8-4) 
Secs. 7-5-7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC CRIMES 

Sec. 7-20. - Assault-Defined. 
    Assault is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(Code 1965, § 8-16(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:36. 
Sec. 7-21. - Same-Simple. 
(a)  Defined. Simple assault is an assault committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  Prohibited. Whoever commits a simple assault shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-16; Ord. No. 1381, § 2, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:38. 
Sec. 7-22. - Same-Aggravated. 
(a)  Aggravated assault is an assault committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of aggravated assault shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8.50; Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 1381, § 3, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 7-23. - Battery-Defined. 
    Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another; or the intentional administration of a poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
(Code 1965, § 8-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:33. 
Sec. 7-24. - Same-Simple battery. 
(a)  Defined. Simple battery is a batter, without the consent of the victim, committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  Prohibited. Whoever commits a simple battery shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-19; Ord. No. 1381, § 4, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35. 
Sec. 7-25. - Criminal mischief. 
(a)  Defined. Criminal mischief is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Tampering with any property of another, without the consent of the owner, with the intent to interfere with the free enjoyment of any rights of anyone thereto, or with the intent to deprive anyone entitled thereto of the full use of the property; or 
(2)  Giving of any false alarm of fire or notice which would reasonably result in an emergency response; or 
(3)  Giving of any false report or complaint to any officer of the law relative to the commission of, or an attempt to commit, a crime; or 
(4)  Taking temporary possession of any part or parts of a place of business, or remaining in a place of business after the person in charge of such business or portion of such business has ordered such person to leave the premises and to desist from the temporary possession of any part or parts of such business; or 
(5)  Throwing any stone or any other missile in any street, avenue, alley, road or highway, or open space or public square, or enclosure, or throwing any stone or other missile from any place into any street, avenue, road or highway, alley, open space, public square or enclosure; or 
(6)  Driving of any tack, nail, spike or metal over one and one-half (11/2) inch in length into any tree located on lands belonging to another, without the consent of the owner, or without the later removal of the object from the tree; or 
(7)  The communication to any person for the purpose of disrupting any public utility water service, when the communication causes any officer, employee, or agent of the service reasonably to be placed in sustained fear for his or another person's safety, or causes the evacuation of a water service building, or causes any discontinuance of any water services; or 
(8)  The discharging of any firearm within the corporate limits; or 
(9)  Placing graffiti upon immovable or movable property, whether publicly or privately owned, without the consent of the owner, by means of the use of spray paint, ink, marking pens containing a nonwater soluble fluid, brushes, applicators, or other materials for marking, scratching, or etching. "Graffiti" includes but is not limited to any sign, inscription, design, drawing, diagram, etching, sketch, symbol, lettering, name or marking placed upon immovable or movable property in such a manner and in such a location as to deface the property and be visible to the general public. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits criminal mischief shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-20; Ord. No. 1381, § 5, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59. 
Sec. 7-26. - Illegal possession of stolen things. 
(a)  Illegal possession of stolen things is the intentional possession, procuring, receiving or concealing of anything of value which has been the subject of any robbery or theft, under circumstances which indicated that the offender knew or had good reason to believe that the thing was a subject of one of these offenses. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of illegal possession of stolen things and the value of the stolen thing is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section committed by means of possessing that the accused within seventy-two (72) hours of such accused person's acquiring knowledge or good reason to believe that the thing was a subject of robbery or theft reports that fact or belief in writing to the city prosecutor or the district attorney in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 8-51; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 1381, § 6, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:69. 
Sec. 7-27. - Theft. 
(a)  Theft is the misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another, either without the consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations. Intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be the subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
(b)  Whoever commits theft and the misappropriation or taking is valued at less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-52; Ord. No. 1097, § 3, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 1381, § 7, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67. 
Sec. 7-28. - Issuing worthless checks. 
(a)  (1)  Issuing worthless checks is the issuing and exchange for anything of value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with the intent to defraud of any check, draft or order for the payment of money upon any bank or other depository knowing at the time of the issuing that the offender has not sufficient credit with the bank or the depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation. This provision shall apply to payments on installment contracts or open accounts. 
(2)  The offender's failure to pay a check, draft or order issued for value within ten (10) days after notice of its nonpayment upon presentation has been deposited by certified mail in the United States mail system addressed to the issuer thereof, either at the address shown on the instrument or the last known address for such person shown on the records of the bank upon which such instrument is drawn, or within ten (10) days after delivery or personal tender of written notice to said issuer by the payee or the payee's agent shall, be presumptive evidence of the intent to defraud. 
(b)  Issuing worthless checks is also the issuing and exchange for anything of value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with intent to defraud of any check, draft, or order for the payment of money when the offender knows at the time of the issuing that the account designated on the check, draft or order has been closed or is nonexistent or fictitious or is one in which the offender has no interest or one on which the offender has no authority to issue such check, draft or order. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of issuing worthless checks when the amount of the check is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(d)  In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed under this section the court may at its discretion order as part of the sentence, restitution in the amount of the check, draft or order. 
(Code 1965, § 8-53; Ord. No. 1097, § 4, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 1381, § 8, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:71. 
Sec. 7-29. - Unauthorized use of a movable. 
(a)  Unauthorized use of a movable is the intentional taking or use of a movable which belongs to another either without the other's consent or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations, but without any intention to deprive the other of the movable permanently. The fact that the movable so taken or used may be classified as an immovable according to the law pertaining to civil matters is immaterial. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unauthorized use of a movable having a value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-54; Ord. No. 1097, § 5, 4-9-85; Ord. No. 1381, § 9, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68. 
Sec. 7-30. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Established. It shall be unlawful for any unemancipated minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to travel, loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon or traverse any public street, highway, road, alley, park, place of amusement and entertainment, building, vacant lot or other unsupervised place in the city as follows: 
(1)  Between 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday night and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, or 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday night and 5:00 a.m. of the following day during the months of September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, and May; 
(2)  Between 10:30 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday night and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, or 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday night and 5:00 a.m. of the following day during the months of June, July, and August; 
(3)  Between 8:45 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. weekdays during the school term, for anyone under the age of sixteen (16) years and over the age of seven (7) years; 
All official time of the city unless the minor is accompanied by such minor's parent, tutor, or other responsible adult or unless the minor is upon an emergency errand or has in such minor's possession the written permission of such minor's parent, tutor, or other adult having custody of such minor, to be upon or in such place between such hours of such date or during any school sponsored event; giving sufficient time for such minor to return safely home from such event. It is also established that during the International Rice Festival the curfew shall be: Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on Thursday night and 5:00 a.m. of the following day and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Juvenile court jurisdiction. Any minor violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a neglected child, as such term is defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes, Sections 13:1569 and 13:1570, as amended, and such minor and such minor's parent, tutor or other adult having the care and custody of such minor shall be dealt with under proper procedure in any juvenile court having jurisdiction of such child. 
(Code 1965, § 8-20.1; Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 10-10-95) 
Sec. 7-31. - Disorderly place-Keeping. 
(a)  Defined. Keeping a disorderly place is the intentional maintaining of a place to be used habitually for any illegal purpose. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits keeping a disorderly place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-21; Ord. No. 1381, § 10, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:104. 
Sec. 7-32. - Same-Letting. 
(a)  Defined. Letting a disorderly place is the granting of the right to use any premises knowing that it is to be used as a disorderly place, or allowing the continued use of the premise with such knowledge. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits letting a disorderly place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-22; Ord. No. 1381, § 11, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:105. 
Sec. 7-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 12 of Ord. No. 1381, adopted March 11, 2008, repealed § 7-33, which pertained to the maintenance of disorderly places and derived from § 8-23 of the 1965 Code. 
Sec. 7-34. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  "Disturbing the peace" is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public: 
(1)  Engaging in a fistic encounter or fight; or 
(2)  Addressing any offensive, derisive or annoying words to any other person who is lawfully in any street, or other public place; or calling any other person therein by any offensive or derisive name; or making any noise or exclamation in such person's presence and hearing with the intent to deride, offend or annoy such person; or preventing such person from pursuing such person's lawful business, occupation or duty; or 
(3)  Addressing any offensive, derisive or annoying word to any other person or calling any other person any offensive or derisive name, which words or names would have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person to whom the remark is addressed; or 
(4)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; or 
(5)  Engaging in any act in a violent and tumultuous manner by any three (3) or more persons; or 
(6)  Holding of an unlawful assembly; or 
(7)  Interruption of any lawful assembly of people. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of disturbing the peace or disorderly conduct shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-24(A)(D); Ord. No. 1183, § 1, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 1381, § 13, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:103.1. 
Sec. 7-35. - Fortunetelling, palmistry, conducting seances, phrenology. 
(a)  Defined. "Fortunetelling" is the practice of foretelling or purporting to foretell future events in a person's life or engaging in the practice of foretelling events and the prophecy of the future; "palmistry" is the practice of reading a person's character or future by the marks or markings in the palm of a person's palm; "conducting seances" is conducting meetings for the purpose of receiving spirit communications or purported spirit communications; and "phrenology" is the study of the conformation of the skull as indicative or purporting to be indicative of mental faculties. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits fortunetelling, palmistry, conducting seances or phrenology shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-28; Ord. No. 1381, § 14, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 7-36. - Gambling. 
(a)  Defined. "Gambling" is the intentional conducting or directly assisting in the conducting, as a business, of any game, contest, lottery or contrivance whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits gambling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-29; Ord. No. 1381, § 15, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90. 
Sec. 7-37. - Interfering electronic devices, reception or communications. 
(a)  The maintenance or operation of any instrument, mechanism, mechanical device, electronic device, electrical impulse or any other device, instrumentality or apparatus which interferes with, impedes or disrupts proper operation, reception or function of any electrical device including radios, televisions, computers, telephones, telephone devices, and facsimile machines within the City of Crowley is hereby declared to be a nuisance and as such is prohibited; and it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, construct or permit to be operated within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley any such instrument, mechanism, mechanical device, electronic device, electrical impulse or any other device, instrumentality or apparatus. 
(b)  Whoever maintains, operates or permits to be operated any such instrumentality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 8-30; Ord. No. 1183, § 2, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 7-38. - Junk dealers to keep records. 
(a)  All persons engaged in the business of buying and selling scrap iron, brass, old metals, old machinery and other junk shall be required to keep in a well-bound book the names of the persons from whom any articles are purchased, together with a description of the article so purchased. Said book shall be open to inspection at any time by the police officers of the city. 
(b)  Whoever fails to keep such records required herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-31; Ord. No. 1381, § 16, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Regulation of junk and junk dealers, R.S. 51:571-51:579. 
Sec. 7-39. - Obscenity. 
(A)  The crime of obscenity is the intentional: 
(1)  Exposure of the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or female breast nipples in any public place or place open to the public view with the intent of arousing sexual desire or which appeals to prurient interest or is patently offensive. 
(2)  (a)  Participation or engagement in, or management, operation, production, presentation, performance, promotion, exhibition, advertisement, sponsorship or display of, hard core sexual conduct when the trier of fact determines that the average person applying contemporary community standards would find that the conduct, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and the hard core sexual conduct, as specifically defined herein, is presented in a patently offensive way; and the conduct taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(b)  Hard core sexual conduct is the public portrayal, for its own sake, and for ensuing commercial gain of: 
(i)  Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual, simulated or animated, whether between human beings, animals or an animal and a human being; or 
(ii)  Masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition, actual, simulated, or animated, of the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva or female breast nipples; or 
(iii)  Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning actual, simulated or animated, flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a costume that reveals the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or female breast nipples or in the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained, on the part of one so clothed; or 
(iv)  Actual, simulated or animated touching, caressing or fondling of, or other similar physical contact with a pubic area, anus, female breast nipple, covered or exposed, whether alone or between humans, animals or a human and an animal, of the same or opposite sex, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or 
(v)  Actual, simulated or animated stimulation of a human genital organ by any device whether or not the device is designed, manufactured or marketed for such purpose. 
(3)  Sale, allocation, consignment, distribution, dissemination, advertisement, exhibition or display of obscene material, or the preparation, manufacture, publication or printing of obscene material for sale, allocation, consignment, distribution, advertisement, exhibition or display. 
Obscene material is any tangible work or thing which the trier of fact determines: (a) that the average person applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, and (b) depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, hard core sexual conduct specifically defined in paragraph (2) above, and (c) the work or thing taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(4)  Requiring as a condition to a sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication to a purchaser or consignee that such purchaser or consignee also receive or accept any obscene material, as defined in paragraph (3) above, for resale, distribution, display, advertisement or exhibition purposes; or, denying or threatening to deny a franchise to, or imposing a penalty on or against a person by reason of his refusal to accept, or his return of, such obscene material. 
(5)  Solicitation or enticement of an unmarried person under the age of seventeen (17) years to commit any act prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(6)  Advertisement, exhibition or display of sexually violent material. "Violent material" is any tangible work or thing which the trier of facts determines depicts actual or simulated patently offensive acts of violence, including but not limited to, acts depicting sadistic conduct, whippings, beatings, torture and mutilation of the human body, as described in subparagraph (b) of paragraph (2) of subsection (A) herein. 
(B)  Lack of knowledge of age or marital status shall not constitute a defense. 
(C)  If any employee of a theater or bookstore acting in the course or scope of such employee's employment is arrested for an offense designated in this section, the employer shall reimburse the employee for all attorney's fees and other costs of defense of such employee. Such fees and expenses may be fixed by the court exercising criminal jurisdiction after contradictory hearing or by ordinary civil process. 
(D)  (1)  The provisions of this section do not apply to recognized and established schools, churches, museums, medical clinics, hospitals, physicians, public libraries, governmental agencies, quasi-governmental sponsored organizations and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such organizations, or a person solely employed to operate a movie projector in a duly licensed theater. 
(2)  For the purpose of this paragraph, the following words and terms shall have the respective meanings defined as follows: 
(a)  "Recognized and established schools" means schools having a full time faculty and pupils, gathered together for instruction in a diversified curriculum; 
(b)  "Churches" means any church affiliated with a national or regional denomination; 
(c)  "Physicians" means any licensed physician or psychiatrist; 
(d)  "Medical clinics and hospitals" means any clinic or hospital of licensed physicians or psychiatrists used for the reception and care of the sick, wounded or infirm. 
(E)  (1)  Except for those motion pictures, printed materials and photographic materials showing actual ultimate sexual acts or simulated or animated ultimate sexual acts when there is an explicit, closeup depiction of human genital organs so as to give the appearance of the consummation of ultimate sexual acts, no person shall be arrested, charged or indicted for any violation of a provision of this section until such time as the material involved has first been the subject of an adversary hearing under the provisions of this section, wherein such person is made a defendant and, after such material is declared by the court to be obscene, such person continues to engage in the conduct prohibited by this section. The sole issue at the hearing shall be whether the material is obscene. 
(2)  The hearing shall be held before the district court having jurisdiction over the proceedings within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of notice by the person. The person shall be given notice of the hearing by registered mail or by personal service on the owner, manager or other person having a financial interest in the material; provided, if there is no such person on the premises, then notice may be given by personal service on any employee of the person on such premises. The notice shall state the nature of the violation, the date, place and time of the hearing, and the right to present and cross examine witnesses. 
(3)  The state or any defendant may appeal from a judgment. Such appeal shall not stay the judgment. Any defendant engaging in conduct prohibited by this section subsequent to notice of the judgment, finding the material to be obscene, shall be subject to criminal prosecution notwithstanding the appeal from the judgment. 
(4)  Evidence of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall not be competent or admissible in any criminal action for the violation of any other section of this chapter; provided, however, that in any criminal action, charging the violation of any other section of this chapter against any person who was a defendant in such hearing, involving the same material declared to be obscene under the provisions of this section, then evidence of such hearing shall be competent and admissible as bearing on the issue of scienter only. 
(F)  Whoever commits the crime of obscenity shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(G)  (1)  When a corporation is charged with violating this section, the corporation, the president, the vice president, the secretary and the treasurer may all be named as defendants. Upon conviction for a violation of this section, a corporation shall be sentenced in accordance with subsection (F) hereof. All corporate officers who are named as defendants shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this section as set forth in subsection (F). 
(2)  If the corporation is domiciled in this state, upon indictment or information filed against the corporation, a notice of arraignment shall be served upon the corporation, or its designated agent for service of process, which then must appear before the court to plead to the charge within fifteen (15) days of service. If no appearance is made within fifteen (15) days, an attorney shall be appointed by the court to represent the defendant corporation with respect to the charge or to show cause why the corporation should not be enjoined from continuing in business during the pendency of the criminal proceedings. Appearance for arraignment may be made through private counsel. 
(3)  If the corporation is domiciled out of state and is registered to do business in the state, notice of arraignment shall be served upon the corporate agent for service of process or the secretary of state, who shall then notify the corporation charged by indictment or information to appear before the court in which the prosecution is pending for arraignment within sixty (60) days after the notice is mailed by the secretary of state. If no appearance is made within sixty (60) days the court shall appoint an attorney to represent the defendant corporation with respect to the charge or to show cause why the corporation should not be enjoined from continuing in business during the pendency of the criminal proceedings. Appearance for arraignment may be made by private counsel. 
(4)  If the corporation is domiciled out of state and is not registered to do business in the state, notice of arraignment of the corporation shall be served upon the secretary of state and an employee, officer or agent for service of process of the corporation found within the city. Such notice shall act as a bar to that corporation registering to do business in the state until it appears before the court in which the prosecution is pending to answer the charge. 
(Code 1965, § 8-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:106. 
Sec. 7-40. - Peeping tom. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall perform such as will make such a "peeping tom" on or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "peeping tom". 
(b)  Defined. "Peeping tom" as used in this section means one who peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, situated on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the "peeping tom" be upon the premises of the person being spied upon. 
(c)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits the above act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-35; Ord. No. 1381, § 17, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:284. 
Sec. 7-41. - Resisting an officer. 
(a)  Defined. "Resisting an officer" is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in such officer's official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property or serving process is acting in such person's official capacity. The phrase "obstruction of" as used herein shall, in addition to its common meaning, signification and connotation, mean: 
(1)  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain such person and after notice is given that such person is under arrest. 
(2)  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested person is actually placed under arrest and before the arrested person is incarcerated in jail. 
(3)  Refusal by the arrested person to give such person's name and make such person's identity known to the arresting officer. 
(4)  Congregation with others on a public street and refusing to move on when ordered by the officer. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits resisting an offer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-39; Ord. No. 1381, § 18, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108. 
Sec. 7-42. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall without authorization intentionally enter any structure, watercraft or movable. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally enter immovable property owned by another: 
(1)  When such person knows such entry is unauthorized, or 
(2)  Under circumstances where such person reasonably should know such entry is unauthorized. 
(c)  The following shall be affirmative defenses to a prosecution pursuant to subsection (b)(2) hereof: 
(1)  That unfenced cultivated property, or unfenced improved pasturelands lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress; that unfenced forest lands owned by a person, consisting of five hundred (500) acres or less, lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress, and a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at intervals of not more than fifty (50) feet on or near the boundary line from which entry was made; 
(2)  That unfenced horticultural property or unimproved pasturelands lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at intervals of not more than six hundred sixty (660) feet on or near the boundary line from which entry was made; 
(3)  That forest lands were not fenced with not less than three (3) strand wire or its equivalent, or that forest lands which were fenced as required above lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress, and in addition, lacked the letters "NO," at least five (5) inches in height, on trees or other markers or a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at intervals of not more than fifty (50) feet on or near the boundary line from which entry was made; 
(4)  That the person was on the property for the purpose of managing such person's livestock or such person's employer's livestock located on the property of another; 
(5)  That the person entered upon the immovable property owned by another due to an emergency; 
(6)  That the entry was consented to by a holder of a possessory interest in the property; 
(7)  That the entry was by a registered land surveyor, and such person's personnel, engaged in the "Practice of Land Surveying," as defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 37:682, as amended, or a person employed by a public utility acting in the course and scope of his employment relating to operation, repair or maintenance of a public utility facility who entered upon unfenced immovable property which lacked a posted sign or sign or similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress; and 
(8)  That the person was unarmed and entered immovable property for the sole purpose of retrieving a dog. 
(d)  Whoever commits the crime of criminal trespass shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.3. 
Sec. 7-43. - Weapons-Illegal carrying. 
(a)  Defined. "Illegal carrying of weapons" is: 
(1)  The intentional concealment of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, on one's person; or 
(2)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any firearm, to other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, at any time by an enemy alien; or 
(3)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any tools, or dynamite or nitroglycerin, or explosives, or other instrumentality customarily used by thieves or burglars at any time by any person with the intent to commit a crime; or 
(4)  The manufacture, ownership, possession, custody or use of any switchblade knife, spring knife or other knife or similar instrument having a blade which may be automatically unfolded or extended from a handle by the manipulation of a button, switch, latch or similar contrivance. 
(b)  Penalty. Whoever commits illegal carrying of weapons shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(c)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section, except paragraph (2) of subsection (a), shall not apply to sheriffs and their deputies, state and city police, constables and marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Code 1965, § 8-44; Ord. No. 1381, § 19, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95. 
Sec. 7-44. - Same-Illegal use generally. 
(a)  Defined. "Illegal use of weapons or dangerous instrumentalities" is the intentional or the criminally negligent discharge of any firearm or air gun, or the throwing, placing or other use of any article, liquid or substance where it is foreseeable that it may result in death or great bodily harm to a human being, unless such discharge is reasonably required for the protection of life or property. 
(b)  Penalty. Whoever commits illegal use of weapons shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-44; Ord. No. 1381, § 20, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Illegal use of weapons and dangerous instrumentalities, R.S. 14:94. 
Sec. 7-45. - Same-Possession in a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession a firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon on any premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises; except, the owners or lessees of the premises or their employees, sheriff, deputy sheriffs, state police, city police, constables, city marshals or persons vested with police powers when acting in the discharge of their duties. 
(b)  Whoever commits the above act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-44.1; Ord. No. 1381, § 21, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 7-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1183, § 3, adopted May 14, 1996, repealed § 7-46, pertaining to searcher for weapons in alcoholic beverage establishments, as derived from the Code of 1965, § 8-44.2. 
Sec. 7-47. - Same-Alcoholic beverage premises, extent of. 
    Premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises shall include all of the licensed premises including the parking lot. 
(Code 1965, § 8-44.3) 
Sec. 7-48. - Same-Use of weapon seized in alcoholic beverage establishment as evidence in court. 
    Any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon found on any person while on the premises of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed may be used as evidence in court. 
(Code 1965, § 8-44.4) 
Sec. 7-49. - Same-Disposition of weapons seized in alcoholic beverage establishment. 
    Any firearms or other dangerous instrumentalities seized under the provision of sections 7-45 through 7-48 shall be held by the police until the disposition of the charges against the defendant. In the event of a conviction, the weapon shall be destroyed unless otherwise ordered by the judge, who shall have authority to order the weapon either destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Code 1965, § 8-44.5) 
Sec. 7-50. - Barbed wire. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place, erect or maintain any barbed wire on any street or public way in the city or on the property line between private property, except that owned by a public utility and used for public utility purposes, and on any street or public way, in any district of the city zoned for residential use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place, erect or maintain any barbed wire on the property line between private property and any street, public way, public park or public recreation area at a height of less than six (6) feet above ground level in any district zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to place, erect or maintain any barbed wire on the property line between public property and property in a residential district owned by a public utility and used for public utility purposes and any street, public way, public park or public recreation area at a height of less than six (6) feet above ground level. 
(d)  The provisions hereof shall not be applicable to property and for farming or pasturage. 
(e)  Whoever shall commit the above act(s) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-17; Ord. No. 1381, § 22, 3-11-08) 
State Law reference- Parental responsibility, Civil Code, § 2318. 
Sec. 7-51. - Parental neglect-Prohibition; definitions. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise reasonable parental control of such minor, which failure results in the minor committing any criminal act or to allow or encourage any such minor to commit any criminal act or become delinquent under and in accordance with the laws of the state as they pertain to juveniles. 
(b)  Parent defined. "Parent" means mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or such other adult with whom a minor may be found residing. 
(c)  Minor defined. "Minor" means any juvenile under the age of seventeen (17) residing with the parent as defined in this section. 
(d)  Criminal acts defined. Criminal acts are those acts which violate the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city, and shall include moving traffic violations. 
(e)  Habitual offender defined. Habitual offender means one who commits criminal acts in any one of the following combinations within a twelve-month period: 
(1)  Two (2) or more criminal acts other than moving traffic violations; or 
(2)  One criminal act other than moving traffic violations and two (2) moving traffic violations; or 
(3)  Four (4) moving traffic violations. 
(Code 1965, § 8-46) 
Sec. 7-52. - Same-Notification and responsibility. 
(a)  Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of any criminal act within the city, the parent of such minor shall be immediately notified by the police department advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor and the parent's responsibility under sections 7-51 through 7-53. 
(b)  A record of such notifications shall be kept by the police department of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 8-47) 
Sec. 7-53. - Same-Penalty. 
    The parent of a juvenile delinquent or a habitual offender shall be deemed guilty of parental neglect and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-8. 
(Code 1965, § 8-48) 
Sec. 7-54. - Parks, playgrounds, recreation areas; prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to commit any of the following acts and/or offenses in any public park, playground, recreation center, recreation building or outdoor recreation area of the city: 
(1)  Bring into, possess or consume any malt, vinous or alcoholic beverage on any of the above areas or facilities; except that, in those facilities or areas under a rental contract agreement with the recreation department, upon approval of the recreation director, such beverages may be possessed and consumed in the facility or area subject to such rental agreement, under the terms and conditions and for the specified time of such rental agreement. 
(2)  Sale of alcoholic beverages, except where a special permit has been obtained for a special event and approved by the mayor and board of aldermen and chief of police and shall be served for consumption on the immediate premises of the concession only. 
(3)  Sleep, loiter or lounge on park benches, seats, swings, other areas, doorways, aisles, streets, alleys or walkways. 
(4)  Bring into, possess or use in any such facility or area any rake combs, knives, firearms, air guns, spring guns, bows, arrows, slings, pointed or edged instruments, clubs or any other forms of weapons customarily used and intended for probable use or readily capable of use as a dangerous weapon. 
(5)  Enter or remain in any such facility or area, other than the designated swimming pool area, attired in bathing or swimming suits. 
(6)  Solicit for contributions for any purpose except for recreation department-sanctioned activities. 
(7)  Bring into, possess or use glass containers for any purpose in any park, playground, swimming pool or recreation area. 
(8)  Build or attempt to build any fire, except in designated picnic areas with specified pits or cooking areas. 
(9)  Park a vehicle other than in an established or designated parking area, stop or park in any roadway, except when [following] posted directions and instructions of attendants. 
(10)  Dump, deposit or leave any paper, boxes, cans, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash anywhere on the grounds, but in a proper receptacle where provided and where a receptacle is not provided, all such rubbish, trash and waste shall be carried away from the park area by the persons responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(11)  Enter or remain in any public park, playground, outdoor area or any recreational facility after 8:00 p.m. or sundown, or in any area designated and posted as closed at any time, except as follows: 
a.  Sanctioned recreation department activities; 
b.  Facilities under written rental contract; 
c.  Lighted tennis courts until 10:00 pm. 
(12)  Violate any posted rule or regulation limiting the use of any designated area for a particular purpose or use as posted in areas designated for certain activities, including but not limited to baseball, basketball, football, bicycling, jogging, walking or other activities which listing herein shall be merely illustrative. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 8-49; Ord. No. 1106, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 1186, § 1, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 1381, § 23, 3-11-08) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverage consumption permits prohibited near playgrounds, § 3-2; vehicles and animals prohibited in parks, § 14-3(a)(2). 
Sec. 7-55. - Urinating in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate on the streets, in gutters, on sidewalks, or in alleys, driveways, or other places near the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other places of public resort. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of urinating in public places shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 1381, § 24, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 7-56. - Noises interfering with the enjoyment of property or public peace prohibited. 
    No person or persons shall make or cause to be made any loud or raucous noise in the city offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities and which renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 1197, § 1, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 1211, § 1, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1254, § 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 1288, § 1, 6-8-04) 
Sec. 7-56.1. - Loud, unnecessary and unusual noises defined and prohibited. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to create loud and raucous noises and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The use of any abusive, indecent, profane or vulgar language in a public place, when the language by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of peace; 
(2)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, tape, compact disc, musical instrument or any other machine or device capable of producing or reproducing sound from a stationary location in such a manner or with such volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling, apartment, hotel, or other type of residence, or in any public place; 
(3)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, tape, compact disc, musical instrument or any other machine or device capable of producing or reproducing sound from a vehicle in such a manner or with such volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or response of persons in any dwelling, apartment, hotel, or other type of residence; of persons in any other vehicle or of persons in any public place; 
(4)  The sounding of any form or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal as required by state law; 
(5)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded, which emits or creates loud grating, grinding, or rattling noise; 
(6)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger; 
(7)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud noises; 
(8)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler, or other device, which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud and raucous noises; 
(9)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in or adjacent to a residential area other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sunset on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, for which permission must be obtained from the director of public works; 
(10)  The creation of loud and raucous noise on any street adjacent to any school or court which is in session or adjacent to any hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are located in such streets indicting that schools, hospitals, and courts are adjacent thereto; or 
(11)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of residentially zoned areas. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 2, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 7-56.2. - Regulation of the use of bells, sirens, compression and exhaust whistles on vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall be equipped with and no person shall use upon a vehicle any bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle, except those vehicles operated in the performance of duty by law enforcement officers, fire department personnel, emergency medical services personnel, and ambulances. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 3, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 7-56.3. - Regulation of the use of loud speakers and amplifiers. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated any mechanical loud speaker or sound amplifier in a public place or upon any public sidewalk, street, alley, or highway of the city in violation of any of the following limitations and requirements: 
(1)  No mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier may be operated within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line of the premises of a residence, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset, as designated by publication in a local newspaper of general circulation. 
(2)  A mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier may not emit unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring or disturbing noises so as to interfere with the enjoyment of life or property or to interfere with public peace and comfort. 
(3)  A mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier may not be operated within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any: 
a.  Hospital; 
b.  School that is in session; 
c.  Nursing home; or 
d.  Facility that provides surgical services to patients who do not require overnight hospital care during the hours of operation of the facility. 
(b)  In this section: 
(1)  Residence means a single-family, duplex or multifamily dwelling; 
(2)  Surgical services means therapy of a mechanical or operative kind, including, but not limited to, operations involving cutting, the setting of fractures and dislocations and similar manual forms of treatment. 
(c)  If conduct that would otherwise violate this section consists of speech or other communication, of gathering with others to hear or observe such speech or communication, or of gathering with others to picket or otherwise express in a nonviolent manner a position on social, economic, political, or religious questions, the person must be ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation prior to arrest or citation. 
(d)  The order required by subsection (c) may be given by a peace officer, a fireman, a person with authority to control the use of the premises, or any person directly affected by the violation. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under subjection (a) that: 
(1)  In circumstances in which this section requires an order, no order was given; 
(2)  An order, if given, was manifestly unreasonable in scope; 
(3)  An order, if given, was promptly obeyed; 
(4)  The mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was operated in a public place within an enclosed structure and was not audible beyond the property line of the premises on which it was located; 
(5)  The person operating the mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was a law enforcement officer or member of the fire department in the performance of official duties; 
(6)  The mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was operated for the purpose of altering persons to the existence of an emergency or danger; or 
(7)  The mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was operated in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore public utilities, to restore property to a safe condition or to protect persons or property from imminent danger, following a fire, accident or natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 4, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 7-56.4. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or not more than thirty (30) days in jail, or both, at the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 5, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 7-57. - Exposure of underwear and/or undergarments. 
(a)  Prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any person to wear outer clothing or garments, including but not limited to trousers, pants, shorts and/or other outer garments designed to be worn at or below the waist of the body and in such a manner as to expose a person's underwear or undergarments in a public place or in public view. 
(b)  Definitions . 
(1)  Public place or in public view. Any place, parcel, site, lot, tract, servitude, right-of-way or property, whether publicly or privately owned, which is accessible and open to the public at any time for any purpose whatsoever and shall include any part of private property or private residences which may be openly viewed from other property and there is no reasonable expectation of privacy. This definition shall not include areas of private property such as courtyards, patios or other outdoor areas enclosed by solid walls, fences and gates, interior rooms or areas which windows or openings are covered with opaque material covering the opening providing a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(2)  Underclothing, underwear, undergarments. Underclothing, underwear and undergarments shall include all types of clothing or garments which are designed and intended to be worn by a person or placed on the body at or below the waist and covered by outer clothing or an outer layer of garments. 
(c)  Penalties . Any person in violation of this section shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or a prison term of not less than sixty (60) days or both. The same person convicted of a second offense shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a prison term of not less than fifteen (15) days and up to sixty (60) days, or both. Upon conviction of a third and subsequent violation, a person shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or a prison term of not less than thirty (30) days but not more than sixty (60) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 1456, § 1, 8-13-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1456, § 1, adopted Aug. 13, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as § 7-58. To avoid duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 7-57. 
Sec. 7-58. - Cruelty to animals-Definitions. 
    The following words, phrases, and terms as used in sections 7-59 through 7-62 shall be defined and construed as follows: 
    Abandons means to completely forsake and desert an animal previously under the custody or possession of a person without making reasonable arrangements for its proper care, sustenance and shelter. 
    Cruel means every act or failure to act whereby unjustifiable physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted. 
    Livestock means cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, mules, burros, asses, other livestock of all ages, farm-raised cervidae species and farm-raised ratite species. 
    Proper food means providing each animal with daily food of sufficient quality and quantity to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper shelter means providing each animal with adequate shelter from the elements as required to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper veterinary care means providing each animal with veterinary care sufficient to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering by the animal. 
    Proper water means providing each animal with daily water of sufficient quality and quantity to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Public livestock exhibition means any place, establishment, or facility commonly known as a "livestock market", "livestock auction market", "sales ring", "stockyard", or the like, operated for compensation or profit as a public market for livestock, consisting of pens or other enclosures, and their appurtenances, in which livestock are received, held, sold, or kept for sale or shipment. "Public livestock exhibition" also means any public exhibition or sale of livestock or a livestock show. 
    Tampers means any of the following: 
(a)  The injection, use or administration of any drug or other internal or external administration of any product or material, whether gas, solid or liquid to livestock for the purpose of concealing, enhancing, transforming, or changing the true conformation, configuration, condition, natural color, or age of the livestock or making the livestock appear more sound than they actually are. 
(b)  The use of administration, for cosmetic purposes, of steroids, growth stimulants, or internal artificial filling, including paraffin, silicone injection, or any other substance. 
(c)  The use or administration of any drug or feed additive affecting the central nervous system of the livestock, unless administered or prescribed by a licensed veterinarian for the treatment of an illness or an injury. 
(d)  The use or administration of diuretics for cosmetic purposes. 
(e)  The surgical manipulation or removal of tissue so as to change, transform, or enhance the true conformation, configuration, or natural color of the livestock unless the procedure is considered an accepted livestock management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 7-59. - Same-Simple and aggravated. 
(a)  [Intentional and simple acts of cruelty.] 
(1)  Any person who intentionally or with criminal negligence commits any of the following [acts] shall be guilty of simple cruelty to animals: 
a.  Overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded, or overworks a living animal. 
b.  Torments, cruelly beats, or unjustifiably injures any living animal, whether belonging to himself or another. 
c.  Having charge, custody, or possession of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, unjustifiably fails to provide it with proper food, proper drink, proper shelter, or proper veterinary care. 
d.  Abandons any animal. A person shall not be considered to have abandoned an animal if he delivers to an animal control center an animal which he found running at large. 
e.  Impounds or confines or causes to be impounded or confined in a pound or other place a living animal and fails to supply it during such confinement with proper food, proper drink and proper shelter. 
f.  Carries, or causes to be carried, a living animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise, in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
g.  Unjustifiably administers any poisonous or noxious drug or substance to any domestic animal or unjustifiably exposes any such drug or substance, with intent that the same shall be taken or swallowed by any domestic animal. 
h.  Injures any animal belonging to another person without legal privilege or consent of the owner. 
i.  Mistreats any living animal by any act or omission whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused to or permitted upon the animal. 
j.  Causes or procures to be done by any person any act enumerated in this subsection. 
(2)  [Penalties.] 
a.  Whoever commits the crime of simple cruelty to animals shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
b.  In addition to any other penalty imposed, a person who commits the crime of cruelty to animals shall be ordered to perform five (5), eight-hour days of court-approved community service. The community service requirement shall not be suspended. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the lawful hunting or trapping of wildlife as provided by law, herding of domestic animals, accepted veterinary practices and activities carried on for scientific or medical research governed by accepted standards. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, fowl shall not be defined as animals. Only the following birds shall be identified as animals for purposes of this section: 
(1)  Order Psittaciformes: parakeets, lovebirds, macaws, cockatiels or cockatoos. 
(2)  Order Passeriformes: canaries, starlings, sparrows, flycatchers, mynah or myna. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 7-60. - Seizure and disposition of animals cruelly treated. 
(a)  When a person is charged with cruelty to animals, said person's animal may be seized by the arresting officer and held pursuant to this section. 
(b)  [Procedures for animal seizures.] 
(1)  The seizing officer shall notify the owner of the seized animal of the provisions of this section by posting written notice at the location whether the animal was seized or by leaving it with a person of suitable age and discretion residing at that location within twenty-four (24) hours of the seizure. 
(2)  The seizing officer shall photograph the animal within fifteen (15) days after posting of the notice of seizure and shall cause an affidavit to be prepared in order to document its condition in accordance with R.S. 15:436.2. 
(3)  The seizing officer shall appoint a licensed veterinarian or other suitable custodian to care for any such animal. The custodian shall retain custody of the animal in accordance with this section. 
(4)  The seized animal shall be held by the custodian provided for in paragraph (3) for a period of fifteen (15) consecutive days, including weekends and holidays, after such notice of seizure is given. Thereafter, if a person who claims an interest in such animal has not posted bond in accordance with subsection (c), the animal may be humanely disposed of by sale, adoption or euthanasia. 
(c)  A person claiming an interest in any animal seized pursuant to this section may prevent the disposition of the animal as provided for in subsection (b) by posting a bond with the court within fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of such seizure in an amount sufficient to secure payment for all reasonable costs incurred in the boarding and treatment for any seized animal for a thirty-day period commencing on the date of initial seizure. Such bond shall not prevent the department, agency, humane society or other custodian of the animal from disposing of the animal in accordance with subsection (b) at the end of the thirty-day period covered by the bond, unless the person claiming an interest posts an additional bond for such reasonable expenses for an additional thirty-day period. In addition, such bond shall not prevent disposition of the animal for humane purposes at any time, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the department, agency, humane society or other custodian of the animal as authorized by the court in accordance with the current rate for board and on the condition of the animal after examination by a licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  Upon the person's conviction of cruelty to animals, it shall be proper for the court, in its discretion, to order the forfeiture and final determination of the custody of any animal found to be cruelly treated in accordance with this section and the forfeiture of the bond posted pursuant to subsection (c) as part of the sentence. The court may, in its discretion, order the payment of any reasonable or additional costs incurred in the boarding or veterinary treatment of any seized animal prior to its disposition, whether or not a bond was posted by the defendant. In the event of the acquittal or final discharge without conviction of the accused, the court shall, on demand, direct the delivery of any animal held in custody to the owner thereof and order the return of any bond posted pursuant to subsection (c), less reasonable administrative costs. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the euthanasia of any seized animal, at any time, whether or not any bond was posted, if a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal is not likely to survive and is suffering, as a result of any physical condition. In such instances, the court, in its discretion, may order the return of any bond posted, less reasonable costs, at the time of the trial. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 7-61. - Search warrant; animal cruelty offenses. 
    If the complaint is made, by affidavit, to any magistrate authorized to issue search warrants in criminal cases, that the complainant has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated in violation of Code of Ordinances section 7-59, in any buildings or place, such magistrate, if satisfied that there is reasonable cause for such belief, shall issue a search warrant to any law enforcement officer authorized by law to make arrests for such offenses, authorizing any such officer to make a search of said building or place, and to arrest any person found violating Code of Ordinances section 7-59. Said warrant may also authorize said officer to seize any animal believed to be cruelly treated and to take custody thereof. This section shall not be construed as a limitation on the power of law enforcement officers to seize animals as evidence at the time of the arrest. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 7-62. - Confined animals; necessary food and water. 
    When a living animal is impounded or confined and continues without necessary food and water for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, any law enforcement officer may, as often as is necessary, enter any place in which the animal is impounded or confined and supply it with necessary food and water so long as it shall remain impounded or confined. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Application for alcoholic beverages permit, § 3-21. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention authority, R.S. 33:402(8). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Unauthorized riding on fire equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the fire department of the city to ride on any truck or other vehicles of the fire department while going to or returning from fires. 
(Code 1965, § 11-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Police authority of firefighters. 
    All firefighters while on duty at the scene of the a fire or while going to or from a fire may exercise all the powers of a member of the city police department. 
(Code 1965, § 11-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Fireworks-Illegal discharging. 
(a)  Defined. Illegal discharging of fireworks is the discharging or exploding of any powder contrivance known as a firework or fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a fireworks display under proper supervision and for which a permit has been obtained from the police department of the city. 
(b)  Prohibited. Whoever commits illegal discharging of fireworks shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 8-26) 
State Law reference- Discharging fireworks near hospitals, R.S. 14:311; sale of fireworks containing white or yellow phosphorus, R.S. 14:318. 
Sec. 8-4. - Same-Illegal sale. 
(a)  Defined. Illegal sale of fireworks is the sale, exchange or barter of any powder contrivance known as a firework or fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Annexation. Not withstanding the provisions hereof, this section shall not apply for a period of five (5) years from the date of annexation of any property into the corporate limits of the city which shall be annexed after January 1, 2000. 
(c)  Special exemptions. 
(1)  Not withstanding the provisions hereof, this section shall not apply to that certain property located adjacent and contiguous to the northeast corner of the intersection of Interstate 10, Louisiana Highway 13 and Stewartville Road which was annexed by Ordinance No. 1256 until January 2, 2009. 
(2)  Not withstanding the provisions hereof this section shall not apply to that certain property located adjacent and contiguous to the northeast corner of the intersection of the LA Hwy. 1111 Spur and Oddfellows Road which was annexed by Ordinance No. 1221 until January 2, 2007. 
(Code 1965, § 8-27; Ord. No. 1232, § 1, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1320, § 1, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 1338, § 1, 6-13-06) 
Sec. 8-5. - Burning combustible materials in open areas prohibited; exceptions, permits, limits and regulations; compliance with state and environmental laws; fees for application and issuance of permits; penalties for violations. 
(a)  Prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any person(s) or public or private entity(ies), to dispose of trash, leaves, branches, trees, logs, stumps, shrubbery, brush, building, construction and demolition materials, debris, garbage, refuse and other combustible materials by open burning in or on any public street, alley, roadway, public park, grounds or property or any private property within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley, except as provided for in subsection (b) hereof and authorized by special permit issued by the office of the city inspector. 
(b)  Exceptions, limitations, regulations and permitting . Outdoor fires and outdoor burning for the following purposes and under the following conditions, limitations and regulations are excepted from the provisions of this section and may be permitted: 
(1)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit outdoor cooking fires provided said fire is maintained in an outdoor gas appliance meeting all national, state and local codes for outdoor cooking appliances or the burning of natural unprocessed wood logs, wood chips or processed wood charcoal commonly used for outdoor cooking fires in barbeque pits, grills and the like. 
(2)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit outdoor open bonfires or cooking fires commonly used for traditional, recreational or ceremonial occasions burning natural unprocessed wood logs, chips or processed wood logs in a traditional manner; provided no public nuisance, health or safety hazard is or will be created and is not prohibited by state law or regulations. 
(3)  Outdoor open fires purposely set on unimproved acreage used and/or assessed as agricultural crop, pasture, forest or woodlands for specific customarily recognized agricultural, forestry or game management purposes and in compliance with applicable laws, regulations or orders of governmental entities having jurisdiction, including but not limited to the Louisiana Forestry Commission, the Louisiana Department of Agriculture, the Louisiana Fire Marshal, the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries and the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality or controlled burns conducted by the Crowley Fire Department for training purposes at the Crowley Firemen's Training Facility. 
(4)  Special permitting for land clearing debris. Natural vegetative materials such as leaves, branches, trees, logs, stumps, shrubbery and brush generated from land clearing operations on parcels within the corporate limits may be burned on site by special permit issued by the office of the city inspector provided that the owner and/or contractor comply with the following local regulations provided for herein and all applicable state and local laws, regulations and permitting required. 
(5)  Limitations and regulations. 
a.  The burning may be permitted provided that a control burning device commonly known as "forced air curtain burners" or similar devices are used and operated to control the emission of smoke, suspended particulate matter or any air contaminants or combinations thereof to meet the requirements of state law and regulations for air quality and the operator and device has been permitted by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ). 
b.  The control burning device shall be situated not less than two hundred (200) feet from any public road, street, highway or alleyway or dwellings or structures located on adjacent property. 
c.  The control burn is conducted in accordance with the requirements and regulations and a certified copy of the LDEQ permit for the operation of the device has been provided to the office of the city inspector. 
d.  The burn shall be conducted during daylight hours from sunrise and shall be extinguished within thirty (30) minutes after sundown. Written notice of the date and time of the commencement of the burn and a drawing or sketch has been provided to all adjacent property owners and property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the property lines not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of the burn. 
(c)  The owner/contractor shall provide a plat or drawing to scale showing the dimensions of the acreage and all adjacent property and the location of the device in relation to the property lines with all dwellings and structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of said parcel. The office of the city inspector, after having received satisfactory evidence of compliance and having received all required documents for such activity specifying the date and/or dates requested for the burn and information necessary to verify same to the satisfaction of the city inspector, may issue a special permit. 
(d)  The owner/contractor shall pay an application and permitting fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) and which shall include one inspection after the device has been situated on the property prior to the commencement of operations. In the event any changes requested or future inspections necessary, the owner/contractor shall pay an additional inspection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional inspection as necessary. 
(1)  Enforcement and penalties for violations. 
a.  Any persons or entities in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall pay a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or serve thirty (30) days in jail or both. 
b.  In addition to the criminal penalties, the city shall have a civil cause of action against any person who violates these provisions and may at its option enforce the provisions of this article by obtaining a writ of injunction from district court and shall be entitled to recover from such persons or entities all actual damages including costs and expenses incurred by the city and reasonable attorney's fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred to enforce these provisions. 
(Code 1965, § 11-15; Ord. No. 1377, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1448, § 1, 10-9-12) 
Cross reference- Burning of trash, leaves, grass, other combustible materials on paved streets and sidewalks prohibited, § 13-6. 
Secs. 8-6-8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1307, adopted Dec. 14, 2004, amended and re-enacted article II in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 11-26-11-32 of the 1965 Code and Ord. No. 1215, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 1999. 
Cross reference- See also various codes adopted in Ch. 5. 

Sec. 8-20. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, those certain codes known as NFPA 54, National Fuel Gas Code and NFPA 58, Liquefied Petroleum Code, 2000 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the clerk of the city and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 8-21. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the chief of this fire department and the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 8-22. - Amendments. 
    The fire prevention code is amended to provide as follows: 
NFPA 54, National Fuel Gas Code and NFPA 58, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code are deleted, modified or amended in accordance with the following sections as hereinafter set out. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 8-23. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the phrase "bureau of fire prevention" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall mean the fire department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 8-24. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or a duly authorized agent thereof, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Sec. 8-25. - Restriction on storage of flammables, etc. 
    Flammable liquids industrial storage districts. The limits referred to in the fire prevention code are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 12-14-04) 
Chapter 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Application for alcoholic beverage permit, § 3-21; rabies regulations, § 4-9 et seq.; keeping hogs prohibited, § 4-12; cleanliness of premises where animals are kept, § 4-15; 
State Law reference- Parish health officer, R.S. 40:20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - State sanitary code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city that certain code entitled the "Sanitary Code, State of Louisiana," as amended, prepared and promulgated by the state division of health. Any person violating said code shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. Copies of said code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, who shall make them available for inspection by any person during regular office hours. 
(Code 1965, § 14-1) 
Cross reference- Adoption of Chapter 10 and 10-A, Plumbing, of said code, § 5-100. 
Sec. 9-2. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Defined. The term "nuisance" shall mean annoyance; anything which works hurt, [sic] inconvenience, or damage, or which essentially interferes with the enjoyment of life or property. 
(b)  Prohibited. Any person who creates or maintains a nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 8-32) 
State Law reference- Authority to assess costs of abating nuisances, R.S. 33:401(A)(9). 
Sec. 9-3. - Food handlers-Definitions. 
    As used in this article, "food handler" shall mean any person employed, working or serving in any dairy, milk plant, restaurant, food packing or processing establishment, establishment selling beverages or other place where such person may handle or come into contact with any food materials or beverages. 
(Code 1965, § 14-12) 
Sec. 9-4. - Same-Diseased. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has a communicable disease in an infectious stage or who is a carrier of a communicable disease which can be transmitted by casual or intimate contact, or through water, milk, other beverages or other food materials, to accept employment as a food handler, or for any person to employ any such person as a food handler. 
(Code 1965, § 14-13) 
Sec. 9-5. - Same-Examination and certificate required. 
    All persons employed or working as food handlers shall have in their possession a certificate from the parish health unit or a physician certifying that such person is free of venereal disease, tuberculosis and communicable parasites. Said certificate shall have been issued within the preceding twelve-month period. 
(Code 1965, § 14-14) 
Sec. 9-6. - Same-Working as or hiring uncertified food handler. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to work, or for any person to hire, as a food handler any person who has not been certified as above required within a twelve-month period. 
(Code 1965, § 14-15) 
Sec. 9-7. - Same-Provisions supplemental to sanitary code. 
    The provisions of sections 14-12 through 14-15 are hereby declared additional and supplemental to the state sanitary code and nothing contained herein shall excuse any violation of said code. 
(Code 1965, § 14-16) 
Sec. 9-8. - Burial vaults required. 
    All human remains henceforth buried in cemeteries located within the corporate limits of the city shall be provided with concrete burial vaults which shall be either located above or below ground and shall be placed in a good workmanlike manner, and it shall be unlawful to bury any human remains without the placement of a concrete burial vault in any cemetery located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1965, § 14-2; Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 9-11-84) 
Sec. 9-9. - Sewage disposal facilities-Required. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner of any premises located in the sewered area of the city and occupied as a residence, hotel, lodginghouse, tenement house, office building, shop, factory, mill, warehouse or waiting room or depot of a common carrier, or any premises in which people live, work, congregate or meet to provide sanitary toilet facilities, properly connected to the public sewage system. 
(b)  In the event that the owners of any such property or premises shall not reside in the city or in the event that any such property shall be owned in indivisum or by a corporation, it shall be the obligation and responsibility of the agent or representative of any such owners or the persons who have control of such property for the account of the owners thereof, or the persons who collect the rent on such property, if such property is rented, to provide and furnish such premises with sanitary toilet facilities, properly connected to the public sewer system. 
(Code 1965, § 19-2) 
Cross reference- Required connection to sewer system, § 10-20. 
Sec. 9-10. - Same-Failure to provide. 
    In the event that such owner, agent, or other representative of the owner shall fail or neglect to provide such facilities to such premises within thirty (30) days after written notice, delivered to such owner or representative or to the premises, such failure or neglect shall be a violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 19-3) 
Sec. 9-11. - Same-Privies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, own, maintain or use any earth toilet or pit privy in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 19-5) 
Sec. 9-12. - Sale of food items from temporary locations prohibited on public or private property; exceptions; penalty. 
(a)  Prohibition; public property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization, association or group to sell any food, food products, seafood, water, milk or other beverage of any kind from foot, truck, automobile, motor vehicle, mobile unit, cart, stand, table, temporary buildings, portable and movable containers or display cases, whether enclosed or non-enclosed, operating on a temporary or seasonal basis, upon public rights-of-way, including but not limited to streets, boulevards, sidewalks, highways, roadways, alleyways, emergency lanes, neutral grounds, shoulders or any other public property. 
(b)  Prohibition; private property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization, association or group to sell any food, food products, seafood, water, milk or other beverage of any kind from foot, truck, automobile, motor vehicle, mobile unit, cart, stand, table, temporary buildings, portable and movable containers or display cases, whether enclosed or non-enclosed, operating on a temporary or seasonal basis, upon private property. 
(c)  Exceptions. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, association or group shall obtain a temporary food service permit issued under the provisions of Chapter XXIIIA, Temporary Food Service Requirements of the State of Louisiana, Sanitary Code, as may be provided therein; or those organizations, events, fairs and festivals which are expressly exempted from regulation by the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 40:4.1-40:4.6, inclusive, may conduct sales upon privately owned property. 
(d)  Display of permits and signs. All persons, firms, corporations, organizations, associations or groups shall conspicuously display a temporary food service permit and any other permits which may be required by state or municipal ordinances at all times during the conduct of the business; and all temporary food service vendors (including those exempt from the requirements of the state sanitary code), shall conspicuously display a sign containing the trade name of the person, firm, corporation, organization, association or group, the address, phone number and name of the responsible person, if different from the vendor named. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, association or group, including each individual person acting for or on behalf of a firm, corporation, organization, association or group, who shall violate the provisions of this article, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor imprisoned for not [sic] more than six (6) months, or both, for each offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 1, 3-13-01) 
Secs. 9-13-9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Burning trash, leaves, etc., generally, § 8-5; deposit in containers required, § 10-71; removal of animal offal and carcasses, § 10-73; on streets and sidewalks, § 13-6; disposal of refuse according to state division of health rules, § 14-70. 
State Law reference- Solid waste management and resource recovery, R.S. 30:1121 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles and appliances, R.S. 33:4876. 

Sec. 9-20. - Dumping rice chaff. 
    The dumping of rice chaff, burned or unburned, on any private property or on the public places within the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1965, § 8-25) 
Sec. 9-21. - Obstruction of drainage. 
(a)  Defined. Obstruction of drainage is the intentional obstruction, partial obstruction or changing of grade, by placing any material or substance whatsoever therein, of any ditch or gutter in the public streets of the city or any natural or artificial drainage canal, drainage ditch or drainage sewer, public or private, within the city. 
(b)  Prohibited. Whoever commits obstruction of drainage shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 8-34) 
Sec. 9-22. - Littering-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in or on any street, sidewalk or any public place, or on any private property without the consent of the owner, any garbage, trash, refuse, discarded matter or litter. 
(Code 1965, §§ 12-9, 12-10) 
State Law reference- Littering generally, R.S. 30:1150.51; littering of highways and adjacent lands, R.S. 32:289. 
Sec. 9-23. - Same-Handbills. 
(a)  Defined. For the purposes of this section, a "handbill" is defined as any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced literature, whether containing advertising matter or not. 
(b)  Regulated generally. It shall be unlawful to distribute any handbill in the city other than by hand-to-hand delivery, mail or in some other manner which assures that said handbills will not be blown or scattered onto public or private property. 
(c)  Placing in or on vehicles. It shall be unlawful to place, attach or affix any handbill onto or into any vehicle. 
(d)  Distributing at dwellings. It shall be unlawful to place, attach or affix any handbill onto or into any occupied or unoccupied dwelling, or to otherwise distribute such handbill at a dwelling other than by hand-to-hand delivery or mail. 
(Code 1965, § 12-11) 
Sec. 9-24. - Accumulations-Constituting nuisance. 
    No house refuse, putrescible, decaying animal or vegetable matter, garbage, or other organic waste shall be allowed to remain in any house, cellar, or outhouse, or on any premises in the city for such period of time or in such amounts as to cause or create a public or private nuisance. 
(Code 1965, § 12-12) 
Sec. 9-25. - Same-Specific prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner to allow the accumulation of any noxious weeds, grass, garbage, rubbish, trash, junk or other deleterious, unhealthful or noxious growths or accumulations on any sidewalk or banquette abutting on any lot, place or area owned by such property owner, or on any lot, place or area owned by such property owner within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 12-23) 
Sec. 9-26. - Same-Notice to correct; correction by city. 
(a)  Should any property owner allow the accumulation of any noxious weeds, grass, garbage, rubbish, trash, junk or other deleterious, unhealthful or noxious growths or accumulations on any sidewalk or banquet abutting on any lot, place or area owned by such property owner, or on any lot, place or area owned by such property owner within the city, such property owner shall be given five (5) days' notice by advertisement in the official journal of the city for two (2) consecutive days or after notice has been given by certified or registered mail addressed in accordance with the tax rolls requiring such property owner to cut and/or remove such growths and accumulations and, should such owner fail or refuse to cut and/or remove such growths and accumulations within such period, such growths and accumulations shall be removed by the municipal authorities at the cost and expense of said property owner. 
(b)  If the property owner at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately following notice to the property owner pursuant to subsection (a) and the property owner has failed to perform the work after opportunity to do so, the municipal authority may undertake the cutting, destruction and/or removal of such growths and accumulations on said property on a monthly basis without further notice required in subsection (a). However, prior to undertaking such work, the municipal authority shall file and record an affidavit signed by the mayor or his designee which shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the property reasonably sufficient to identify same, a statement that the property owner has within the twelve (12) months failed to perform such work after notification by advertisement and/or certified or registered mail and the opportunity to perform the work pursuant to subsection (b) of this section and a photograph of the property sufficient to reasonably identify the unsafe or unsanitary conditions to justify the necessity to cut, destroy and remove grass, noxious weeds and/or accumulations. 
(Code 1965, § 12-24; Ord. No. 1404, § 1, 12-8-09) 
Sec. 9-27. - Same-Collection of removal costs. 
    If, after the cutting and removal or removal of such weeds, grass, garbage, rubbish, trash, junk or other deleterious, unhealthful or noxious growths or accumulations by the municipal authorities, after due notice as provided above, the cost of expense thereof has not been paid within ten (10) days, the city clerk shall furnish the owner, as shown by the last assessment roll of the municipality, by registered or certified mail, a written statement, showing the cost or expense incurred for the work and the place or property on which the work was done and, if the statement is not paid within one month thereafter, the amount thereof shall be included in and form a part of the taxes due by the owner of the property and shall be collected as such, and, when collected, such amount shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 12-25) 
State Law reference- Collection of cost of cutting weeds, R.S. 33:5062 et seq. 
Sec. 9-28. - Junk-Storage; abandoning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or property owner to store or abandon any junk, wrecked or used motor vehicles, or any part thereof, or any other junk, discarded or abandoned major appliances, such as refrigerators, freezers and ranges, any junk, discarded or abandoned machinery, other metals, building materials or any other discarded or abandoned items on any vacant lot or any unused portion of any occupied lot, other than the premises of a duly licensed salvage or junkyard business, or on any neutral ground, street or sidewalk within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 12-27) 
Cross reference- Abandoned vehicles, §§ 14-7, 14-43. 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles and appliances, R.S. 33:4876; abandoned airtight containers, R.S. 14:324. 
Sec. 9-29. - Same-Definitions. 
(a)  Junk, wrecked or used motor vehicles, as used herein, shall mean any motor vehicle which is totally inoperable, left unattended on any vacant lot, unused portion of an occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk and is so damaged or dismantled as to be a total loss. 
(b)  Total loss, as used herein, shall mean that the cost to repair a damaged or dismantled motor vehicle exceeds the junk value of such vehicle, as determined by any recognized national appraisal book. 
(Code 1965, § 12-28) 
Sec. 9-30. - Junk-Storage; abandoning; notice. 
(a)  As to motor vehicles. Upon determination that such motor vehicles is a junk, wrecked or used motor vehicle as hereto defined, the city inspector shall give notice that said motor vehicle has been determined to be a junk motor vehicle and that, unless such motor vehicle is removed within ten (10) days, after notice, same shall be deemed abandoned to the city, as public property, and that such motor vehicle shall be removed and disposed of by the city. Such notice shall by placing same on the vehicle or by serving same on the owner thereof, if known, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the city official or employee giving such notice shall make proper return, giving the date on which and the manner in which such notice was served. 
(b)  As to other junk. In the case of other junk, discarded or abandoned property referred to in section 9-28, and situated on any private property, notice that such material has been determined to be junk, discarded or abandoned property and that same will be removed and disposed of at the cost and expense of the owner of such parcel of ground ten (10) days after service of such notice, shall be served to the owner of the parcel of ground on which such junk material is situated by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the city inspector. 
(Code 1965, §§ 12-29, 12-30; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 8-12-30) 
Sec. 9-31. - Same-Removal of junk material. 
    After giving of the notice required by section 9-30(a) or (b), as the case may be, and the lapse of the required delay, the municipal authorities shall remove such junk motor vehicles or other junk property or material and dispose of same in such manner as such authorities deem appropriate. 
(Code 1965, § 12-31) 
Sec. 9-32. - Same-Lien and recovery of costs. 
(a)  General. The city shall record in the mortgage records of the parish, an affidavit executed by the city clerk, setting out a description of the parcel of ground from which the junk material was removed and the cost of removing such material, which affidavit shall constitute a lien in favor of the city for the cost of removing such material and shall be collectable in the same manner as special assessments are collectable by law. 
(b)  Recovery from junk owner. In the event that the identity of the owner of any junk property described in section 9-28 be known, the city may bring suit against said owner to recover the costs of the removing and disposing of said junk material in an amount not to exceed the amount set forth in Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 33:4876, as amended. 
(Code 1965, §§ 12-32, 12-33) 
Secs. 9-33-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL AND REDUCTION 

Sec. 9-51. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words shall have meanings ascribed to them unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Court means the judge of the sixth ward and Crowley City Court. 
    Dispose means throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, dump, drop, eject, or allow the escape of a substance. 
    Litter means all waste material except as provided and defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes 30:2173(2), including but not limited to disposable packages, containers, sand, gravel, rubbish, cans, bottles, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, furniture or appliances, automotive parts, including but not limited to tires and engines, trailers, boats and boating accessories, tools and equipment, and building materials, or other discarded materials of any kind and description. 
    Litter shall not include agricultural products that are being transported from the harvest or collection site to a processing or marketing site if reasonable measures are taken to prevent the agricultural product from leaving the transporting vehicle. Litter shall also not include recyclable cardboard being transported and compressed bundles to processing facilities. Agricultural product as used in this definition means all crops; livestock, poultry and forestry; and all aquacultural, floricultural, horticultural, silvicultural; and viticultural products. 
    Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, street, alleyway or highway, ditch or banks thereof, any parks, playgrounds, residential, commercial or industrial properties. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Sec. 9-52. - Intentional littering prohibited; criminal penalties. 
(a)  Littering prohibited. No person shall intentionally dispose or permit the disposal of litter upon any public or private property in the corporate limits of the city, or place upon property not owned by him, whether from a vehicle or otherwise, including but not limited to public streets, roads, alleyways, highways, rights-of-way, ditches, public parks, recreational areas, residential, commercial or industrial property, except as such property may be designated by the state, any of its agencies or any political subdivision for the disposal of such litter and such person is authorized to use such property for such purpose. 
(b)  Inference. 
(1)  If the litter is disposed from a motor vehicle, boat or other means of conveyance, except a bus, school bus or large passenger vehicle as defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes 32:1, there shall be an inference that the driver of the conveyance disposed of the litter. If such litter was possessed by a specific person immediately before the act of disposing, there shall be an inference that the possessor committed the act of disposing. 
(2)  When litter disposed in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings, which display the name of a person or in any other manner indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, there shall be an inference that such person has violated this section. 
(c)  Citation. The person shall be cited for the offense by means of a citation, summons or other means provided by law. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall, upon first conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and sentenced to serve four (4) hours of community service in a litter abatement work program as approved by the court. 
(2)  Upon second conviction, an offender shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and sentenced to serve eight (8) hours of community service in a litter abatement work program as approved by the court. 
(3)  Upon third or subsequent conviction, an offender shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or be imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both, and shall be sentenced to serve not less than twenty-four (24) hours and not more than seventy-five (75) hours of community service in a litter abatement work program as approved by the court, or all or any combination of the abovementioned penalties. 
(4)  The judge may require an individual convicted of a violation of this section to remove litter from city streets and alleyways, public rights-of-way, public playgrounds, public parks, or other appropriate locations for any prescribed period of time in lieu of the penalties prescribed in this section. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(f)  A person may be found guilty and fined under this section although the commission of the offense did not occur in the presence of a law enforcement officer if the evidence presented to the court establishes that the defendant has committed the offense. 
(g)  Court costs. Persons found guilty under the provisions of this section shall pay special court costs of fifty dollars ($50.00) dollars in lieu of other costs of court and the special court costs shall be disbursed as follows: 
(1)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) to be paid to the judicial expense fund of the city court; 
(2)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) to be paid to the city clerk; and 
(3)  Ten dollars ($10.00) to the clerk of court. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Sec. 9-53. - Community service litter abatement work program; establishment; limited liability. 
(a)  A community service litter abatement work program may be established by the municipality which shall be court approved. Such program shall supervise persons ordered to perform community service work collecting or removing litter within the jurisdiction, in accordance with the requirements of Louisiana Revised Statutes 30:2531.4. The program shall provide for the collection and removal of litter from public highways, rights-of-way, parks, roads, beaches, recreational areas and other public areas within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley. The community service litter abatement work program shall be approved by the city court. 
(b)  A person who participates in a community service litter abatement work program established pursuant to this section shall have no cause of action for damages against the City of Crowley or any person supervising his/her participation therein, nor against any employee or agent of the City of Crowley, for any injury or loss suffered by him/her during or arising out of his/her participation in the program, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the City of Crowley, its employee or agent. The City of Crowley shall not be liable for any injury caused by the individual participating in the program unless the gross negligence or intentional act of the entity or its employee or agent was a substantial factor in causing the injury. No provision hereof shall negate the requirement to provide an offender with necessary medical treatment as statutorily required. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Sec. 9-54. - Application of other laws. 
    Nothing in this article shall limit the authority of the City of Crowley to enforce any other laws, rules or regulations of the State of Louisiana or the Parish of Acadia, or to supersede, amend or delete any of the provisions of other laws, rules or regulations relating to litter control and reduction of litter. However, no person shall be prosecuted for an occurrence in violation of this article if the person is being prosecuted for the same occurrence under any other law, statute or ordinance of the state or other political subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Sec. 9-55. - Collection and distribution of fines. 
    All fines collected under the provisions of this section shall be payable to the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Sec. 9-56. - Establishment of a litter reduction committee. 
(a)  In order to aid in the reduction of litter and to promote anti-litter efforts within the city, there is hereby authorized a committee which shall be known as the Crowley Litter Reduction and Anti-litter Committee. 
(b)  The committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and shall be residents of the City of Crowley. The mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as chairman of the commission. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(c)  The names of three (3) nominees shall be submitted upon the recommendation of the Garden Clubs of the City of Crowley and the Chamber of Commerce of the City of Crowley. Each appointment shall be submitted to the board of aldermen for confirmation. 
(d)  The members shall serve without pay. 
(e)  Each member shall serve a term of one year. The initial members shall serve staggered terms of one, two (2), three (3), and four (4) years. Thereafter, said term shall be annual. 
(f)  The commission shall make recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen for activities and projects and shall solicit and encourage the assistance and active cooperation of business, industry and civic organizations to aid in the eradication of litter within the city and to provide recommendations and suggestions to the governing authority for anti-littering campaign and litter reduction in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 4-10-01) 
Secs. 9-57-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1334, adopted Apr. 11, 2006, enacted new provisions to be designated Art. III, §§ 9-51-9-59. In order to avoid duplication of numbers, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV, §§ 9-61-9-69. Original numbering has been maintained in history notes following each section. 

Sec. 9-61. - Definitions. 
    Business establishment means any sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or other entity formed for profit-making purposes, including professional corporations and other entities where professional or consumer services are provided, including, but not limited to legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, financial, counseling and banking. Business establishment shall also include hotels, motels, nonprofit entities and religious institutions. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means a person or business establishment that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space which is enclosed on all sides by a roof and solid walls, windows or floor-to-ceiling partitions, irrespective of the size of such areas and of any doorway, stairway or passageway providing means of ingress and egress to such area, and is not intended to mean areas commonly described as public lobbies. 
    Gaming operations means the conducting or assisting in the conducting of gaming activities or operations upon a riverboat, at the official gaming establishment, by operating an electronic video draw poker device, by a charitable gaming licensee, or at a pari-mutuel wagering facility or off track wagering facility which is licensed for operation and regulated under the provisions of chapter 4 of title 4, chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 of title 27, or chapter 11 of title 4 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, or any other gaming operation authorized by law. 
    Gaming property means the designated gaming space and facilities owned, or leased or operated by a licensee or the casino operator that are part of the same facility or complex at which the gaming operations are located including, without limitation, any hotel, restaurant, bar, retail facility, showroom, ballroom or entertainment center. 
    Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of health care providers as defined in R.S. 40:1299.41A(1). This definition shall include all waiting areas, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms and wards within health care facilities. 
    Nonprofit entity means any corporation, unincorporated association or other association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organizations and not to secure private financial gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section. 
    Office workplace means any enclosed area of a structure or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by business entities, which provides primarily clerical, professional, or business services of the business entity, or which provided primarily clerical, professional, or business services to other business entities or to the public at that location. Office workplace includes but is not limited to office spaces in: 
(a)  Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes. 
(b)  Libraries. 
(c)  Museums. 
(d)  Office buildings. 
    Public place means any areas to which the public is invited or permitted, including, but not limited to, business establishments, banks, education facilities, health care facilities, shopping malls, property owned, occupied or operated by the City of Crowley or any agency thereof, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail stores, theaters, sports arenas and waiting areas. 
    Restaurant means any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich stand, soda fountain and any other commercial eating establishment, or part of any organization, club, boardinghouse or guesthouse, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or patrons, whether food is customarily consumed on or off the premises, but not an establishment whose primary purpose is to serve food to employees of a common employer. 
    Retail store means any place which in the regular course of business sells goods or services directly to the public. 
    Service line or waiting area means any queue, line or other formation of persons, whether seated or standing, in which one or more persons are waiting for, providing or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves exchange or consideration. 
    Shopping malls means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail stores or business establishments. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any form of lighted object or device which contains tobacco. 
    Sports arena means any sports pavilion, stadium (whether or not fully enclosed), gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and ice skating rink, bowling alley and other similar place where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports, cultural or similar events. 
    Tobacco business or shop means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other enterprise in which the primary activity is the sale, manufacture or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products and accessories at wholesale or retail or any premises owned or leased by a tobacco product manufacturer, importer, distributor, or leaf dealer and principally devoted to the manufacture, importation or sale of tobacco or tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-51), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-62. - Construction of article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited by law or regulation. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude owners, operators, managers, employers or other persons having control of any establishment covered by this article from prohibiting smoking in such establishment to a greater extent than is provided by this article, in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-52), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-63. - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed areas within public places in the City of Crowley except as permitted in accordance with section 9-65. Such public places include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Public transportation facilities, including buses, vans, taxis and for-hire vehicles required to obtain a certificate of public convenience from the City of Crowley, and including, but not limited to, ticketing, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(2)  Public restrooms. 
(3)  Retail stores, not including tobacco businesses or shops as defined in section 9-62. 
(4)  Restaurants. 
(5)  Business establishments. 
(6)  Libraries, museums and galleries. 
(7)  Motion picture theaters, concert halls, auditoriums and buildings used for, or designed for the primary purpose of exhibiting movies, stage drama, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. 
(8)  Convention halls. 
(9)  Sports arenas. 
(10)  Places of meeting or public assembly for educational, religious, recreational or political purposes, but not including meetings conducted in private residences. 
(11)  Health care facilities. 
(12)  All preprimary, primary and secondary schools, community colleges, technical training establishments and specialty schools. 
(13)  Elevators. 
(14)  In any waiting area, or portion thereof, in an enclosed area within a public place. 
(15)  All enclosed areas of any building or facility owned, operated or occupied by the City of Crowley or any political subdivision, commission, agency, entity or district created by such government, including the private offices and other areas in such buildings and facilities as well as areas open to the public. 
(16)  Polling places. 
(17)  Shopping malls. 
(18)  Licensed child care and adult care facilities. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited in the following public places, whether or not in an enclosed area: 
(1)  Within ten (10) feet of the entrance or exit to any building or facility owned, operated or occupied by the City of Crowley or any political subdivision, commission, agency, entity or district created by such government. 
(2)  Within ten (10) feet of the entrance or exit to any public place. 
(3)  In any service line in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-53), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-64. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment except as provided in section 9-65. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, health care facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairwells, restrooms and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition in smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-54), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-65. - Areas where smoking is not regulated. 
    The following places shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(a)  Restaurants or alcoholic beverage establishments or facilities holding a permit, license or certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 26:71(A)(3)(a), 26:71.1, 26:72, 26:73, 26:271(A)(2), 26:271.1, 26:271.2 and 26:272. 
(b)  Private homes including those residences used as an office workplace. 
(c)  Hotel guest rooms. 
(d)  Tobacco businesses or shops. 
(e)  Any gaming property where gaming operations are conducted. 
(f)  Private enclosed office workplaces occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such an office workplace may be visited by nonsmokers, except places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire marshal or by any other ordinance or safety regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-55), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-66. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "Smoking" or "No Smoking" signs, or the international symbols indicating the same (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it), and any other signs necessary to comply with the provisions of this article shall be prominently and conspicuously posted at all major entrances to, and appropriate locations within, each enclosed area where smoking is either prohibited, permitted or otherwise regulated by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such area. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every public entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays and receptacles used or provided for the deposit of tobacco refuse shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of the area. 
(d)  Each employer, owner or manager of a public place where smoking is prohibited shall, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article or of the opening of business subsequent of the effective date of this article, post a sign approved by the City of Crowley which clearly and conspicuously summarizes the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-56), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-67. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the code enforcement officer of the City of Crowley, the fire chief of the city or his designated representative, or any duly appointed law enforcement officer having jurisdiction or arrest authority. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for an occupational license in City of Crowley. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the code enforcement officer, fire chief of the city police of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-57), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-68. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article by smoking in an area where smoking is prohibited shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  Any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or business establishment who fails to comply with section 9-66 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. 
(c)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-58), 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9-69. - Public education. 
    The City of Crowley, in conjunction with the American Cancer Society and the Tobacco Free Living Organization, shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1(9-59), 4-11-06) 
Chapter 9.5 - HISTORIC DISTRICT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1229, adopted April 11, 2000, enacted provisions designated as §§ 2-20-2-42. In order to provide for better classification and to facilitate indexing, reference and use, §§ 2-20-2-42 have been redesignated as §§ 9.5-20-9.5-42, at the discretion of the editor. The original section numbers from the ordinance have been retained in the history note at the end of each section. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9.5-1-9.5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION 

Sec. 9.5-20. - Commission established. 
    There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Crowley Historic District Commission," hereinafter referred to as the "historic commission," or the "commission." 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-20), 4-11-200) 
Sec. 9.5-21. - Recommendation and appointment of members. 
    The commission shall consist of not fewer than nine (9) and no more than fifteen (15) members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-21), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-22. - Term; vacancies. 
    Each of the members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. The chairperson shall be elected by the members of the commission. Whenever the term of a member of the commission expires, the mayor shall appoint his successor. The members shall serve consecutive terms. The first commission shall have staggered terms one-fourth with one-year terms, one-fourth with two-year terms, one-fourth with three-year terms, and one-fourth with four-year terms. All commission members shall have a demonstrated knowledge of or interest, competence, or expertise in historic preservation. The commission shall seek the advise, as needed, of professionals in the related disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, or archaeology, etc. Advisory members may be appointed from time to time as needed to assist the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-22), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-23. - Administration and committees. 
    The Chair of the Economic and Community Development Committee of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley shall serve as advisor to the commission and will act as liaison between the commission and the office of the mayor. Nominal expenses necessary to carry out the duties of the commission shall be budgeted by the Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley. The chair of the economic and community development committee shall designate and appoint the recording secretary for the commission and all files, records and minutes of the commission will be maintained by the City of Crowley. The city attorney shall be the ex officio attorney for the commission. The commission may designate and appoint from among its members various committees with such powers and duties as the commission may have and prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-23), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-24. - Rules regulations and guidelines; meetings; reports and recommendations. 
    The commission shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, not inconsistent with the laws of the City of Crowley and the State of Louisiana. The commission shall meet quarterly, but the commission may hold meetings at any time on the written request of three (3) members or on the call of the chair of the commission or of the mayor. The commission shall make quarterly reports to the mayor and board of aldermen containing a statement of its activities. Copies of the rules, regulations and guidelines are available at the Crowley Building Inspector's Office. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-24), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-25. - Purpose, duties and powers. 
    The historic district commission shall have for its purpose the preservation and stewardship of all structures in the designated historic district of the city. The commission shall have for its further purpose the guardianship of those structures which have architectural and historical value and which should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the city and state. 
(a)  No private building, structure or edifice, including fences, boundary walls, signs, light fixtures, steps and paving or other appurtenant fixtures shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished within a designated historic district of the city until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features has been submitted to, and approved by, the historic district commission, except as otherwise provided by this article, or as provided by rules, regulations, policies, procedures, and standards adopted by the commission. For the purpose of this article, "exterior architectural features" shall include, but not be limited to, the color, architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure, including the kind and texture of the building material, the type and the style of all roofs, windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. The style, scale, material, size and location of outdoor advertising signs and bill posters within the district shall also be under the control of the commission. 
(b)  The historic commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use but shall consider the relationship of the exterior of the building with all other buildings within the historic district, so as to avoid incongruity and to promote harmony within the district. 
(c)  The historic district commission shall adhere to and seek compatibility of structures in the historic district in terms of size, texture, scale and site plan, and the commission shall set forth and define guidelines prior to any exercise of its authority. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repairs which do not involve a change of design, material, or the outward appearance thereof; nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such feature which is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. The requirements of this article shall not apply to work which has begun or for which a permit has been issued prior to the establishment of the historic district. 
(e)  No review, approval, disapproval or recommendation shall be made by the commission until said commission has adopted rules, regulations, policies, procedures and standards following a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-25), 4-11-00) 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9.5-26. - Designation of historic districts. 
    The Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley may adopt, amend, reject or repeal ordinances designating historic districts when adoption or amendment is pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  An investigation and report describing the historical, architectural or archaeological significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings included in any such proposed district, and the description of the boundaries of such district has been prepared. 
(2)  Historic districts shall consist of areas which are deemed to be of special significance in terms of their history, prehistory, architecture and/or culture, and which possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and association. The area, buildings, structures, sites or objects shall be significant elements of cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the City of Crowley or of the archaeological history or prehistory of the City of Crowley. The conservation of such a district will provide for the education, pleasure and enhancement of the quality of life of all residents of the City of Crowley. 
(3)  The Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley shall designate the boundaries of a historic district in accordance with the procedures set forth in Appendix A, section 11.3, Amendment Procedures. 
(4)  Following the Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley's designation and approval of a historic district, the area so designated shall be labeled "HC" for Historic Commercial or "HR" for Historic Residential on the official city zoning map. Numbered designations following the two-letter designation will remain the same or follow the same numbering scheme as the area had previous to the new designation. 
(5)  With respect to any changes in the boundaries of such district subsequent to its initial establishment or the creation of additional districts within the City of Crowley, the investigative studies and reports shall be prepared by the historic district commission and shall be referred to the economic and community development committee for its review and implementation. Changes in the boundaries of an initial district or proposals for additional districts shall also be submitted to the State of Louisiana, Office of the Lieutenant Governor, Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism, Office of Cultural Development, Division of Historic Preservation, in accordance with the provisions as stated in subsection (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-26), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-27. - Definition of historic districts. 
(a)  Commercial Historic District (HC). The following area of the City of Crowley is hereby designated as the "Crowley Historic District": 
Those certain lots or parcels of ground within the original City of Crowley, Acadia Parish, Louisiana, being known and described as all of Blocks 21, 36, 49, 64 & 77; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8 of Block 92; all of the Courthouse Square; Lots 2, 4, 6 & 8 of Block 91; all of Blocks 78, 63 & 50; Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 & 16 of Block 35; Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 & 15 of Block 22; the East 181.5 feet of Block 7 and all of that area South of the East 181.5 feet of Block 7 up to the railroad right-of-way; and all of Block 8 and all of that area South of Block 8 up to the railroad right-of-way, as per plat of survey of the original City of Crowley on file and of record in the Office of the Clerk of Court, Acadia Parish, Louisiana. 
(b)  Residential Historic District (HC). 
Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-27), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-28. - Application to commission. 
(a)  The owner of any property within the historic district shall apply for a certificate of appropriateness from the historic district commission before the commencement of work involving: 
(1)  The erection of any new building or construction in the historic district; 
(2)  The alteration or addition to any existing building situated within the historic district; 
(3)  The painting, repairing or demolition of any existing building situated within the historic district; or 
(4)  The relocation of any building into or out of the historic district. 
(b)  The application therefore shall be made to the commission, accompanied by the full plans and specifications thereof, so far as they relate to the proposed appearance, color, texture or materials and architectural design of the exterior, including the front, sides, rear and roof of such buildings, alterations or addition of any building or outbuilding, party wall, courtyard, sidewalk, driveway, parking area, fence or other dependency thereof. 
(c)  All changes to the historic properties within the district should conform to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings, as amended and published in accordance with [the] law. 
(d)  New building construction within the district should follow the guidelines established by the commission and the Louisiana Main Street Downtown Design Guidelines. A copy of these publications may be obtained from the Crowley Main Street Office. 
(e)  The historic commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness, except in those instances where the commission has determined that the application for a certificate of appropriateness is not a substantive change and further that the commission has determined that the certificate complies with standards adopted by the commission. Notice of time and place of said hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in the official journal of the City of Crowley at least seven (7) days before such hearing and by the posting of such notice on or near the main entrance of the place where the commission usually meets. 
(f)  Within not more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of an application, the commission shall review it, giving consideration to the factors set forth in section 9.5-26 of this article and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant, setting forth the reasons thereof. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission and whatever its decision, notice in writing shall be given to the applicant. The commission shall keep a record of all applications and decisions in the manner described herein. 
(g)  No building permit shall be authorized by the city inspector which affects a site or structure in the historic district without a certificate of appropriateness, except as otherwise permitted by the Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley. 
(h)  The commission shall have the right to make such recommendations for changes and modifications as it may deem necessary in order to enable the applicant to meet its requirements. 
(i)  Where, by reason of topographical conditions, irregularly shaped lots or unusual circumstances applicable solely to the particular application, strict enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in serious undue hardship particularly affecting said applicant, then the commission, in passing upon his application, shall have the power to vary or modify adherence to this section, provided always that its requirements insure harmony with the general purposes hereof and will not adversely affect the historic district as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-28), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-29. - Commission recommendation and action thereon. 
    The historic district shall, upon due consideration, render its decision concerning the approval or disapproval of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, and it may include such changes as, in its judgment, are reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of this article. It may then send its decision, in writing, to the applicant and the building inspector. If the permit is approved, the building inspector shall promptly issue a permit for such work in conformance with the commission's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-29), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-30. - Appeals. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision, act or proceedings of the historic commission shall have the right to apply in writing to the Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley for reversal or modification thereof and the mayor, or presiding officer of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Crowley, shall have the right to stay all further action until the board of aldermen shall have had an opportunity to rule thereon. Any such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days from date of the written decision and the board of aldermen may consider said appeal at its next general or special meeting, but, in any event, no more than forty-five (45) days thereafter. The board of aldermen may affirm a decision of the historic district commission by majority vote of all its members. The board of aldermen shall have the right to reverse, change or modify any decision of this historic district commission by majority vote of all its members. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the board of aldermen affecting said historic district shall have the right to file a civil suit within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision in a court of competent jurisdiction under the usual rules of procedure governing same, with the right to stay order and injunctive relief, provided the situation warrants it. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-30), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-31. - Injunctions. 
    Whenever any person has engaged in, or is about to engage in, any act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this article, the commission may make application to the appropriate court for an order enjoining such act or practice or requiring such person to refrain from such prospective violation or to remedy such violation by restoring the affected property to its previous condition. Upon a showing by the commission or the city that such a person has engaged, or is about to engage in, such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining or other appropriate order shall be granted without bond. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-31), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-32. - Penalties. 
    Any owner, agent, lessee or other person acting for or in conjunction with him, who shall violate the historic district article or law or rules, regulations or decisions of the commission, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation, except as hereinafter provided. Any owner, agent, lessee or other person acting for or in conjunction with him, who shall demolish a structure or edifice without having received a certificate of appropriateness may be fined a single fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). For violations other than demolition without a certificate of appropriateness, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-32), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-33. - Stopping work commenced without permit. 
    The building inspector shall promptly stop any work attempted to be done without or contrary to a permit issued under this article and shall promptly prosecute any person responsible for such a violation of this article or engaged in such violation. Any officer or authorized agent of the commission shall exercise concurrent or independent powers with the building inspector in prosecuting violations of this article and stopping work being done without, or contrary to, the permits reported by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-33), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-34. - Provisions of ordinance prevail in case of conflict. 
    The provisions of this article shall govern and take precedence over any other provisions of any ordinance or codes of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-34), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-35. - New construction (HC). 
    Proposals for new construction in the historic district shall seek compatibility with existing structures through the appropriate use of site planning, materials, decorative details, architectural elements and scale. A proposal shall not draw unnecessary attention to itself in any one of these characteristics. However, a proposal should not duplicate or copy historic styles and periods. The architectural context is of primary concern. 
(a)  Scale. The relationship of the building and its elements (including doors and windows) to other structures in the district. It is important in considering scale that a careful study is made of the height, width and mass of buildings in the immediate neighborhood and district as a whole. This study should serve to confirm or deny the appropriateness of the height, width and mass of the proposed building. 
(b)  Siting. The positioning of a building on a lot. This process includes determining the setback of a building, the spacing of this building from adjacent buildings and the location of the walls, fences, walks, drives and landscaping if any of these are used in the overall design. 
(c)  Materials. The surface building fabric which contributes to the exterior character and appearance of a building. 
(d)  Decorative details. Ornamentation or embellishment. These include cornices, lintels, arches, balustrades, chimneys, shutters, columns and other common details. When used, details should create a unifying effect on a building and should be compatible with the context of the neighborhood. 
(e)  Architectural elements. Parts of a building that are integral to its composition. These include balconies, roofs, porches, chimneys, dormers, parapets and other parts of a building that contribute to its overall shape and silhouette. The choice and arrangement of elements of a proposed building should reflect those of other buildings in the neighborhood. The building should not draw unnecessary attention to itself by failing to relate to neighboring styles. But neither should it copy these styles. The object is to compliment the context of the Crowley Historic District (HC). The historic district commission shall follow the Secretary of Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings in considering all proposals for new construction and/or rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-35), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-35.1. - Use of paint schemes, flagship colors, and architectural elements used to establish an identity or connection. 
(a)  Proposals for new construction or renovation in the historic district using designated paint schemes, flagship colors and architectural elements shall seek to minimize the contrast with existing buildings and structures while incorporating the use of paint schemes, flagship colors, decorative detail, design and/or architectural elements. The use of such paint schemes, flagship colors, and/or architectural elements shall be modified or changed to promote compatibility and harmony with the scale and relationship of other buildings and structures in the historic district, the location thereof in the district and the architectural elements or parts of the proposal, including balconies, roofs, porches, chimneys, dormers and other parts of the building or structure. The proposal should reflect a choice and arrangements of the colors, elements, size and placement of the identifying characteristics of the company or organization, which shall not draw unnecessary attention but insofar as is possible shall compliment the context of the Crowley Historic District. 
(b)  Any designated paint scheme, flagship colors, decorative detail, design and/or architectural element used to identify a business or organization in the historic district shall be removed or obliterated, and the building or structure restored to its original color and form, within sixty (60) days after the business or organization shall cease operations or use of the building. Any person, corporation, organization, firm or entity no longer conducting business or operating upon the premises, and/or the owner of the building, who shall fail to remove or obliterate and restore the building or structure to its original color and form shall be given notice thereof, in writing, by the city inspector, at its last known address by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, of the failure to comply. After five (5) days from receipt of such notification, if corrective action has not been taken, the person, corporation, organization, firm or entity having beneficial use of and/or the owner of the premises, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 9.5-32 hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1261, § 1, 9-10-02) 
Sec. 9.5-36. - Fences. 
    Fence design must be in harmony with the nature of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-36), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-37. - Floodlights (HC). 
    The Crowley Historic District (HC) shall not be illuminated by privately controlled floodlights or other illumination except as approved by the historic district commission or as permitted specifically by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-37), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-38. - Overhanging balconies (HC). 
    No overhanging balconies or galleries may be removed, but new or additional balconies may be entered if they conform to the distinctive architecture of the Crowley Historic District (HC). The permit for all such new construction or any renovation shall be subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-38), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-39. - Signs (HC). 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Sign shall include any symbol, device, image, poster, flag, banner, billboards, design or directional sign used for advertising purposes, whether painted upon, attached to, erected on, or otherwise maintained on any premises containing any words, letters or parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, or a business or commodity or product, which is visible from any public street and is used to attract attention. 
(2)  Display includes erect, paint, repaint, place, replace, hang, re-hang, repair, maintain paint directly upon a building or other structure, inlay, embed in or otherwise exhibit in public view. 
(b)  Signs must confirm to the character of the district. In addition to the prohibitions contained in this section, approval of the display of a sign in the Historic District (HC) of the City of Crowley shall be granted by the commission only when such signs and the plans therefor, so far as they relate to the appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials and design, conform to the quaint and distinctive character of the historic district or do not injuriously affect it or impair the value to the community of those buildings having architectural or historical worth. 
(c)  No signs to be displayed in certain places. No sign shall be displayed from the parapet or roofs of any buildings in the Historic District (HC). No sign shall be displayed or placed in any manner whatsoever so as to disfigure or conceal any significant architectural feature or detail of any building. 
(d)  What signs may advertise. No sign shall be displayed in the historic district unless such sign advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the premises and, if it does do so, no more than fifty 50 per cent of the area of such sign may be used to advertise products or commodities actually sold on the premises. This is exclusive of any pre-existing, historic "ghost" signs. 
(e)  Number of primary signs. In general, one primary sign is allowed to each store, shop or bona fide place of business and this sign shall be no larger than the maximum stipulated in this section. 
(1)  In the case of a business operated on a corner lot that faces two (2) streets, one primary sign on each street facing is allowed and shall be regulated as if each side were a separate storefront. 
(2)  In the case of a single sign being inappropriate, multiple primary signs may be used, the total face area of which may not exceed the maximum size stipulated in this article. 
(f)  Surface area of signs. The surface area of any sign shall be in direct proportion to the amount of front footage of each ownership and shall be as follows: 
(1)  For single-faced signs, attached flat against the wall and including painted wall signs, there shall be allowed thirty (30) square inches of sign surface area to each foot of lot frontage. 
(2)  For double-faced signs, suspended by brackets or arms perpendicularly from the wall of a building, the surface area shall be the sum of the area of each face, not to exceed thirty (30) square inches of sign surface area to each foot of lot frontage. 
(3)  In the case of multiple businesses operating at a single location, the total face area of signage may be increased to 11/2 times the maximum stipulated in this article. 
(g)  Secondary signs. In addition to primary sign(s) referred to in subsection (e) hereinabove, small secondary signs may be used to identify the following: 
(1)  Entrance doors. 
(2)  Operating hours. 
(3)  Temporary signs. 
(h)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs of a promotional nature may be placed on the interior of store windows. In no case may they remain longer than sixty (60) days. A permit is not required for the placement of a temporary sign. Temporary signs may be placed on the exterior of a building for the following special situations: 
(1)  For the identify of real estate for sale. 
(2)  For political advertisement. Except for signs larger than 2'×2' yard sign, no application is required. 
(3)  For promotion by nonprofit organizations. In no case may these signs exceed the size limitations of this article. 
(i)  Portable and changeable letter signs. No portable or changeable letter signs may be erected or allowed to remain within the Downtown Commercial Historic District. 
(j)  Illuminated signs. No illuminated signs may be constructed or erected within the (HC) Historic District without the express approval of the Crowley Historic District Commission. 
(1)  Concealed lighting is recommended. Bulbs may not be exposed. The light should enhance the sign as well as the building on which it is mounted. 
(2)  Internally illuminated signs are not permitted. 
(3)  Flashing or intermittent signs (exclusive of historic signs) are not permitted. 
(k)  Signs no longer serving as advertisement to be taken down. Any sign displayed which no longer advertises a bona fide business (exclusive of historic or "ghost" signs) conducted upon the premises shall, upon notification by the Crowley Historic District Commission or its agent (who is hereby specifically authorized to so proceed), be taken down, removed or obliterated within five (5) days after such notification and failure to so comply on the part of the owner, occupant, agent or person having the beneficial use of any building or premises upon which such sign may be found shall subject such person to be the penalty provided in section 9.5-32. 
(l)  Zoning ordinance applicable to signs. All signs under this section shall be further governed by existing regulations of the zoning ordinance of the city, which are not in conflict with this section. 
(m)  Application for signs to be submitted to commission. All applications for permits to display signs within the historic district of the city shall be permitted to the historic district commission for approval before a permit therefor may be issued in conformity with section 9.5-29. 
(n)  Application to display signs and accompanying drawings. Application for permit to display signs in the historic district of the city shall be made to the commission upon forms furnished by the commission. Such an application shall also be accompanied by sketches and drawings in triplicate, showing details of construction and foundation when required by the building code adopted by the city and shall delineate the size, shape, design, coloring, lighting and position in relation to the building from or upon which it shall be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-39), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-40. - Aerials, antennas etc., prohibited. 
    The construction of aerials, antennas or satellite dishes of any type within the Crowley Historic District (HC) is prohibited without the express approval of the historic district commission. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-40), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-41. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
    In order to insure the protective maintenance of resources, the exterior features of such properties shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the city's minimum housing code and the city's adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-41), 4-11-00) 
Sec. 9.5-42. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Any resource which is within a preservation district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons as may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such resource if it is found to have one or more of the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration to the extent that it creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the city building inspector. 
(2)  Deterioration, as determined by the city building inspector, of a building characterized by one or more of the following: 
a.  Those buildings that have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads with safely. 
d.  Members of the walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material, workmanship or deterioration. 
e.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads safely. 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads safely. 
g.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material, workmanship or deterioration. 
h.  Any faults, defect or condition in the building which render the same structurally unsafe or not property watertight. 
(b)  If the commission makes a preliminary determination that a resource is being demolished by neglect, it shall direct the city building inspector to notify the owner(s) of the source of this preliminary determination, stated the reasons therefor and shall give the owner of record thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of such notice or the posting thereof on the property, whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail, restricted delivery or mailed to the last known address of the record owner(s) as listed on the city and/or parish tax rolls. 
(2)  If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource. 
(c)  If the owner(s) fail(s) to commence work with the time allotted as evidenced by the building permit, the commission shall notify the owner(s) in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the commission at a date, time and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed or posted at least thirty (30) days before said hearing. For the purpose of insuring lawful notice, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The commission shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner(s) may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If, after such hearing, the commission shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, it may direct the city building inspector to take appropriate action against the owner(s). If the necessary repairs are not begun within ninety (90) days of the determination by the commission that the subject building or structure is being demolished by neglect, the owner(s) may be fined as specified in section 9.5-32. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1(2-42), 4-11-00) 
Chapter 10 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - State law exemption. 
    Under the provisions of part VII of chapter 8 of title 40 of Louisiana Revised Statutes 1950, section 40:1758, the city shall not be included or affected by part VII of chapter 8 comprised of R.S. 40:1758 through 40:1761. 
(Ord. No. 1124, § 1, 12-13-88) 
Editor's note- Nonamendatory Ord. No. 1124, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 1988, has been codified herein by the editor as § 10-1. 
Sec. 10-2. - Water supply-Fluoride required; franchisee to operate, failure to comply, penalty. 
(a)  All potable water distributed through a public water system in the city shall be treated with fluoride by the operator and/or franchisee in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Louisiana Department of Public Health regarding the minimum and maximum recommended amounts in parts per million. 
(b)  All persons, firms or corporations distributing water through a public water system operating within the corporate limits of the city shall install, operate and maintain the necessary equipment and facilities to add fluoride to treated water produced in accordance with the recommended methods and in the amounts approved by the Louisiana Department of Public Health or its successor agencies. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation owning a franchise issued by the city to distribute water by means of a public water system who fails to comply with the requirements hereof shall be issued notice to comply with the provisions of this section within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of notice. Notice shall be by certified mail. Return receipt requested addressed to the franchisee at the last address provided by the franchisee. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation owning a franchise issued by the city to distribute water by means of a public water system and who fails to comply with the requirements hereof, shall be in default of the obligation of the franchise issued by the city and may be assessed a civil penalty of not more that one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the violation continues and/or franchise may be revoked. 
(e)  Notice to appear before the board of aldermen with the date and time fixed thereon shall be issued to the franchisee to show cause why the franchisee should not be assessed with civil penalties and/or why the franchise should not be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 6-8-04) 
Secs. 10-3-10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Required sewage disposal facilities, § 9-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-20. - Sewer connection required. 
(a)  All plumbing, fixtures, sewer disposal facilities, and waste fixtures within a structure or located on any premises (either public or private), shall be connected to the wastewater treatment sewer system of the city, when determined by the city inspector there is available a main or lateral sewer line; after taking into consideration, among other aspects, the separation (both horizontal and vertical) of the structure in question and the sewer main or lateral, the municipal boundary, geographic location or other legally created boundaries and the available capacity of the wastewater treatment system, however, no connection(s) shall be permitted unless the property and the premises shall be situated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  In the event a premises within the corporate limits or newly annexed into the corporate limits currently utilizes a private wastewater treatment and disposal system meeting the requirements of the state sanitary code, as approved by the state health officer and the city inspector, such premises may continue to utilize a properly maintained private sewage treatment system for a period not to exceed five (5) years from the date of annexation of the premises by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 19-1; Ord. No. 1263, § 1, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 10-21. - Private sewage disposal systems, regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or install septic tanks, field drainage systems, mechanical plants, or any type of waste facility not connected to the sanitary sewer system on any premises, when a determination of available facilities has been made by the city inspector, as provided in section [10-]20 hereof. 
(b)  In the event that a premises is not required to be connected to a public sewer main or lateral, wastewater or sewage shall be disposed of only in a properly constructed and maintained mechanical plant or other acceptable means of private sewage treatment. All means of private wastewater treatment and disposal shall meet the requirements of the state sanitary code and shall be inspected and approved by the state health officer or representative thereof, and/or the city inspector, as may be required by the codes, articles or regulations applicable thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 19-4; Ord. No. 1263, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 10-22. - Prohibited connections, substances, maintenance responsibility and defects prohibited. 
(a)  Discharge prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or permit to be discharged any stormwater, surface water or other substances of such character other than as usual and customarily discharged into plumbing systems connected to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Infiltration prevention. All private lines, systems, appurtenances connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be maintained and kept in good repair to prevent the infiltration, intrusion and/or inflow of water or other substances. 
(c)  Notification of violation. When it shall have been determined that illegal and/or unauthorized connections exist or the condition of the private line or system is such that it shall allow or permit the intrusion of stormwater, surface water or other substances, the city inspector shall give written notice to such owner, owner's agent or representative via U.S. Mail, certified, properly addressed and postage prepaid, of such violation or defective condition and shall require the necessary repair, disconnection or other means so as to comply with this section within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, and further advising that the failure to make such repair or corrections as necessary to comply with the provision hereof for each thirty (30) days after such notice, shall be a separate violation of the provisions of this section and constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen may conduct the hearing and take evidence, require the attendance of witnesses and production of documents and other such matters of evidence relevant to such hearing. A record of the hearing shall be made, testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded stenographically or otherwise to produce an accurate transcript. The transcript (recording) will be made available to any member of the public upon payment of the usual and customary charges therefore. However, only a written transcript, certified by the person recording and making the transcript, shall be considered to be the official record. 
    After the mayor and board of aldermen have reviewed the evidence, including the testimony, documents and other exhibits as may be necessary, they shall render a decision, may issue an order to the owner and/or user responsible directing necessary repairs and/or corrective action within a specified time or the sewer service shall be disconnected unless adequate corrective action or repairs are made so as to end the violation and ensure that the private system serving the premises is functioning and shall continue to function properly. 
(d)  Cease and desist orders. Whenever the city inspector finds that a violation has occurred and/or continues to occur or that, due to the past violations, are likely to reoccur, the city inspector's office may issue an order to the owner and/or user directing all such violations immediately cease and desist until such appropriate, corrective or preventative action or repairs as may be needed to properly address the continuing or threatened violation, including halting such operations or terminating the discharge. The issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the owner and/or user provided for by this chapter. 
(e)  Notice of hearing. In the event that the city inspector finds that the violation has continued beyond the time permitted, the mayor may issue an order to the owner(s) and/or user(s) causing or contributing to the unauthorized connection and/or failure to properly maintain the private system to show cause before the mayor and board of aldermen why enforcement action should not be ordered. A notice shall be served upon the owner(s) and/or user(s) specifying the date, time and place of the hearing to be held by the mayor and board of aldermen regarding the violation(s), the reason(s) the action in is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the owner and/or user to show cause before the mayor and board of aldermen why enforcement action should not be ordered. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation or on any responsible person at the owner's last known address. Service may be made by the city marshal or the city inspector and a return of service shall be provided under oath. 
(f)  Emergency suspension of services. In the event that the wastewater treatment superintendent, the city inspector or other officer of the City of Crowley shall determine, in the opinion of such officer, the actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent and substantial hazard or endangerment to the public, to the environment or cause interference to the treatment facilities (PTOW) or cause the city to violate any condition of its NPEPDS permit, the city may issue an immediate suspension order to utility providers terminate all utilities, including water, electricity, gas or other utility serving the premises. The city shall notify the owner and/or user immediately of the suspension of services and further shall order the owner and/or user to immediately cease and desist such operation or eliminate the violation and shall advise the owner and/or user of the violation and the necessity to eliminate the said violation within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of notice of the occurrence. 
(g)  Legal action. In the event that any person discharges sewage, water or other waste into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state ordinances or any other ordinances, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief and/or civil penalties for violations hereof in the appropriate courts of this state. Any other action taken or not taken shall not be a prerequisite or act as a bar against prosecution of the owner and/or user. 
(h)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a violation has occurred or continues to occur, the city may petition any court of competent jurisdiction through the city attorney for the issuance for a temporary or permanent injunction as appropriate which restrains or compels specific performance of the order or other requirement(s) imposed by this chapter on the owner and/or user. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the owner and/or user. 
(i)  Civil penalties. Any owner and/or user who has violated or continues to violate an order of the mayor and board of aldermen who willfully failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the order's rules, regulations or permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, each day on which the violation shall occur or continue which shall be deemed a separate or distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys fees, court costs and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit in a court of competent jurisdiction against the person found to be in violation of this chapter, the rules, regulations or permits or orders issued hereunder. 
(j)  Criminal prosecution. Any person who willfully or negligently violates any of the provisions of this chapter, orders of the city issued hereunder or any other requirement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months. Each day the violation shall occur shall be considered a separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action or rights provided for under the provisions of this chapter or available under state law. 
(Code 1965, § 19-6; Ord. No. 1303, § 1, 1-11-05) 
Cross reference- Required facilities, § 9-9 et seq. 
Sec. 10-23. - Maintenance of service lines. 
(a)  Each property owner owning property connected to the sanitary sewage system of the city shall maintain and keep in good repair the service line to the city's sewer main. 
(b)  In the event that the owner of any such property or premises shall not reside in the city or in the event that any such property shall be owned in indivisum or by a corporation, it shall be the obligation and responsibility of the agent or representative of any such owners or the persons who have control of such property for the account of the owners thereof, or the persons who collect the rent on such property, if such property is rented, to maintain and keep in good repair such service line. 
(c)  When any such service line shall become defective, the city, through its city inspector, shall give written notice to such owner, or such owner's agent or representative, in writing, of such defective condition, which notice shall be delivered to such owner or to the premises and posted on the principal front door thereof. 
(d)  In the event that such owner, agent or other representative shall fail or neglect to make the necessary repairs to the service line within thirty (30) days after such written notice, such failure or neglect shall be a violation of the provisions of this section and each additional ten (10) days failure to repair such service line shall be a separate violation of the provisions of this section and shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. 
(Code 1965, § 19-7) 
Cross reference- Obstructing drainage, § 9-21. 
Sec. 10-24. - Connection(s) outside city-Authorized. 
    Any owner of property lying outside of the municipal limits of the City of Crowley and currently connected to the sanitary wastewater treatment system of the city, may remain connected thereto, provided such premises and systems comply with all rules and regulations relating to sewer and wastewater disposal connections and the requirements of the sanitary code of the city and the state; and pay the monthly fees and annual charges, as may be required. 
(Code 1965, § 19-16; Ord. No. 1263, § 3, 1-14-02) 
Sec. 10-25. - Same-Permit required; fee. 
    Prior to making any such connection outside the city the property owner shall obtain from the city inspector the necessary permit, and shall pay to the city clerk the sum of one dollar ($1.00) per month for each drain opening for such sanitary sewerage service to January 1 of the year following such connection. 
(Code 1965, § 19-17) 
Sec. 10-26. - Same-User charge. 
    On or before January first of each year, the property owner outside the city shall pay to the city clerk the sum of one dollar ($1.00) per month for each drain opening, for each such service for the period of one year. All such payments are to be made in advance. 
(Code 1965, § 19-18) 
Sec. 10-27. - Same-Disconnection for nonpayment; fee. 
    In the event that any property owner outside the city fails to make the annual payment for sewer service when the same becomes due, the city inspector shall cause the premises to be disconnected from the sewer system and such premises shall not be reconnected until such property owner has paid the charges and the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) covering the cost of disconnecting such premises from the system. 
(Code 1965, § 19-19) 
Sec. 10-28. - Discharge of infectious medical waste or hazardous wastewater. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall discharge into the sanitary sewerage system of the City of Crowley and/or into the storm drainage system of the City of Crowley, any wastewaters generated by the cleaning or washing of any vehicle, containers or structures containing infectious medical waste or hazardous waste as classified under the pertinent rules, regulations and laws of the State of Louisiana and the Department of Environmental Quality and/or the United States of America Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  In the event any person, firm or corporation should discharge any wastewater generated from any such vehicle, containers or structures into the city's wastewater disposal system and/or sanitary sewer or storm drainage system contrary to the provisions of this article, any federal, state or local pre-treatment requirements shall be subject to the criminal provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Any user who is found to have violated the provisions of this article, or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with the provisions of this article may be assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation; after having been ordered to show cause before the governing authority why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken against the party and to show cause why said penalty should not be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1133, §§ 1-3, 6-12-90) 
DIVISION 1.5. - SEWER SERVICE USER FEE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1116, §§ 1-11, adopted Nov. 10, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as Div. 1.5, §§ 10-29-10-38, for classification purposes at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-29. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used in this division shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
    Applicable meter reading period means each month during which the water company meter readings are made to compute the user fee from each contributor. The monthly charge for residential, commercial and industrial sewer services shall be computed on actual water consumption for each month of the year. 
    Billing and collecting agent or agent means the corporation, partnership, individual or other legal entity that has contracted with the city to perform the services as provided for in section 10-32(3). 
    City means the City of Crowley, Louisiana, with the mayor and board of aldermen as the governing authority thereof. 
    City corporate limits means all the territory situated within the corporate limits of the city. 
    City inspector means the chief inspector of the city, as appointed and designated by the mayor and board of aldermen, acting through and with the help and assistance of deputy city inspectors and other personnel of the office of the city inspector of the city. 
    Contributor means an individual dwelling unit or individual place of business or industry discharging or required to discharge wastewater into the sewer system. The term "contributor" includes both metered contributors and unmetered contributors. In the case of multiple dwelling units or places of business served by a single meter, "contributor" shall mean each of the individual dwelling units or business units shall be separate contributors for the base rate of the user fee. The property owner shall advise the water company of the number of individual dwelling units or individual business units located in each facility served by a single meter. The city shall advise the water company of the names and addresses of each contributor, except in the case of contributors who are served by a single meter; the owner of the single meter shall be responsible for payment of the number of individual contributors times the base rate plus the total amount of wastewater discharge. 
    Imputed neighborhood average means the volume of wastewater, as determined by reference to a table or other objective criteria promulgated by the city inspector, imputed to an unmetered contributor and a metered contributor for whom, for any reason, water company meter readings have not been made during the applicable meter reading period. 
    Metered contributor means a contributor who consumes water, the volume of which is determined by a water meter or other measuring device during an applicable meter reading period. 
    Monthly user fee bill or bill means a postcard or sheet of paper which will be mailed or delivered by the billing and collecting agent, unless such agent is the water company, to each contributor once a month and which sets out the amount of the contributor's user fee, together with delinquent user fees, if any, with interest, penalties, disconnection and reconnection charges as may be due under the regulations. 
    Monthly water bill means a postcard or sheet of paper on which will be delivered by the water company to each contributor once a month and which sets out the amount of the contributor's user fee, together with delinquent user fees, if any, with interest, penalties, disconnection and reconnection charges as may be due under the regulations. 
    Nonpotable water means untreated from any source which is to be discharged into, or is obligated under law to be discharged into, the sewerage system. 
    Potable water means pure, fresh water, suitable for consumption by humans. 
    Rate means the cost, measured in dollars and cents, for each unit of wastewater discharge in computing the user fee, and the minimum monthly user fee. The rate initially adopted hereunder consists of the aggregate amounts shown in section 10-30(a)(i) through (a)(3), based on actual water consumption for the six (6) month period described under the defined term "applicable meter reading period." 
    Regulations means rules, guidelines and procedures to be developed, coordinated, promulgated and kept up to date by the city inspector, referred to in sections 10-32 and 10-33, for the economic and efficient administration of the provisions of this division. 
    Sewerage System means all wastewater collection sewers, wastewater pumping and transmission and wastewater treatment and disposal facilities now existing or hereafter constructed, acquired, owned or operated by the city, which sewerage system is hereby declared to be a combined "revenue-producing public utility" within the meaning of Title 33, subsection 4161 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer of the city. 
    Unmetered contributor means a contributor who consumes potable water and/or nonpotable water, the volume of all or any material part of which is not measured by a water meter or other device during an applicable meter reading period. 
    User fee or user fees means the sewerage service charge levied and to be collected hereunder from each contributor. 
    User fee effective date is the date specified in section 10-30 that sewer service charges or user fees begin to accrue hereunder, effective and collectible in accordance with the schedule of rates and other conditions and provisions of this division. 
    Utility service area means all of the territory within the city corporate limits and all territory situated outside of the city corporate limits now or hereafter served by the sewerage system owned or operated by the city. 
    Wastewater means sewage or other waste effluent required by law to be discharged into the sewerage system. 
    Wastewater discharge means the volume of wastewater imputed to each contributor for the purpose of computing the user fee, based on water company meter readings during the applicable meter reading period or the imputed neighborhood average. 
    Water means potable water and nonpotable water consumed by a contributor, a portion of which is discharged into or must, under applicable law, be discharged into the sewerage system. 
    Water company means Louisiana Water Co., a Louisiana corporation domiciled in Baton Route, Louisiana, with home offices at 8755 Goodwood Boulevard, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Said company is a private legal entity engaged in the business of providing potable water and water system services within the utility service area, during applicable meter reading periods under this division. 
    Water company meter readings means water meter readings of volume of potable water, sold to each contributor by the water company, through the use of water meters during an applicable meter reading period. 
(Ord. No. 1116, §§ 1, 4, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 1119, § 2, 2-27-88; Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 10-30. - User fee. 
(a)  There is hereby authorized to be collected by the city from each contributor, commencing April 1, 2008, a monthly sewerage service charge or user fee to pay the reasonable and necessary costs of administration, operation, maintenance, replacement, and improvement of the sewerage system, including the payment of debt services and reserve requirements on sewer revenue bonds of the city issued for the purposes of acquiring and construction of additions and improvements to the sewerage system of the city, as follows: 
(1)  In the utility service area, for the first two thousand (2,000) gallons or less of wastewater discharge, a base user fee of eleven dollars ($11.00) per month for each contributor; plus 
(2)  In the utility service area, for wastewater discharge in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons, a user fee in the amount of two dollars and eighty-five cents ($2.85) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of wastewater discharge or twenty-eight and one-half cents ($0.285) for each one hundred (100) gallons of wastewater discharge. 
(3)  In the utility service area, in addition to the amounts above, the surcharge referred to in subsection 10-32(7), for discharge of wastewater exceeding the strength of two hundred (200) parts per million in biochemical oxygen demand or two hundred fifty (250) parts per million in total suspended solids. 
(4)  In the utility service area, in addition to the amounts above, the connection, reconnection charges and late charges, including interest for nonpayment or late payment of the user fee. 
(b)  There is hereby additionally authorized to be collected by the city from each contributor, commencing April 1, 2008, and each year thereafter, for the purposes provided for above, a monthly sewer service charge or user fee in the aggregate amounts described in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) above, subject to adjustments as may hereafter be adopted and approved by the governing authority of the city each year in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 2, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 1119, § 1, 2-27-88; Ord. No. 1167, § 3, 7-18-95; Ord. No. 1380, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 10-31. - Payment. 
    The user fee hereby authorized shall be payable in advance on the effective date referred to in section 10-30, and on such date as may be provided for with the monthly water bill provided by the water company or, if the billing and collecting agent is not the water company, in a monthly user fee bill mailed or delivered by the billing and collecting agent. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 3, 11-10-87) 
Sec. 10-32. - Regulations and guidelines. 
    The city inspector, with the advice and approval of the mayor and city attorney, be and he is hereby empowered, authorized and directed to prepare and promulgate regulations necessary to collect and administer the collection and deposit of the user fee authorized by this division, which regulations shall contain provisions dealing with the following subject matter and be subject to the following guidelines: 
(1)  The regulations shall define the imputed neighborhood average volume of wastewater on the basis of objective criteria and guidelines, charges and procedures, with respect to an unmetered contributor and a metered contributor for whom, for any reason, historic water company meter readings are not available for an applicable meter reading period. 
(2)  The user fee initially adopted herein has been adjusted to reflect the assumption that the average contributor discharges as wastewater one hundred (100) per cent of potable water consumed during the applicable meter reading period. If a contributor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city inspector that a lower percentage of potable water is discharged to the sewerage system, the regulations shall empower the city inspector to reduce the wastewater discharge in computing the user fee by an appropriate amount. The city inspector shall maintain a current list of all reductions granted and the reasons supporting such reductions. No reduction will be allowed for normal automobile washing or lawn watering at residences. 
(3)  The water company shall act as the billing and collecting agent, as shall be provided for in an agreement authorized to be entered into between the city and water company. The billing and collecting agent shall perform duties anticipated under the provisions of this division including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Taking or receiving the water company meter readings for applicable meter reading periods and computing and printing each contributor's monthly user fee; 
(b)  Mailing and/or delivering each contributor's monthly user fee bill to the correct address, insofar as possible; 
(c)  Receiving and accounting for user fee revenues paid by contributors and remitting such moneys on a weekly basis, as collected, for deposit in the revenue fund with the treasurer of the city, or the city fiscal agent bank if directed by the mayor of the city; and 
(d)  Maintaining books and records open for inspection by the city during regular business hours at the office of the agent in Crowley, Louisiana, as provided in the agreement between the city and the agent; 
(e)  Using reasonable care to collect user fees from contributors as designated by the city; provided, however, the agent shall not be liable to the city for failure to collect all or any portion of the user fees from one (1) or more contributors, except as a result of the agent's gross negligence or malfeasance. 
(4)  For computation of the user fee rates in the calendar year 1989, and each calendar year thereafter, the water company shall provide, to the city, water company meter readings for the applicable meter reading period by no later than July first of each year. 
(5)  Beginning July 1, 1988, and on or before July first of each calendar year thereafter, the agent shall compute each contributor's user fee for the next following calendar year. Such computation shall adjust the rate upward or downward, as necessary to produce revenues to pay operation and maintenance costs of the sewerage system and the debt service and reserve requirements on sewer revenue bonds. In order to assist the agent in making such computation, the city shall provide a budget showing the principal and interest and reserve requirements for outstanding bonds and the cost of operation and maintenance to be paid from user fee revenues in the next following year. 
    When the agent has completed its initial computation of each contributor's proposed user fee for the next following year, such computation shall be reviewed and approved by the city, whereupon the city shall, through the water company, advise contributors of their user fee rate for the next following year. Such advice shall be given no later than November thirtieth of each year. The water company, the agent and the city shall cooperate in making the annual computation of user fees. It is the intention hereof that annual user fee rates be adopted at the lowest level reasonably possible, consistent with the budget of estimated income and expenditures, including moneys necessary to pay debt service and reserve requirements for sewer revenue bonds. 
(6)  The city authorizes the city inspector to provide services to citizens and customers of the sewerage system, as herein anticipated. Such office is empowered to correct and adjust bills, answer questions and receive and act on complaints, as herein provided. 
(7)  The regulations shall provide for a surcharge for discharge by commercial and industrial users of wastewater exceeding the strength of two hundred (200) parts per million in biochemical oxygen demand or two hundred fifty (250) parts per million of total suspended solids. The rate of the surcharge applicable to the utility service area shall be increased by two (2) per cent for each ten (10) parts per million of biochemical oxygen demand which exceeds a strength of two hundred (200) parts per million, or total suspended solids exceeding a strength of two hundred fifty (250) parts per million, but not both. The city inspector shall provide to the water company or agent, if other than water company, information necessary to provide for the billing of the surcharge. 
(8)  The regulations shall provide that if any contributor to the sewerage system fails or neglects to timely pay his user fee in full, after reasonable notice, as provided for in the regulations, the affected premises shall be and the same are hereby authorized to be condemned by the city inspector and the water service disconnected to such premises. Such condemnation shall be ordered and take effect under the operation of this division upon the water company providing the city inspector a "delinquent list" in a form satisfactory to the water company, which sets out the name and address of each delinquent contributor, the amounts respectively owed and the dates to which the delinquency applies, and when the water company has received from the city inspector said delinquent list, which contains an acknowledgment of receipt of said delinquent list by the city inspector. Promptly upon receipt by the water company from the city inspector of the delinquent list, the water company shall cut off water to the condemned premises. Delinquent lists shall be prepared by the water company not more often than once each week. The city inspector shall have the power to strike a name from the delinquent list, provided that no name shall be stricken except for good reason as, for example, the alleged delinquent bill has been paid; payment of the delinquent bill has been assured pursuant to arrangements that are satisfactory to the city inspector; the bill is in error; the cut off of water services will create a life-threatening situation for an aged or ill person or deny services to a widow and orphans. The water company shall be entitled to prompt reimbursement from the city for providing disconnection and reconnection services. The city shall be entitled to recover its cost incurred as a result of disconnection and reconnection, and such cost shall constitute a part of and be added to the user fee bill levied and authorized to be collected hereunder. 
(9)  The regulations may provide for the establishment of a one dollar ($1.00) per month voluntary contribution fund from each sewer user, providing for a voluntary one dollar ($1.00) per month additional amount to be added to accounts of customers who choose to contribute to a special fund established for assistance to residential sewer users in need. The regulations shall further provide for a board to administer the fund, which shall be composed of persons appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen of the city and which shall have authority to disburse the said funds to those persons found in need of assistance. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 5, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 1119, §§ 4-6, 2-27-88) 
Sec. 10-33. - Right of appeal. 
    Regulations promulgated hereunder shall provide for the right of appeal for refund of user fees paid under protest with respect to any provision, application or effect of this division and said regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 6, 11-10-87) 
Sec. 10-34. - Revenue fund; uses. 
(a)  All revenues derived by the city from collection of the user fees shall be deposited into a special dedicated fund to be known as the "comprehensive sewerage system revenue fund" or "Revenue fund." Moneys in the revenue fund shall be used solely for the making of payments for the cost of administration, operation, maintenance, depreciation, replacement, extension and improvement of the sewerage system, including any payments required by the provisions of any resolution authorizing the issuance of sewerage revenue bonds. Moneys in the revenue fund shall not be available for transfer, appropriation or expenditure by the city for any purpose other than the purposes specified in this section and in the resolution or resolutions providing for the issuance of sewerage revenue bonds. 
(b)  Moneys on deposit in the revenue fund not needed for expenditure shall be invested by the treasurer in direct obligations of the United States and in other securities authorized by Louisiana law for the deposit of public funds. Moneys earned on investment of idle funds shall be credited to the revenue fund for the purposes such revenue fund is created. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 7, 11-10-87) 
Sec. 10-35. - Exemptions from user fee. 
    No fee services shall be provided by the sewerage system to any building, place of residence, facility or other premises, and all contributors shall be obligated to pay the user fee provided for herein, without exception or discrimination, including local, state and federal governmental entities and nonprofit and religious corporations or organizations. Consumers of potable water who do not discharge wastewater into the sewerage system and who are not obligated by local or state law to connect to the sewerage system for the discharge of wastewater into the environment are not subject to the user fee. Any premises which has its own treatment works, such as septic tanks not operated and maintained at public expense, and who may discharge wastewater into the environment in compliance with all local, state and federal laws and regulations, shall not be subject to the user fee. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 8, 11-10-87) 
Sec. 10-36. - Review of user fee. 
(a)  The rate established herein shall be reviewed annually, on or before September 1 of each year by the city and shall be revised upward or downward as necessary to reflect, at a minimum, revenues to pay the actual cost of administration, operation, maintenance, extension, development and improvement, including debt service and reserve requirements on any sewerage revenue bond of the sewerage system. 
(b)  The rate review shall be made automatically by the city engineer who shall compile information from the water company and the certified public accountant of the City of Crowley. The city engineer shall provide certification to the mayor and board of aldermen of the rate adjustment necessary to provide adequate revenue for the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 9, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 1167, § 4, 7-18-95) 
Sec. 10-37. - Surplus moneys. 
    Any surplus in the user fee, after the payment of all legal obligations, operations and maintenance, as provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness of the city payable in whole or in part from user moneys, shall be used for the purpose of reduction of the user fee rate. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 10, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 1119, § 3, 2-27-88) 
Sec. 10-38. - Indemnification. 
    In consideration of the agreements and undertakings by the agent, the city agrees to indemnify, hold the agent harmless and defend the agent and water company, if different from the agent, for any violations of, or noncompliance with, environmental laws or regulations, and it is agreed that the agent and water company, by agreeing to perform functions as herein provided, do not assume or accept responsibility for city sewer operations. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 11, 11-10-87) 
Sec. 10-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1161, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 1994, amended former Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 10-40-10-64, to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, Div. 2, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1965, §§ 19-30-19-33, 19-46-19-53, 19-64-19-75. 

Sec. 10-40. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City of Crowley, Louisiana, and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Register Part 403). The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; 
(4)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; 
(5)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(6)  To enable the City of Crowley to comply with its national pollution discharge elimination system and/or Louisiana Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject; and 
(7)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
    This division provides for the regulation of all users of the publicly owned treatment works through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
    This division shall apply to the City of Crowley, Acadia Parish, Louisiana, and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city or otherwise, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of the publicly owned treatment works of the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to a duly authorized city employee. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority or administrator. The secretary of the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater contribution permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Best management practices or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsection 10-41(a). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at 20;deg; Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/l). 
    Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Bypass. The discharge of wastewater into the city's sewage collection system which is not pretreated as required by this ordinance or by wastewater contribution permit issued by the city. 
    Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard or categorical pretreatment standard. 
    Chemical oxygen demand or COD. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
    City. The City of Crowley, Louisiana, or the mayor and board of aldermen of Crowley, Louisiana. 
    Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
    Control authority. The term "control authority" shall refer to the "approval authority", defined hereinabove, or the superintendent if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Daily maximum limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Louisiana. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
    Federal categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard or categorical pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific category of and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Grab sample. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations and which contributes to a violation of any requirements of the city's NPDES and/or LPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    Local limit or technically based limit or TBLL. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
    Louisiana Pollution Discharge Elimination System or LPDES permit. A permit issued by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Monthly average. The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    Minor industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who is not a significant industrial user or nonsignificant industrial user and has a discharge with, or the potential for, a high concentration of conventional pollutants or other constituents. 
    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342). 
    New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at the site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subparagraph (1)b., c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Nonsignificant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who is not a significant industrial user or a minor industrial user and who has a discharge comprised of domestic wastewater only. 
    Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Crowley's NPDES and/or LPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, federal, state or local governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH. The measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standard or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any device or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any sewers that convey wastewater to a treatment plant. For the purposes of this division, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU). Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this definition, a significant industrial user is: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) per cent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
b.  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in subsection 10-44(b)(2), together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
c.  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 10-41 of this division or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    State. State of Louisiana. 
    Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids or total suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) or other acts. 
    Upset. An inhibition or disruption of the treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations, which is a cause or significantly contributes to a decrease in the quality of the effluent being discharged from the treatment plant or a decrease in the performance of the treatment plant processes or operations. 
    User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in subsection 10-44(b) of this division. 
    Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    These definitions shall be considered amended after adoption of this division by the promulgation of rules or regulations by the administrator or under the provisions of the Act. 
(c)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand 
BMP - Best management practice 
BMR - Baseline monitoring report 
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
CIU - Categorical industrial user 
COD - Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd - Gallons per day 
IU - Industrial user 
l - Liter 
LDEQ - Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality 
LPDES- Louisiana Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
mg - Milligrams 
mg/l - Milligrams per liter 
NPDES - National pollutant discharge elimination system 
O&M - Operation and maintenance 
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC - Standard industrial classification 
SIU - Significant industrial user 
SNC - Significant noncompliance 
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
TSS - Total suspended solids 
USC - United States Code 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-41. - Regulations. 
(a)  General discharge prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. No user shall contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five (5) per cent nor any single reading over ten (10) per cent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, but in no case will any user discharge solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater or unless specific written authorization is given by the city, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. The city reserves the right, at its own discretion, to establish upper pH limits and such upper pH limits will be described in the industrial users' wastewater contribution permit. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or that may cause acute worker health and safety problems or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or LPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES and/or LPDES permit. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40°C (104°F) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(13)  Any visible free animal or vegetable oil and grease which would cause the POTW interference, pass through, or treatment upset, or total animal or vegetable oil and grease exceeding one hundred (100) milligrams per liter. This local limit will be monitored by the industrial user and/or by the city when deemed appropriate by the city through a wastewater contribution permit. 
(14)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(15)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(16)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent. 
(17)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent. 
(18)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(19)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in an individual wastewater contribution permit. 
(20)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test. 
(21)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(b)  Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The federal pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(5)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. 
(c)  Specific pollutant limitations. The city has developed technically based local limits in accordance with the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. The limits, as listed below, are daily maximum concentration limits in milligrams per liter (mg/l) allowable for industry's discharges to the sanitary sewage collection system. The city will apply the concentration limits uniformly to each permitted industrial user of the city's POTW unless there is a particular categorical limitation established in the federal guidelines which is more stringent than any of the limitations listed below. The city may, at its own discretion, choose to allocate only certain pollutant parameters listed in the table below to specific industrial users. The city retains full authority, upon the approval of EPA and/or LDEQ, to increase or decrease these local limits; and, establish local limits for additional pollutant parameters not herein listed. Limits imposed on industrial users may be in the form of daily maximums and/or specific period (i.e., monthly) average. The limits listed below apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. At his discretion, the superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration based limitations below. 
Pollutant Daily Maximum Concentration Limits (mg/l) Arsenic 2.26 Cadmium 0.74 Copper 3.66 Cyanide 0.22 Lead 0.83 Mercury 0.0043 Nickel 20.22 Silver 0.002 Total Chromium 5.00 Zinc 6.37 Phenol 181.13  
    Grease, oil, and sand traps, interceptors or hold-haul tanks shall be provided for the proper handling of waste containing grease in amounts above the limits herein, and/or other material deemed harmful to the treatment plant and/or collection system. However, interceptors and traps are not required for private living quarters or dwellings. All interceptors and traps shall meet the standards prescribed in the rules and procedures established by the required regulatory agencies. All interceptors and trap basins shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for easy cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction and equipped with easily removable covers or grates. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand traps and/or interceptors shall be maintained by the owner or occupant at his own expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
    Storage, handling, disposal and transportation of the waste material removed from pretreatment facilities shall be done according to all applicable federal, state, and local regulations that pertain to the type and/or class of waste generated. 
    Any industry with grease and sand trap pretreatment tanks shall keep accurate records as to when the tank was cleaned, who performed the cleaning, and the method and location of disposal of the contents removed. These records shall be made available to the superintendent or his representative upon request. This information shall be kept on file by the user for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(d)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply when more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(e)  City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater contribution permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in subsection 10-40(a) of this division. 
(f)  Dilution of discharge prohibited. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state unless expressly authorized by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations (pounds per day) on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(g)  [Development of BMPs.] The superintendent may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of subsection 10-41(a). 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-42. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in subsection 10-41(a) of this division within the time limitations as specified by the EPA, LDEQ, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any industrial user required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall provide, operate and maintain adequate treatment facilities at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Review and/or approval of the pretreatment system by the city shall not be construed as approval of the applicability, adequacy or structural integrity of the pretreatment system nor is any warranty of any kind to be implied. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or state authority upon request. 
(b)  Accidental discharges/slug control plan. Each user, whether new or existing, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. 
    The superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan or the action to control slug discharges. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by this section; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, employee training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
    In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
    Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
    Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(c)  Hauled wastewater procedures. The discharge of hauled wastewater into the POTW at any location must be approved by the superintendent prior to any such discharge. If, at the city's discretion, such waste is allowed, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the superintendent, and at such times as are established by the superintendent. Such waste shall not violate section 10-41 of this division or any other requirements established by the city. The superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater contribution permits. 
(2)  The superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater contribution permits. The superintendent may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater contribution permits. The superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this division. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge, such waste analysis to be provided at the hauler's expense. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(d)  Provisions for fraud and false statements. The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this division shall be subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to fraud and false statements, the provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation or certification, and the provisions of Section 309(c)(6) regarding responsible corporate officers. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-43. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(b)  Charges and fees. The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater contribution permit application including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Annual permit fees for significant industrial users and industrial waste haulers; 
(3)  Fees for monitoring, inspecting and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(4)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards; 
(7)  Fees for dumping septage or for waste haulers discharging to the city's POTW; 
(8)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
    These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
    All pretreatment program costs shall be apportioned to each user on a pro-rata basis for all outside costs or charges incurred by the city and shall be paid as invoiced. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-44. - Administration. 
(a)  Wastewater discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural outlet within the City of Crowley, Louisiana, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this division. The POTW has the legal authority to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions could cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Wastewater contribution permits. 
(1)  Wastewater contribution permits. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this division. 
(2)  Permit application. Significant industrial users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the city. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this division, and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All minor industrial users and nonsignificant industrial users shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the city, for verification of discharge status. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
a.  Name, address and location, (if different from the address); 
b.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
c.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in subsection 10-41(c) of this division as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended; 
d.  Time and duration of contribution; 
e.  Average daily and maximum daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any; 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, and location and elevation; 
g.  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
h.  For existing users where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
i.  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard: 
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
1.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
2.  No increment referred to in paragraph 1. shall exceed six (6) months. 
3.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than six (6) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
j.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
k.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
l.  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
m.  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application; 
n.  All wastewater contribution permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine or imprisonment for knowing violations." 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(3)  Permit modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by subsection 10-44(b)(2), the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the superintendent within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of any applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the information required by paragraphs h. and i. of subsection 10-44(b)(2). 
(4)  Permit conditions. Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits shall contain the following: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater contribution permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater contribution permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection 10-44(b)(6) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater contribution permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, and local law. 
The wastewater contribution permit may contain, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
b.  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
c.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
d.  Compliance schedules; 
e.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
f.  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
g.  Requirements for notification of slug discharge as per subsection 10-42(b); 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division; 
i.  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
j.  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the superintendent to be necessary. 
(5)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for no more than five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 10-41 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed by the superintendent of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
Minor industrial users shall complete the application process annually and nonsignificant industrial users every three (3) years for verification of discharge status. 
(6)  Nontransferability of permits. Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without giving at least thirty (30) days' notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the wastewater contribution permit transfer. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer shall render the wastewater contribution permit void as of the date of the facility transfer. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit for a period of ninety (90) days during which time the user shall comply with all regulations for application for a new permit. 
(c)  Reporting requirements. 
(1)  Baseline reports. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision made under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing users subject to categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information listed below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become subject to categorical pretreatment standards subsequent to, the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit a report to the superintendent which contains the information listed below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet the applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Users described above shall submit information set forth below: 
a.  Identifying information: Name and address of facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Permits: List of all environmental control permits held by or for facility. 
c.  Description of operations: A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, SIC number, schematic process flow diagram indicating points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement: The measured average and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurements of pollutants: (1) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; (2) the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in f. below. Sample collection shall be as follows: 
1.  Except as indicated in subsection 2. below, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the superintendent. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
2.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
3.  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by subsection 10-44(c)(3) (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
f.  Analytical requirements: All pollutant analysis and sampling techniques shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(2)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. 
This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified chemist or professional engineer. 
(3)  Periodic compliance reports. All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the superintendent submit no less than twice per year (June and December or on dates specified) reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection 10-44(b)(2)e. At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the reports required (baseline monitoring, compliance date, and periodic compliance reports) shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by EPA. 
When in the course of the self-monitoring sampling program an industrial user discovers through the laboratory analyses that the facility is not in compliance, the industrial user shall notify the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery of noncompliance and resample the wastewater discharge. The new analyses shall be submitted to the superintendent within thirty (30) days after discovering the occurrence of noncompliance. Each monitoring report submitted to the superintendent shall contain the certification statement as indicated in subsection 10-44(b)(2)n. in this division and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(4)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operation or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater. 
a.  The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater contribution permit application under subsection 10-44(b)(2) of this division. 
b.  The superintendent may issue a wastewater contribution permit under subsection 10-44(b) of this division or modify an existing wastewater contribution permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
c.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) per cent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(5)  Hazardous waste discharge report. Any user who discharges to the POTW any waste which, if otherwise disposed of, would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 shall notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division manager, and the Louisiana Hazardous Waste Authority in writing. The city shall be notified prior to any such discharge and give approval before the hazardous waste may be discharged into the city's waste treatment system. 
All notifications shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261 and the EPA hazardous waste number; 
b.  The type of discharge (batch, continuous, or other); 
c.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the discharge; 
d.  An estimate of the mass and concentration of the hazardous constituents in the wastestream to be discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. 
The city will not authorize any hazardous waste discharge into the city's collection system until such time as the user has demonstrated that, at a minimum, the above notification procedures have been performed. 
(6)  Report of potential slug discharge. Significant industrial users are required to notify the superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(7)  [Notification required.] If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
(d)  Monitoring facilities. The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public right of way area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
    There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
    All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(e)  Inspection and sampling. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, state authority, or the U.S. EPA or their representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, state authority and U.S. EPA shall be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(1)  All categorical industrial users and significant industrial users shall install, at the users' own expense, an adequate sampling port at a location agreed upon by the city and the industrial user. The city shall inspect the facilities of each categorical industrial user and significant industrial user at least once per year to, at a minimum, ascertain whether the purposes of this division and all other requirements are being complied with, collect wastewater samples, establish surcharge, etc. 
(2)  All other industrial users not described in subsection 10-44(e)(1) above may be required to install, at the users' own expense, an adequate sampling port at a location agreed upon by the city and the industrial user. The city may inspect the facilities of these other industrial users to verify the discharge, collect wastewater samples, establish surcharge, and ascertain whether the purposes of this division and all other requirements are being complied with. 
(f)  Recordkeeping requirements. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under subsection 10-41(g). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. 
    Any user subject to reporting requirements established in this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying all records of information resulting from any monitoring activity required and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Such records shall include: 
(1)  The time, date, exact place and method of sampling; 
(2)  Who performed the sampling; 
(3)  The date and who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of the analyses. 
    These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be extended during the course of any litigation regarding the user, or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention time by the superintendent. 
(g)  Search warrants. If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City of Crowley designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the city court of Crowley. 
(h)  Confidential information. 
(1)  Access to data. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the users. Any such claim must be asserted at the time of submission in the manner prescribed on the wastewater contribution permit application form. 
When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
Information accepted by the city as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agent by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(2)  Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The city shall annually publish in the Crowley Post Signal or its official journal a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment requirements or standards during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) per cent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in subsection 10-40(b); 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) per cent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by subsection 10-40(b) multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 10-41 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
d.  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
e.  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater contribution permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
f.  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
h.  Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
The definition of significant noncompliance as described above may be subject to change depending upon the most current definition of significant noncompliance established by the U.S. EPA Region 6 office. The City of Crowley reserves the right to alter, modify and use, at the time of annual evaluation, the definition of significant noncompliance as established by the U.S. EPA Region 6 at the time of such annual evaluations. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-45. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated, or continues to violate, this division, wastewater contribution permit, any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may serve upon such person a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
    Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such document shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders and will be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The city may order any user who causes or contributes to violation of this division or any order issued hereunder or causes or contributes to violation of its wastewater contribution permit or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the mayor and board of aldermen why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the mayor and board of aldermen regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the mayor and board of aldermen why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the mayor and board of aldermen notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen for action thereon. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charge thereof. 
    After the mayor and board of aldermen have reviewed the evidence, the city may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances and are being properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the superintendent finds a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater contribution permit, orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time or sewer services shall be discontinued until the user has demonstrated being in compliance. A compliance order may not extend the compliance deadline established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater contribution permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventative actions as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
    Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Emergency suspension. The city shall suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
    Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment services and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City of Crowley shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(g)  Revocation of permit. The superintendent may revoke a wastewater contribution permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater contribution permit application; 
(2)  Failure of the user to provide prior notification to the superintendent of any significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the wastewater contribution permit, this division, or any pretreatment standard or requirement; 
(5)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports or tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(7)  Failure to pay fines or sewer charges; 
(8)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(9)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater contribution permit application; 
(10)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions of subsection 10-45(g) of this division, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater contribution permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 10-41 of this division. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection 10-45(c) of this division why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-46. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court(s) of this state. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, provisions of this division, a wastewater contribution permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent may petition any court of competent jurisdiction through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater contribution permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on actions of the user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(2)  Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated, or continues to violate, an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provisions of this division, a wastewater contribution permit, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. 
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other actions against a user. 
(3)  Criminal prosecution. Any person that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, or a wastewater contribution permit, orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement or standard, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
Any user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to penalty of at least five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both. 
(4)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided in this division are not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-47. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" is defined as an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operations. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards but the user must demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was, at the time of the upset, operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (oral communications must be followed with written submissions within five (5) days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance, 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including the exact times and dates or, if not corrected, the anticipated time noncompliance is expected to continue, and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(3)  In any enforcement proceedings, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(4)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(5)  The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in situations where among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "bypass" is defined as the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds the applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours and written notice within five (5) days from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. Written notices shall contain a description of the bypass and its causes, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates, times, and, if not corrected, the anticipated time the bypass is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrences of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written requirements if the oral notice was received within twenty-four (24) hours, on a case-by-case basis. 
(3)  Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There was no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of an auxiliary treatment facility, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection 10-47(b)(2) of this section; 
d.  The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-48. - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this division is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-49. - Conflict. 
    All other ordinances or parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this division are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-50. - Effective date. 
    This division shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Secs. 10-51-10-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 10-70. - Disposal to comply with state board of health rules. 
    All disposal of garbage and other refuse within the city shall be by methods specifically approved by the state board of health, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1965, § 12-1; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-71. - Containers required; specification; definitions; use. 
(a)  No owner, lessee or occupant of any public or private premises shall permit to accumulate upon such premises any garbage, solid waste, debris or other refuse except in containers which shall meet the following specifications and definitions: 
(1)  Container. A receptacle with a capacity greater than twenty (20) gallons, but no more than thirty-two (32) gallons, constructed of plastic metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, and having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. The mouth of the container shall have a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base. The weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds. Such container shall be kept covered at all times except when garbage or refuse is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. 
(2)  Bin. A metal receptacle (commonly known as a dumpster) designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically, for use at commercial businesses and industrial establishments; which bins are provided to commercial and industrial units by contract through the Acadia Parish Police Jury with a designated contractor. 
(3)  Solid waste. Unwanted or discarded materials with insufficient liquid content to be freeflowing that results from domestic, industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental, and community operations which require proper storage, collection, transportation and disposal to prevent environmental pollution inimical to public health, safety and welfare. Solid waste does not include sewerage, earth or material used to fill land in accordance with construction codes, mining residues, slag, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste effluents, which are not acceptable for disposal in sanitary sewerage treatment systems. Synonym: "refuse." 
(4)  Garbage. All normal and usual household and institutional waste products that are placed in approved containers for collection purposes and are usually a mixture of putrescible, nonputrescible, combustible and incombustible materials, such as organic wastes from food preparation and consumption, wrapping and packaging materials, metal, glass and plastic containers and other items. This definition also applies to similar waste products from commercial establishments such as restaurants, cafeterias, schools and hospitals. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage or destroy any garbage container or bin as required in this section belonging to any other person or the contractor for the Acadia Parish Police Jury. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or deposit any garbage, refuse or any other waste matter as defined herein into any container or bin that is not owned by said person and/or has not been designated or assigned to said person, firm, commercial establishment or industrial unit. 
(Code 1965, § 12-5; Ord. No. 1136, § 1, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-72. - Refusal to service nonconforming containers. 
    The contractor as designated by the Acadia Parish Police Jury is not required to handle, empty or collect garbage or otherwise service garbage containers or bins not in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 12-8; Ord. No. 1136, § 2, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 10-73. - Disposal of animal offal and carcasses. 
    Animal offal and carcasses of dead animals shall be removed from the city and disposed of by methods approved by the parish health officer. 
(Code 1965, § 12-4; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 4. 
Sec. 10-74. - Depositing on streets, banquettes. 
(a)  Streets. No person shall place or cause to be placed in or on the public streets of the city, between the curbs or drain ditches thereof, any trash, debris or garbage, whether or not same is in receptacles or containers. 
(b)  Banquettes. No person shall place or cause to be placed in or on the banquettes of any street or avenue of the city any trash, debris or garbage, whether or not same is in receptacles or containers, save and except the banquette directly adjoining property owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person or such person's employer. 
(Code 1965, § 12-13; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Cross reference- See also § 9-20 et seq. 
Sec. 10-75. - Rodent, insect and nuisance control. 
    The methods of disposing of garbage and other refuse shall include the maximum practicable rodent, insect and nuisance control at any place of disposal. 
(Code 1965, § 12-2; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Secs. 10-76-10-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 10-86. - Title and purpose. 
    This article title the "Groundwater Protection Ordinance" establishes a zoning overlay district to be known as the "Drinking Water Protection Critical Area". The purpose of the drinking water protection critical area is to protect groundwater from contamination. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-87. - Authority. 
    The drinking water protection critical area is an overlay district superimposed on the zoning districts in the City of Crowley, and shall apply to all new construction, reconstruction, or expansion of existing buildings and new or expanded uses. Activities/facilities/uses must comply with the requirements of both the drinking water protection critical area and any underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 2, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-88. - Definitions. 
    Abandoned water well. A well thats use has been permanently discontinued; its pumping equipment has been permanently removed; the well is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used to supply water and/or has the potential for transmitting surface contaminants into an aquifer; the well poses potential health or safety hazards; or the well is in such a condition that it cannot be placed in the active, standby, or inactive status. 
    Animal feedlot/dairies. Defined as having one thousand (1,000) cattle or comparable "animal units" of other livestock. 
    Applicant. Person or persons applying for a special permit for a facility within the drinking water protection critical area. 
    Aquifer. A water-bearing rock, sand or gravel layer that will yield water in a usable quantity to a well or spring. 
    Class I well. Wells used to inject hazardous wastes or dispose of nonhazardous industrial waste and treated municipal sewage below the deepest underground source of drinking water. 
    Class II well. Wells used to inject fluids associated with the production of oil and natural gas or fluids and compounds used for enhanced hydrocarbon recovery. These wells normally inject below the deepest underground source of drinking water (USDW) except in cases where the USDW contains producible quantities of oil or gas. 
    Class III well. Wells that inject fluids used in subsurface mining of minerals. 
    Class V well. Wells not included in the other classes that inject nonhazardous fluid into or above an underground source of drinking water. (The seven (7) major types of Class V wells include drainage wells, geothermal reinjection wells, domestic wastewater disposal wells, mineral and fossil fuel recovery related wells, industrial/commercial/utility disposal wells, recharge wells and miscellaneous wells. Class V injection wells also include all large-capacity cesspools and motor vehicle waste disposal wells.) 
    Contamination. The presence of a material that may cause or significantly contribute to a present or potential risk to human health, safety, welfare, or that is present in groundwater resources or to the natural environment such that it degrades the quality of the resource so as to constitute a hazard and/or impair its use. 
    Delineation. Determining the outline or shape of a drinking water protection area. 
    Drinking water protection area. The area around a drinking water source, such as a well or surface water intake, such as delineated by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality as part of the source water assessment program. This area is shown on source water assessment program maps and contains the drinking water protection critical area. 
    Drinking water protection critical area. The zoning district defined to overlay other zoning districts in the City of Crowley. This district is defined as the area within a one thousand-foot radial boundary from public or municipal drinking water wells that have been identified and mapped by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality as part of the source water assessment program. (Based on research, the natural breakdown and degradation of many contaminants beyond one thousand (1,000) feet reduces the risk of contaminants outside the critical area from reaching the well.) 
    Groundwater. The water contained in the interconnected pores located below the ground in an aquifer. 
    Hazardous materials. A material that may cause or significantly contribute to a present or potential risk to human health, safety, welfare, to ground water resources or to the natural environment or that is defined in the following categories: 
Carcinogenic. A gas, liquid, or solid which is normally considered to be cancer causing or mutagenic. Examples: PCB's in some waste oils. 
Corrosive. Any material, whether acid or alkaline, which will cause severe damage to human tissue, or in case of leakage might damage or destroy other containers of hazardous materials and cause the release of their contents. Examples: battery acid and phosphoric acid. 
Explosive. A reactive gas, liquid or solid that will vigorously and energetically react uncontrollably if exposed to heat, shock, pressure or combinations thereof. Examples: dynamite, organic peroxides and ammonium nitrate. 
Highly toxic. A gas, liquid, or solid so dangerous to man as to afford unusual hazard of life. Example: chlorine gas. 
Ignitable. A gas, liquid or solid which may cause fires through friction, absorption of moisture, or which has low flash points. Examples: white phosphorous and gasoline. 
Moderately toxic. A gas, liquid or solid that through repeated exposure or in a single large does can be hazardous to man. 
Or the following items listed below and by-products, reaction products, or waste products generated from the use, handling, storage, or production of these items: 
Acid and base cleaning solutions, antifreeze and coolants, new or used, arsenic and arsenic compounds, batteries, new and used, brake and transmission fluid, oils/greases, lubricants, brine solution casting and foundry chemicals, caulking agents and sealants, cleaning solvents, cutting fluids, degreasing solvents, disinfectants, electroplating solutions, explosives, fertilizers, food processing wastes, fuels and additives, glues, adhesives, and resins, greases, hydraulic fluid industrial and commercial janitorial supplies, industrial sludges and stillbottoms, inks, printing and photocopying chemical, laboratory chemicals, metal finishing solutions, oils (petroleum based), paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, paint solvents, and paint removing compounds, pesticides and herbicides, plastic resins and catalysts, plasticizers, photo development chemicals, pool chemicals, roofing chemicals and sealers, solders and fluxes, tanning industry chemicals, transformer and capacitor oils/fluids. 
    Impervious surface. A surface covered by a material that is relatively impermeable to water. 
    Inactive water well. A well is considered to be inactive if it is not presently operating but is maintained in such a way that it can be put back in operation, with a minimum of effort, to supply water. 
    Normal household use. Storage or use of a hazardous material in quantities less than five (5) gallons if liquid or fifty (50) pounds if solid. 
    Person. An individual, corporation, joint venture, incorporated association, public or private corporation, partnership, governmental body or other similar entity, public or private. 
    Promiscuous dump. Any collection of solid waste either dumped or caused to be dumped or placed on any property either public or private, whether or not regularly used, and not authorized by the administrative authority (Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality). 
    Public water supply. A water supply that provides water through constructed conveyances to the public for at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily for at least sixty (60) days per year. The water system may consist of one or more public supply wells. 
    Sanitary landfill. A landfill for the disposal of commercial or residential solid waste by deposit in a landfill in layers covered with suitable cover material of a depth and at a frequency adequate to control disease vectors and odors, and in such a manner that minimizes the risk to human health and the environment. 
    Secured storage. Natural or created barrier to site ingress or egress around the entire perimeter of the hazardous materials storage area. 
    Source water assessment program. Section 1453 of the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996 required each state to develop a source water assessment program that will: delineate areas providing drinking water for all public water supplies (groundwater and surface water) and inventory drinking water supplies for potential contaminants which may have adverse effects on human health. 
    Well. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed for conveying groundwater to the surface, monitoring groundwater levels or other characteristics, providing cathodic protection, or providing a method of injecting water into the aquifer system from above the earth's surface. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 3, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-89. - Establishment and delineation of the drinking water protection critical area. 
    For the purposes of this district, there are hereby established within the City of Crowley, certain drinking water protection critical areas. The drinking water protection critical area is defined as the area within a one thousand-foot radial boundary from any public or municipal drinking water well that has been identified and mapped by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality as part of the source water assessment program. The maps are available for viewing at the office of the city clerk, city hall, Crowley, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 4, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-90. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses, unless granted a special exception, are prohibited within the drinking water protection critical area: abandoned water wells, aboveground storage tanks, agriculture chemical- formulation/distribution facilities, airports, animal feed lots/dairies, asphalt plants, auto/boat/tractor/small engine shops, battery recyclers, body shop/paint shops, car washes, cemeteries, chemical plants, class I injection wells, class II injection wells, class III injection wells, class V injection wells, dry cleaner/laundromats, funeral homes, furniture stripping facilities, golf courses, hospitals, lumber mills, metal plating/metal working facilities, military facilities, nonfunctional septic systems, nuclear plants, oil/gas wells and associated drilling activities, oil/gas tank batteries, oxidation ponds, paper mills, petroleum bulk plants, pipeline compressor stations, plant nurseries, port facilities, power plants, printing shops, promiscuous dumps, railroad yards-switching/loading and offloading/maintenance, salvage yards, sand/gravel pits, sanitary landfills, sewer lift stations, sewer treatment plants, truck terminals, underground storage tanks, wood preserving plants. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 5, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-91. - Exceptions. 
    Aboveground storage tanks for irrigation wells. It should be noted concerning this exception that best management practices are encouraged since placing an irrigation well with its associated aboveground storage tank within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public supply well increases the risk of contamination of the drinking water aquifer and also the zone of influence of each of the two (2) wells may interfere with one another. Likewise, placing a public supply well within one thousand (1,000) feet of an irrigation well is discouraged for the same reasons. 
    Any of the land uses, facilities or activities identified in section 10-90 lawfully in existence on August 16, 2005, may continue to exist on the parcel upon which it is located. Replacement or repair will be granted. 
(a)  Uses and activities requiring special permit. The following uses and activities are permitted only upon the issuance of a special permit by the city inspector of the City of Crowley under such conditions as there exists an undue hardship and as they may require: 
(1)  Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform to the drinking water protection critical area; 
(2)  Those activities that involve the handling of hazardous materials in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use, permitted in underlying zoning (except as prohibited in section 10-90). 
The burden is on the applicant to show undue hardship. 
(b)  Procedures for issuance of special permit. 
(1)  The special permit granting authority (SPGA) for this article shall be the office of the city inspector of the City of Crowley. Such special permit shall be granted if the SPGA determines that the intent of this article, as well as its specific criteria, is met. The SPGA shall not grant a special permit under this section unless the petitioner's application materials include, in the SPGA's opinion, sufficiently detailed, definite, and credible information to support positive findings in relation to the standards given in this section. 
(2)  The SPGA may grant the required special permit only upon finding that the proposed use meets the prohibited uses standards as specified in section 10-90 of this bylaw, all federal, state and local regulations, and any regulations or guidelines adopted by the SPGA. 
(3)  The applicant must file two (2) copies of a site plan and attachments. The site plan shall be drawn at a proper scale as determined by the SPGA. The site plan and its attachments shall at a minimum include provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or vandalism, including spill containment and cleanup procedures; provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces. 
(4)  Appeals from denial of special permits shall be submitted in writing to the City of Crowley (any appeal board, executive committee of the city or other body) within thirty (30) days of receipt of denial. The City of Crowley shall conduct a review and render a decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of appeal request. Adverse decision of the City of Crowley shall be appealed to the state district court. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 6, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-92. - Saving clause. 
    Should any section or provision of this article be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any other part thereof. A determination that any portion or provision of this overlay protection district is invalid shall not invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 7, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-93. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person may submit a verbal or written complaint alleging a violation of this article. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the jurisdiction shall conduct a brief investigation of the substances of the complaint, including a meeting with the landowner involved. 
(c)  Based upon the determination that there is a violation of this article, the jurisdiction shall conduct an attempt at informal reconciliation with the violator. As part of such informal reconciliation, the jurisdiction shall: 
(1)  Notify the violator by mail of the violation of this article and desire of the jurisdiction to correct the violation through informal reconciliation. The statement shall also indicate that should the violator refuse to allow the recommended corrective actions within the time set forth by the jurisdiction, action may be taken to correct the violation and the violator will be billed for the cost of taking the corrective action. 
(2)  Make a good faith effort to meet the violator and resolve/correct the violation. 
(d)  If after taking the steps above and after a period of fifteen (15) days following the mailing of the notice of the violation, the jurisdiction in good faith determines that the violator is unwilling to participate in informal reconciliation and take the corrective actions prescribed, the jurisdiction shall notify the violator by mail of the termination of the informal reconciliation. 
(e)  The jurisdiction may take corrective actions deemed necessary following fifteen (15) days after notifying the violator by mail of the notice of termination of the informal reconciliation, and bill the violator for the reasonable cost of such action. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 8, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 10-94. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil. This article may be enforced civilly by suit for injunctive relief or by any other appropriate civil remedy. 
(b)  Criminal. In lieu of a civil enforcement proceeding, a person found in violation of this article shall be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months or pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both. 
(Ord. No. 1315, § 9, 9-13-05) 
Chapter 11 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; arborist's license, § 5-164; examination and certification of electricians, § 5-40 et seq.; plumber certification, § 5-74 et seq.; gas code adopted, § 5-103; food and food handlers, § 9-5 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Imposition of annual license tax. 
    There is hereby levied an occupational license tax for the year 1988, and for each subsequent year, upon each person, firm or corporation pursuing and conducting any business, trade, calling, profession or vocation, within the corporation limits of the city, subject to license under the Louisiana Constitution and laws of this state. 
(Code 1965, § 21-201; Ord. No. 1113, § 1, 6-9-87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1113, adopted June 9, 1987, did not expressly amend this Code; at the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 1 of the ordinance have been included as § 11-1, treated as superseding the former similar provisions relative to annual license taxes. 
Sec. 11-2. - Adoption of state laws; peddler's license. 
(a)  The amount of license tax levied in each case is hereby fixed, determined and ordained to be, except as provided hereinafter, the same as that fixed, levied and collectable by the governing authority under, and shall be granted in accordance with, the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes, Title 47, Sections 341 through 363, inclusive, as amended, and all other applicable laws, all of which for the purposes of this article are made a part hereof by reference as if written herein in extenso. 
(b)  However, in the case of all other businesses as defined in Section 359, subparagraph (j), a license based on a flat fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be required. 
(c)  All peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors, and every person who displays samples, models, goods, wares, and merchandise on a temporary basis in any hotel, motel, store, storehouse, house, vehicle or any other place for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of such goods, wares or of like kind or quality, either for immediate or future delivery shall obtain a license based on a flat fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), provided that an itinerant vendor of agricultural products purchased directly from farmers or an itinerant vendor of seafood products who has either harvested the seafood himself or has purchased the seafood directly from commercial fishermen or shrimpers, shall obtain a license based on a flat fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  Pawn brokers and pawn shops shall be granted a license for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(e)  All owners of coin operated mechanical or electronic amusement devices as defined by Louisiana Revised Statutes, shall be required to purchase a license in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) per machine except for electronic pinball machines, flipper machines or video games shall be required to purchase a license of fifty dollars ($50.00) per machine. 
(f)  There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on every person engaged in the business of operating video draw poker devices or similar devices, licensed and permitted pursuant to Louisiana Revised Statutes, Section 33:4862 et seq. of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such device. 
(Code 1965, § 21-202; Ord. No. 1113, §§ 2, 3, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 1120, § 1, 7-18-88; Ord. No. 1150, §§ 1-3, 2-9-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1113, adopted June 9, 1987, did not expressly amend this Code; at the discretion of the editor, § 2 of the ordinance has been included as § 11-2(a) and (b), treated as superseding the former similar provisions relative to adoption of state laws, and § 3 of the ordinance has been included as § 11-2(c) for classification purposes. 
Sec. 11-3. - License required for each location and each class of business. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided, any person taxable having one or more places of business within the corporate limits shall pay a separate license fee for each class of business conducted at each place. 
(b)  A separate license for each class of business at each place of business shall not be required where any person has taxable annual gross sales and taxable gross receipts in an aggregate amount of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or has only taxable annual sales or taxable annual gross receipts in an amount of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). In this instance, only one license shall be required for each place of business, which license shall be based upon the classification of business which constitutes the major portion of the taxable annual gross sales or taxable annual gross receipts. 
(Code 1965, § 21-204) 
Sec. 11-4. - Due and payment dates. 
(a)  On January first of each year the license tax herein authorized to be levied shall be due and payable to the collector of municipal taxes, who shall commence collecting the tax from each person pursuing and conducting any business subject to taxation under this article, the 
state constitution, and applicable laws of the state. All license taxes levied hereunder shall be due and payable on January first of each calendar year for which the license is due, except that for a new business commencing after January first of any calendar year, the first license shall be due and payable on the date the business is commenced. 
(b)  All license taxes unpaid prior to March first of each calendar year for which they are due or, in the case of a new business, unpaid on the date such business is commenced, shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the payment of delinquent interest and penalty. 
(Code 1965, § 21-205) 
Sec. 11-5. - Failure to pay tax; judgment prohibiting further pursuit of business. 
    Failure to pay tax levied under authority of this article shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent. The tax collector or other tax collecting official is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the delinquent taxpayer to show cause in not less than two (2), nor more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, why the delinquent taxpayer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of the business taxed under authority of this article. This rule may be tried out of term and in chambers and shall be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order therein rendered shall be considered a judgment in favor of the local governmental subdivision prohibiting the taxpayer from the further pursuit of the business therein until such taxpayer has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered a contempt of court, punishable according to law. 
(Code 1965, § 21-206) 
Sec. 11-6. - Uninvited soliciting and hawking. 
(a)  Prohibited. The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or disposing of or peddling or hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and unlawful, and punishable as such nuisance, as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or solicitation of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden products, so far as the sale of the commodities named herein is authorized by law. 
(Code 1965, § 17-1) 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, R.S. 37:1901 et seq.; trespass, R.S. 14:63 et seq. 
Sec. 11-7. - Bond for itinerant photographers. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have an established and fixed place of business within the city to engage in the occupation of commercial photography until and unless such person furnishes a bond and files same with the city clerk in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) predicated on the faithful performance of the photography contracts undertaken in a manner and with the technique and efficiency prevalent in the trade. 
(b)  Prerequisite to license. The city clerk shall not issue a license to any such person to engage in the business of commercial photography until and unless such bond has been duly furnished and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 17-2) 
Sec. 11-8. - Permit for street fairs and carnivals. 
(a)  Permit required. Street fairs or carnivals are hereby prohibited from operating, showing or doing business in the city unless and until such fair or carnival applies to the governing authority for a special permit, authorizing such operation, showing or business, and the governing authority grants such permit, which permit shall specify the period during which the fair or carnival may operate in the city. 
(b)  Revocation of permit. If any such permit is granted and the mayor and the chief of police determine that the operation of such fair or carnival is not to the best interest of the city and its citizens, the mayor and chief of police and the police committee, acting together, shall have the power and authority to revoke and terminate such permit by serving a notice of such revocation on the owners, or any adult employee of the fair or carnival, and by refunding the proportionate part of any license tax or fee previously paid to the city by such fair or carnival or the owner thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 4-1) 
Sec. 11-9. - Poolrooms, billiard halls-Hours of operation. 
(a)  Established. All public poolrooms or billiard halls shall close and remain closed between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., and on Sundays shall remain closed until 12:00 noon. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall only apply to poolrooms or billiard halls operated for profit and not those conducted by fraternal societies or associations. 
(Code 1965, § 4-3) 
Sec. 11-10. - Same-Children prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as proprietor, agent, manager, employee, lessee or otherwise conducting or carrying on any place where pool or billiard games of any sort are operated for profit, to allow or permit minors under the age of seventeen (17) years within such places, or to be employed therein or to allow or permit such minors to engage or take part in any game of pool or billiards in such places, or to allow or permit such minors to use or play upon any pool or billiard table therein. 
(Code 1965, § 4-4) 
Cross reference- Permitting minor to play pool in alcoholic beverage establishment, § 3-1(9). 
Secs. 11-11-11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1437, adopted May 24, 2012, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 11-20-11-109.31, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see the Code Comparative Table. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural commodity shall mean horticulture, viticulture, poultry, farm and range products and livestock products. 
    Business shall include any activity engaged in by any person or caused to be engaged in by him with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect. 
    The term "business" shall not be construed in this article to include the occasional and isolated sales or transactions by a person who does not hold himself out as engaged in business. 
    Collector or tax collector shall mean the Director of the Sales Tax Collection Department of the School Board of the Parish of Acadia, Louisiana, acting as agent for the city. 
    City shall mean the City of Crowley, Parish of Acadia, State of Louisiana. 
    Cost price shall mean: 
(1)  The actual cost of the article of tangible personal property without any deductions therefrom on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, except those costs for installing the articles of tangible personal property if such cost is separately billed to the customer at the time of installation, transportation charges or any other expenses whatsoever; or the reasonable market value of the tangible personal property at the time it becomes susceptible to the tax, whichever is less. 
(2)  In the case of tangible personal property that has acquired a tax situs in the city and is thereafter transported outside the city for repairs performed outside the city and is thereafter returned to the city, the cost price shall be deemed to be the actual cost of any parts and/or materials used in performing such repairs, if applicable labor charges are separately stated on the invoice. If the applicable labor charges are not separately stated on the invoice, it shall be presumed that the cost price is the total charge reflected on the invoice. 
    Dealer shall include every person who manufactures or produces tangible personal property for sale at retail, for use, or consumption, or distribution or for storage to be used or consumed in the city. Dealer is further defined to mean: 
(1)  Every person who imports, or causes to be imported, tangible personal property from any state, other political subdivisions of this state, or foreign country, for sale at retail, or for use, or consumption, or distribution, or for storage to be used or consumed in the city; 
(2)  Every person who sells at retail, or who offers to sell at retail, or who has in his possession for sale at retail, or for use, or consumption, or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in this city, tangible personal property; 
(3)  Any person who has sold at retail, or used or consumed, or distributed or stored for use or consumption in this city, tangible personal property and who cannot prove that the tax levied by this article has been paid on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, or the storage of said tangible personal property; 
(4)  Any person who leases, or rents tangible personal property for a consideration, permitting the use or possession of such property in the city without transferring title thereto; 
(5)  Any person who is the lessee or rentee of tangible personal property and who pays to the owner of such property a consideration for the use or possession of such property in the city without acquiring title thereto; 
(6)  Any person who sells or furnishes any of the services subject to tax under this article; 
(7)  Any person who purchases or receives any of the services subject to tax under this article; 
(8)  Any person who is engaging in business in the city. Engaging in business in this city means and includes any of the following methods of transacting business: maintaining directly, indirectly, or through a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business or by having an agent, salesman or solicitor operating within the city under the authority of the seller or its subsidiary irrespective of whether such place of business, agent, salesman or solicitor is located in the city permanently or temporarily or whether such seller or subsidiary is qualified to do business in the city; 
(9)  Any person who sells at retail any tangible personal property to a vending machine operator for resale through coin-operated vending machines; 
(10)  Any person who makes deliveries of tangible personal property into the city in a vehicle owned or operated by such person; 
(11)  The term "dealer" shall include every person who is engaged in regular or systematic solicitation of a consumer market in the city by the distribution of catalogs, periodicals, advertising fliers, or other advertising, or by means of print, radio or television media, by mail, telegraphy, telephone, computer date base, cable optic, microwave, or other communication system. 
    Distraint or distrain shall mean the right to levy upon and seize and sell, or the levying upon or seizing and selling, any property or rights to property of the delinquent dealer by the officer charged with the collection of the tax for the purpose of satisfying any tax, interest or penalties due under the provisions of this article. 
    Drugs includes all pharmaceuticals and medical devices which are prescribed for use in the treatment of any medical disease. 
    Engaging in business in this city shall mean and include any of the following methods of transacting business: maintaining directly, indirectly or through a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business or by having an agent, salesman, solicitor or employee operating within this city under the authority of the seller or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent, salesman, solicitor or employee is located in this city permanently or temporarily, or whether such seller or subsidiary is qualified to do business in this city, or by having within this city any choses in or causes of action, or any property, or any liens on property, or any indebtedness due it in this city protected by the laws and courts of this city, or the making of deliveries of tangible personal property into the city other than by common or contract carrier. 
    Gross sales shall mean the sum total of all retail sales of tangible personal property in or related to the city, as hereinafter provided and defined, and sales of services without any deductions whatsoever of any kind or character, except as provided in this article. 
    Hotel shall mean and include any establishment engaged in the business of furnishing sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins to transient guests, where such establishment consists of six (6) or more sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins at a single business location in the city. 
    Lease or rental shall mean: 
(1)  The leasing or renting of tangible personal property and the possession or use thereof by the lessee or rentee for a consideration, without transfer of the title of such property in or related to the city. For the purpose of the leasing or renting of automobiles, "lease" means the leasing of automobiles and the possession or use thereof by the lessee, for a consideration, without the transfer of the title of such property for a one hundred eighty-day period or more. "Rental" means the renting of automobiles and the possession or use thereof by the renter, for a consideration, without the transfer of the title of such property for a period less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(2)  The term "lease or rental," however, as herein defined, shall not mean or include the lease or rental made for the purpose or re-lease or re-rental of casing tools and pipe, drill pipe, tubing, compressors, tanks, pumps, power units, other drilling or related equipment used in connection with the operating, drilling, completion or reworking of oil, gas, sulphur or other mineral wells. 
    Off-road vehicle is any vehicle manufactured for off-road use which is issued a manufacturer's statement of origin that cannot be issued a registration certificate and license to operate on the public roads of this state because at the time of manufacture the vehicle does not meet the safety requirements prescribed by R.S. 32:1301 through R.S. 32:1310. This includes vehicles that are issued a title only by the vehicle registration bureau, department of public safety and corrections, such as all terrain vehicles and recreational and sport vehicles, but it does not include off-road vehicles used for farm purposes, farm equipment, or heavy construction equipment. 
    Parish means the Parish of Acadia, State of Louisiana. 
    Person , except as provided in subsection (3): 
(1)  Shall include any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, co-operative, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the state, any parish, city, municipality, district, or other political subdivision, public board, public commission or public or semi-public corporation, district or instrumentality or group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
(2)  For purposes of the payment of the tax on the lease or rental or the purchase of tangible personal property or services, "person" shall not include a regionally accredited independent institution of higher education which is a member of the Louisiana Association of Independent Colleges and Universities, if such lease or rental or purchase is directly related to the educational mission of such institution. However, the term "person" shall include such institution for purposes of the payment of tax on sales by such institution if the sales are not otherwise exempt. 
(3)  For purposes of the payment of the tax, "person" shall not include this state, any parish, city and parish, municipality, district, or other political subdivision thereof, or any agency, board, commission, or instrumentality of this state or its political subdivisions. 
(4)  a.  For purposes of the payment of the state sales and use tax and the sales and use tax levied by any political subdivision, the term "person" shall not include a church or synagogue that is recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service as entitled to exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
b.  The secretary of the department of revenue and taxation shall promulgate rules and regulations defining the terms "church" and "synagogue" for purposes of this exclusion. The definitions shall be consistent with the criteria established by the United States Internal Revenue Service in identifying organizations that qualify for church status for federal income tax purposes. 
c.  No church or synagogue shall claim exemption or exclusion from the date sales and use tax or the sales and use tax levied by any political subdivision before having obtained a certificate of authorization from the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation. The secretary shall develop applications for such certificates. The certificates shall be issued without charge to the institutions that qualify. 
d.  The exclusion from the sales and use tax authorized by this subsection shall apply only to purchases of bibles, song books, or literature used for religious instruction classes. 
    Purchaser shall mean any person who acquires or receives any tangible personal property or the privilege of using any tangible personal property or receives any services pursuant to a transaction subject to tax under this article. 
    Retail sale or sale at retail shall mean a sale to a consumer or to any other person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property in the city and shall mean and include all such transactions as the tax collector, upon investigation finds to be in lieu of sales; provided, that sales for resale must be made in strict compliance with the rules and regulations issued by the said tax collector. Any dealer making a sale for resale, which is not in strict compliance with the rules and regulations, shall himself be liable for and pay the tax. 
(1)  The sale of tangible personal property to a dealer who purchases said property for resale through coin-operated vending machines in or related to the city shall be considered a "sale at retail." The subsequent resale of the property by the dealer through coin-operated vending machines shall not be considered a "sale at retail." 
(2)  The term "sale at retail" does not include sale of materials for further processing into articles of tangible personal property for sale at retail or sales of electricity for chlor-alkali manufacturing processes, nor does it include an isolated or occasional sale of tangible personal property by a person not engaged in such business. The term "sale at retail" does not include the sale of any human tissue transplants, which shall be defined to include all human organs, bone, skin, cornea, blood, or blood products transplanted from one individual into another recipient individual. 
(3)  The term "sale at retail" does not include the sale of raw agricultural commodities, including but not limited to feed, seed, and fertilizer, to be utilized in preparing, finishing, manufacturing, or producing crops or animals for market. 
(4)  The term "retail sale" does not include a sale of corporeal movable property which is intended for future sale to the United States government or its agencies, when title to such property is transferred to the United States government or its agencies prior to the incorporation of that property into a final product. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, for purposes of the imposition of the tax of any political subdivision, the sale of a vehicle subject to the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.) shall be deemed to be a "retail sale" or a "sale at retail" (i) in the city if the principal residence of the purchaser of the vehicle who purchased for private use or (ii) in the city if the principal location of the business if the vehicle is purchased for commercial use, unless the vehicle purchased for commercial use is assigned, garaged, and used outside the city, in which case the sale shall be deemed a "retail sale" or a "sale at retail" in the political subdivision where the vehicle is assigned, garaged, and used. 
(6)  The term "sale at retail" does not include the sale of food items by youth serving organizations chartered by congress. 
(7)  The term "sale at retail" does not include the purchase of a new school bus or a used school bus which is less than five (5) years old by an independent operator, when such bus is to be used exclusively in a public school system. This exclusion shall apply to all sales and use taxes levied by any local political subdivision. 
(8)  The term "sale at retail" does not include the sale of tangible personal property to food banks, as defined in R.S. 9:2799. 
(9)  The term "sale at retail" shall not include the sale of airplanes or airplane equipment or parts to a commuter airline domiciled in Louisiana. 
(10)  The term "sale at retail" shall include the sale of a pollution control device or system. 
(11)  The term "sale at retail" shall not include the sales of pelletized paper waste when purchased for use as combustible fuel by an electric utility or in an industrial manufacturing, processing, compounding, reuse, or production process, including the generation of electricity or process steam, at a fixed location in this the city. However, such sale shall not be excluded unless the purchaser has signed a certificate stating that the fuel purchased is for the exclusive use designated herein. 
For purposes of this subsection, "pelletized paper waste" means pellets produced from discarded waste paper that has been diverted or removed from solid waste which is not marketable for recycling and which is wetted, extruded, shredded, or formulated into compact pellets of various sizes for use as a supplemental fuel in a permitted boiler. 
(12)  The term "sale at retail" shall not include the sale or purchase of equipment used in fire fighting by bona fide volunteer fire departments. 
    Retailer shall mean and include every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail or for distribution, or use or consumption, or storage to be used or consumed in this city or any person rendering services taxable hereunder. 
    Sale shall mean any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter, lease or rental, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means, whatsoever of tangible personal property, for a consideration, and includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for consumers who furnish, either directly or indirectly, the materials used in fabrication work, and the furnishing, preparing or serving for a consideration any tangible personal property. A transaction whereby tangible personal property is transferred but the seller retains title as security for the payment of the price shall be deemed a sale. 
    Sales of services means and includes the following: 
(1)  The furnishing of sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins by hotels; 
(2)  a.  The sale of admissions to places of amusement, to athletic entertainment other than that of schools, colleges, and universities, and recreational events, and the furnishing, for dues, fees, or other consideration of the privilege of access to clubs or the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement, entertainment, athletic, or recreational facilities; but the term "sales of services" shall not include membership fees or dues of nonprofit, civic organizations, including by way of illustration and not of limitation, the Young Men's Christian Association, the Catholic Youth Organization, and the Young Women's Christian Association. 
b.  Places of amusement shall not include museums, which are hereby defined as public or private nonprofit institutions which are organized on a permanent basis for essentially educational or aesthetic purposes and which use professional staff to do all of the following: 
1.  Own or use tangible objects, whether animate or inanimate; 
2.  Cares for those objects; 
3.  Exhibit them to the public on a regular basis. 
c.  Museums include but are not limited to the following institutions: 
1.  Museums relating to art, history, including historic buildings, natural history, science and technology; 
2.  Aquariums and zoological parks; 
3.  Botanical gardens and arboretums; 
4.  Nature centers; 
5.  Planetariums. 
(3)  The furnishing of storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots and trailer parks; 
(4)  The furnishing of printing or overprinting, lithographic, multilith, blueprinting, photostating or other similar services of reproducing written or graphic matter; 
(5)  The furnishing of laundry, cleaning, pressing and dyeing services, including by way of extension and not of limitation, the cleaning and renovation of clothing, furs, furniture, carpets and rugs, and the furnishing of storage space for clothing, furs, and rugs; 
(6)  The furnishing of cold storage space and the furnishing of the service of preparing tangible personal property for cold storage, where such service is incidental to the operation of storage facilities; 
(7)  a.  The furnishing of repairs to tangible personal property, including by way of illustration and not of limitation, the repair and servicing of automobiles and other vehicles, electrical and mechanical appliances and equipment, watches, jewelry, refrigerators, radios, shoes, and office appliances and equipment are not excluded from the tax. 
b.  For the purposes of this subsection, tangible personal property shall include machinery, appliances, and equipment which have been declared immovable by declaration under the provisions of Article 467 of the Louisiana Civil I Code, and things which have been separated from land, buildings, or other constructions permanently attached to the ground or their component parts as defined in Article 466 of the Civil Code. 
(8)  The term "sale of service" shall not include an action performed pursuant to a contract with the United States Department of the Navy for construction or overhaul of United States Naval vessels. 
    Sales price means: 
(1)  The total amount for which tangible personal property is sold, less the market value of any article traded in including any services, except services for financing, that are a part of the sale valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, and includes the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, except costs for financing which shall not exceed the legal interest rate and a service charge not to exceed six (6) per cent of the amount financed, and losses; provided that cash discounts allowed and taken on sales shall not be included, nor shall the sales price include the amount charged for labor or services rendered in installing, applying, remodeling, or repairing property sold. 
(2)  The term "sales price" shall not include any amount designated as a cash discount or a rebate by the vendor or manufacturer of any new vehicle subject to the motor vehicle license tax. For purposes of this paragraph, "rebate" means any amount offered by a vendor or manufacturer as a deduction from the listed retail price of the vehicle. 
(3)  "Sales price" shall not include the first fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of the sale price of new farm equipment used in poultry production. 
    Storage shall mean and include any keeping or retention in the city of tangible property for use or consumption in the city or for any purpose other than for sale at retail in the regular course of business. The tax collector shall not levy or collect the tax on the storage of property which has been documented for use outside this city although the property may be stored within this city if the owners of such property which is to be stored for exclusive use outside this city have acquired a tax exemption certificate from the tax collector. When a vendor is presented with a copy of a tax exemption certification from a vendee, the vendor shall be relieved from liability for the collection of use tax on such property. If the property is removed from storage and is used within this city, the property shall be subject to taxation. 
    Tangible personal property means and includes: 
(1)  Personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
(2)  The term "tangible personal property" shall not include: 
a.  Stocks, bonds, notes, or other obligations or securities; gold, silver, or numismatic coins, or platinum; 
b.  Gold or silver bullion having a total value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; 
c.  Proprietary geophysical survey information or geophysical data analysis furnished under a restricted use agreement even though transferred in the form of tangible personal property. 
(3)  The term "tangible personal property" shall not include the repair of a vehicle by a licensed motor vehicle dealer which is performed subsequent to the lapse of the applicable warranty on that vehicle and at no charge to the owner of the vehicle. For the purpose of assessing a sales and use tax on this transaction, no valuation shall be assigned to the services performed or the parts used in the repair. 
    Tax means the sales and use tax imposed under this article, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
    Taxing authority shall mean the City of Crowley, Parish of Acadia, State of Louisiana, acting through the mayor and board of aldermen thereof as the governing authority of said city, with the tax collector acting as agent. 
    Tax collector shall mean the Director of the Sales Tax Collection Department of the School Board of the Parish of Acadia, State of Louisiana. 
    Use shall mean and include the exercise of any right over tangible personal property incident to the ownership thereof, except that it shall not include the sale at retail of that property in the regular course of business or the donation to a school in the city which meets the definition provided in R.S. 17:236 or to a public or recognized independent institution of higher education in the state of property previously purchased for resale in the regular course of a business. The term "use" shall not include the purchase, the importation, the consumption, the distribution, or the storage of motor vehicles to be leased in an arm's length transaction. 
(1)  For purposes of the imposition of the tax levied by a political subdivision or school board, "use" shall mean and include the exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership thereof, except that it shall not include the sale at retail of that property in the regular course of business or the donation to a school in the state which meets the definition provided in R.S. 17:236 or to a public or recognized independent institution of higher education in the state of property previously purchased for resale in the regular course of a business. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary for purposes of the imposition of the tax in the city, the use of a vehicle subject to the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.) shall be deemed to be a "use": 
a.  In the political subdivision of the principal residence of the purchaser if the vehicle is purchased for private use; or 
b.  In the political subdivision of the principal location of the business if the vehicle is purchased for commercial use, unless the vehicle purchased for commercial use is assigned, garaged, and used outside of such political subdivision, in which case the use shall be deemed a use in the political subdivision where the vehicle is assigned, garaged, and used. 
(3)  For purposes of the tax, "use" shall not include the exercise of any right or power by a free hospital over items, including but not limited to supplies and equipment, which are reasonably necessary for the operation of a free hospital. 
    Use tax shall include the use, the consumption, the distribution and the storage for use or consumption as herein defined. No use tax shall be due or collected on tangible personal property used, consumed, distributed, or stored for use or consumption in the city if the sale of such property would have been exempted or excluded from sales tax at the time such property became subject to the taxing jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-21. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied from and after April 1, 1997, for the purpose hereinafter specified, a tax upon the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution and the storage for use or consumption in the city of each item or article of tangible personal property as defined herein; the levy of such tax shall be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the sales price of each item or article of tangible personal property when sold at retail in this city; the tax to be computed on gross sales for the purpose of remitting the amount of tax due the city and to include each and every retail sale; 
(2)  At the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the cost price of each item or article of tangible personal property when the same is not sold but is used, consumed, distributed or stored for use or consumption in this city; provided there shall be no duplication of the tax. 
(b)  There is hereby levied from and after April 1, 1997, a tax upon the lease or rental within the city of each item or article of tangible personal property, as defined herein; the levy of said tax to be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, as defined herein, where the lease or rental of such property is an established business or part of an established business in the city or the same is incidental or germane to the said business; 
(2)  At the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the monthly lease or rental price paid by lessee or rentee or contracted or agreed to be paid by lessee or rentee to the owner of the tangible personal property. 
(c)  There is hereby levied a tax from April 1, 1997, upon all sales of services, as herein defined, in this city at a rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the amounts paid or charged for such services. 
(d)  There is hereby levied a tax from April 1, 2016, for the purpose hereinafter specified, a tax upon the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution and the storage for use or consumption in the city of each item or article of tangible personal property as defined herein; the levy of such tax shall be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the sales price of each item or article of tangible personal property when sold at retail in this city; the tax to be computed on gross sales for the purpose of remitting the amount of tax due the city and to include each and every retail sale. 
(e)  There is hereby levied from and after April 16, 2016, a tax upon the lease or rental within the city of each item or article of tangible personal property, as defined herein; the levy of said tax to be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, as defined herein, where the lease or rental of such property is an established business or part of an established business in the city or the same is incidental or germane to the said business. 
(f)  There is hereby levied a tax from April 16, 2016, upon all sales of services, as herein defined, in this city at a rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the amounts paid or charged for such services. 
(g)  No exemption from state sales and use tax granted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 or Chapter 2-A of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 shall be applicable to the tax levied by this Article unless the state exemption specifically provides that it applies to such tax. In the absence of any such specific application of the state exemption to the tax, any state exemption granted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 or Chapter 2-A of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 shall be applicable only to the levy and collection of the state sale and use tax. No amendment can be made which would materially adversely affect the security for payment of any sales tax bonds issued by the city secured by the avails of this tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12; Ord. No. 1472, § 1, 2-10-16) 
Sec. 11-22. - Helicopters, exemptions from lease or rental tax. 
(a)  Whenever a helicopter used in the exploration for or the extraction or production of oil, gas, and other minerals or for providing services to those engaged in such extraction, production, or exploration is acquired or used through a transaction entitled lease, rental, lease-purchase, or any similar name which for purposes other than sales taxation might be considered a conditional sale contract or a transaction in lieu of sale, such acquisition or use shall be deemed to be a sale for purposes of this article. 
(b)  The tax due on such transactions shall be payable in equal monthly installments over the term of the lease, rental, or lease-purchase contract. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-23. - Collection. 
(a)  Collection from dealer. 
(1)  The tax imposed under this article shall be collectible from all persons, as hereinafter defined, engaged as dealers, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  On all tangible personal property imported into the city, or caused to be imported, from other states or foreign countries or other political subdivisions of Louisiana, and used by him, the "dealer," as hereinafter defined, in the city shall pay the tax imposed by this article on all articles of tangible personal property so imported and used, the same as if the said articles had been sold at retail for use or consumption in this city. For the purposes of this article, the use, or consumption, or distribution, or storage to be used or consumed in this city of tangible personal property, shall each be equivalent to a sale at retail, and the tax shall thereupon immediately levy and be collected in the manner provided herein, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax in any event. 
(3)  A credit against the tax imposed by this article shall be granted to taxpayers who have paid a similar tax upon the sale or use of the same tangible personal property in another state. The credit provided herein shall be granted only in the case where the state to which a similar tax has been paid grants a similar credit as provided herein, provided that members of the armed forces who are citizens of this state and whose orders or enlistment contracts stipulate a period of active duty of two (2) years or more and who purchase automobiles outside of the State of Louisiana while on such tour of active duty shall be granted such credit in connection with the purchase of such automobiles whether or not the state to which such tax thereon has been paid grants a similar credit as herein provided. The amount of the credit shall be calculated by multiplying the rate of the similar tax paid in the other state by the cost price which is subject to Louisiana use tax at the time of the importation of the tangible personal property. The proof of payment of a similar tax to another state shall be made according to rules and regulations promulgated by the secretary and tax collector. In no event shall the credit be greater than the tax imposed by Louisiana upon the particular tangible personal property which is the subject of the Louisiana use tax. 
(b)  Collection of tax on vehicles. The tax imposed by this article on the sale or use of any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, motor bus, house trailer, or any other vehicle subject to the vehicle registration license tax shall be collected as provided in this subsection. 
(1)  The tax levied by this article on any such vehicle shall be paid to the vehicle commissioner as the agent of the tax collector at the time of application for a certificate of title or vehicle registration license and such tax shall be administered and collected by the vehicle commissioner in compliance with rules and regulations issued by the collector of revenue and in compliance with the law as construed by the collector of revenue. No certificate of title or vehicle registration license shall be issued until this tax has been paid. The collector of revenue shall be the only proper party to defend or to institute any legal action involving the tax on the sale or use of any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, motor bus, house trailer or any other vehicle subject to the vehicle registration license tax. (R.S. 47:451 et seq.) 
a.  The tax levied by this article on the sale of any such vehicle shall be due at the time of registration or any transfer of registration as required by the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.). However, the vehicle commissioner shall waive penalties or interest on sales tax on timely filed applications for registration rejected due to office of motor vehicles error. 
b.  The tax levied by this article on the use of any such vehicle in this city shall be due at the time first registration in this state is required by the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.). However, the vehicle commissioner shall waive penalties or interest on use tax on timely filed applications for registration rejected due to office of motor vehicles error. 
(2)  Every vendor of such a vehicle shall furnish to the purchaser at the time of sale a sworn statement showing the serial number, motor number, type, year, and model of the vehicle sold, the total sales price, any allowance for and a description of any vehicle taken in trade, and the total cash difference paid or to be paid by the purchaser between the vehicles purchased and traded in and the sales or use tax to be paid, along with such other information as the collector of revenue may by regulation require. All labor parts, accessories, and other equipment which are attached to the vehicle at the time of sale and which are included in the sale price are to be considered a part of the vehicle. 
(3)  a.  It is not the intention of this subsection to grant an exemption from the tax to any sale, use, items, or transaction, and this subsection is not to be construed as so doing. It is the intent of this subsection to transfer the collection of the tax on vehicles from the vendor to the vehicle commissioner as agent for the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation and the tax collector to provide a method of collection of the tax directly from the vendee or user by the vehicle commissioner as agent of the secretary and tax collector. 
b.  1.  The vehicle commissioner and the city and/or tax collector, acting as agent for the city, shall enter into an agreement by which the vehicle commissioner shall collect such tax on behalf of the tax collector, as agent for the city. Except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, no certificate of title or vehicle registration license shall be issued until such local tax is paid. 
2.  The tax imposed by the city on the sale or use of vehicles subject to the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.) shall be collected by the vehicle commissioner and distributed to the tax collector for the city. The vehicle commissioner shall withhold from any such taxes collected for the city one per cent of the proceeds of the tax so collected, as provided by law, which shall be used by the commissioner to pay the cost of collecting and remitting the tax to the tax collector. 
3.  The vehicle commissioner shall cause to be conducted annually, by the legislative auditor, an audit or examination of the books and accounts of sales and use taxes collected by the vehicle commissioner for each political subdivision. The scope of the audit shall be sufficient to determine whether or not sales and use taxes collected for each political subdivision have been properly and correctly distributed in accordance with law during the period under audit. The cost of such audit shall be prorated to all local political subdivisions for whom the vehicle commissioner collects sales and use taxes on the basis of total tax dollars distributed to each local political subdivision, and the vehicle commissioner shall withhold the cost of such audit from taxes collected. In the event the audit determines that adjustments to tax distributions are required, the vehicle commissioner shall adjust future tax distributions to applicable tax recipient bodies. The prescriptive period for adjustments under this section shall be three (3) years from the thirty-first day of December of the year in which such taxes became due. 
(4)  The provision contained in R.S. 47:301(10) in the second unnumbered paragraph which excludes isolated or occasional sales from the definition of a sale at retail is not to apply to the sale of vehicles which are the subject of this subsection. Isolated or occasional sales of vehicles are hereby defined to be sales at retail and as such are subject to the tax. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a certificate of title or vehicle registration license may be issued to a purchaser by the secretary of the department of public safety if he is so authorized in writing by the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation. the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation shall grant such authorization upon written application by the purchaser to said secretary showing that: 
a.  All state and local taxes and fees due by the purchaser were paid in good faith at the time of purchase to a motor vehicle dealer; 
b.  The motor vehicle dealer has not remitted the taxes and fees to the secretary of the department of public safety; 
c.  The motor vehicle dealer has refused or is unable to answer a written demand by the purchaser that the taxes and fees be paid to the secretary of the department of public safety; and 
d.  The certificate of title or vehicle registration license has not been issued within six (6) months after the date of sale. 
A refusal by the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation to authorize the issuance of a certificate of title or a vehicle registration license may be appealed to the board of tax appeals within sixty (60) days from the date the application for a certificate of title is denied by the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation. 
(6)  Those lessors or renters subject to the tax levied by R.S. 47:551 may directly transfer the cost of any local sales and use taxes paid on any automobile purchased for lease or rental by allocating such taxes to each automobile rental contract. Such allocation shall be determined by a schedule promulgated by the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation and shall be collected by such lessors or renters. The schedule shall be based on automobile purchases in the year prior to the particular allocation assessed. The secretary shall promulgate such other rules as he deems necessary to ensure that the allocation provided in this subsection is equitable and is not in excess of the actual local sales taxes paid by such lessors and renters. 
(c)  Auctioneers . All auctioneers in the city shall register as dealers and shall display their registration to the public as a condition of doing business in this state. Such auctioneers or the company which they represent shall be responsible for the collection of all local and state taxes on articles sold by them and shall report and remit to the tax collector as provided in this article. 
(d)  Collection of tax on motorboats and vessels. The Secretary of the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries shall not register or issue a certificate of registration on any new boat or vessel purchased in this city until satisfactory proof has been presented to him that all sales taxes provided by this article have been paid; nor shall he register or issue a certificate of registration on any boat or vessel brought into this city until satisfactory proof has been presented to him that all use taxes required by this article have been paid. 
(e)  Collection of tax on off-road vehicles. 
(1)  The vehicle commissioner shall not issue a title or a certificate of registration on any off-road vehicle purchased in this city or brought into this city from another state or political subdivision of this state until satisfactory proof has been presented to him that all sales taxes required by this article have been paid. The purchaser of an off-road vehicle from a seller who is not registered with the department of public safety and corrections shall pay the sales tax at the time the vehicle is titled the same as is required for the registration and licensing of other vehicles under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  After payment of the taxes due, the commissioner shall issue a decal, in a form prescribed, said decal to be affixed to the vehicle, as directed, by the commissioner, which shall be conclusive proof of registration and payment of the required taxes. All off-road vehicles sold as new and subsequently sold as used shall be required to display this decal. The decal shall be a two-year renewal type and the fees for issuance of new, renewal, transfer, lost, or illegible decals shall be the same amount as those fees charged for the registration stickers of other motor vehicles. Failure to have this decal affixed to the off-road vehicle within thirty (30) days of purchase will result in a fine, not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), or the impounding of the vehicle, or both, and the payment of all taxes due, if any. All peace officers, including the department of wildlife and fisheries, may require proof of registration and shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Collection of tax on membership in health and physical fitness clubs. The tax due under this article on contracts for membership in a health and physical fitness club shall be assessed and shall be due and payable on a monthly basis computed on the amount paid each month less any actual or imputed interest or collection fees or unpaid reserve amounts not received by the health and fitness club. 
(g)  Direct payment numbers. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a Louisiana taxpayer who obtains a DP Number as provided in R.S. 47:303.1 shall remit the tax due on purchases and rentals of tangible personal property and taxable services directly to the tax collector, and shall not be liable to remit the tax to the vendor or lessor of the tangible personal property and taxable services, as provided in R.S. 47:303.1. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-24. - Treatment of tax by dealer. 
(a)  The tax levied in this article shall be collected by the dealer from the purchaser or consumer, except as provided for the collection of tax on motor vehicles in R.S. 47:303 and the collection of tax on property leased or rented for use offshore in R.S. 47:301(4)(d)(ii). The dealer shall collect the tax on off-road vehicles and remit them directly to the department of public safety and corrections upon application for certificate of title and registration as required for the registration and licensing of other vehicles under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. The dealer shall collect the tax on off-road vehicles from out-of-state residents who purchase off-road vehicles in this city and remit the sales taxes due directly to the department of revenue and taxation. 
(b)  Every dealer located outside the state making sales of tangible person property for distribution, storage, use, or other consumption, in this city, shall at the time of making sales collect the tax imposed by this article from the purchaser. 
(c)  Dealers shall, as far as practicable, add the amount of the tax imposed under this article in conformity with the schedule or schedules to be prescribed by the tax collector pursuant to authority conferred herein, to the sale price or charge, which shall be a debt from the purchaser or consumer to the dealer, until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. Any dealer who neglects, fails or refuses to collect the tax herein provided, shall be liable for and pay the tax himself. 
(d)  Where the tax collected for any period is in excess of the tax rate provided by this article, the total tax collected must be paid over to the tax collector, less the compensation to be allowed the dealer as hereinafter set forth. This provision shall be construed with other provisions of this article and given effect so as to result in the payment to the tax collector of the total tax collected if in excess of the tax rate provided. 
(e)  Any dealer who fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the tax herein provided, either by himself or through his agents or employees, shall, in addition to the penalty of being liable for and paying the tax himself, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not more than three (3) months, or both. 
(f)  No dealer shall advertise or hold out to the public, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb all or part of the tax or that he will relieve the purchaser from the payment of all or any part of the tax. Whoever violates this provision with respect to advertising shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for not more than three (3) months, or both. For a second or subsequent offense, the penalty shall be double. 
(g)  The dealer or seller is permitted and required to state and collect the tax separately from the price paid by the purchaser. 
(h)  The use of tokens is forbidden. The tax collector shall by regulations prescribe the method and the schedule of the amounts to be collected from the purchasers, lessees or consumers in respect to any receipt upon which the tax is imposed by this article. The amount of tax to be collected by the dealer and paid by the purchaser shall in each transaction comply with the schedule so provided. 
(i)  The sums of money collected by the dealer for payment of the tax imposed by the city shall be and remain the property of the city and deemed held in trust for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-25. - Exclusions and exemptions from the tax. 
(a)  (1)  The gross proceeds derived from the sale in this city of livestock, poultry, and other farm products direct from the farm are exempted from the tax levied by this article, provided that such sales are made directly by the producers. When sales of livestock, poultry, and other farm products are made to consumers by any person other than the producer, they are not exempted from the tax imposed by this article. 
(2)  The gross proceeds derived from the sale in this city of livestock at public sales sponsored by breeders' or registry associations or livestock auction markets are exempted from the tax levied by this article. When public sales of livestock are made to consumers by any person other than through a public sale sponsored by a breeders' or registry association or a livestock auction market, they are not exempted from the tax imposed by this article. This section shall be construed as exempting race horses entered in races and claimed at any racing meet held in Louisiana, whether the horse claimed was owned by the original breeder or not. 
(3)  Every agricultural commodity sold by any person, other than a producer, to any other person who purchases not for direct consumption but for the purpose of acquiring raw product for use or for sale in the process of preparing, finishing, or manufacturing such agricultural commodity for the ultimate retail consumer trade, shall be exempted from any and all provisions of this article, including payment of the tax applicable to the sale, storage, use, transfer, or any other utilization of or handling thereof, except when such agricultural commodity is actually sold as a marketable or finished product to the ultimate consumer in the city, and in no case shall more than one tax be exacted. For the purposes of this section, "agricultural commodity" means horticultural, viticultural, poultry, farm and range products, and livestock and livestock products. 
(4)  a.  The purchase of feed and feed additives for the purpose of sustaining animals which are held primarily for commercial, business, or agricultural use shall be exempted from the taxes levied by this article. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection: 
1.  "Commercial use" means the purchasing, producing, or maintaining of animals, including breeding stock, for resale; 
2.  "Business use" means the keeping and maintaining of animals which are used in performing services in conjunction with a business enterprise, such as sentry dogs and rental horses; 
3.  "Agricultural use" means the maintaining of work animals and beasts of burden which are utilized in the activity of producing crops or animals for market, in the production of food for human consumption, in the production of animal hides or other animal products for market, or in the maintaining of breeding stock for the propagation of such agricultural use animals. 
c.  This exemption shall not apply to the purchase of feed or feed additives for animals kept primarily for personal, sporting, or other purposes, including but not limited to purchases for pets of any kind or hunting dogs. 
(5)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale or use of materials, supplies, equipment, fuel, bait, and related items other than vessels used in the production or harvesting of crawfish. The person who purchases the exempt items shall claim the exemption by executing a certificate at the time of purchase. The department of revenue and taxation shall provide the certificates to retail merchants. Any merchant who in good faith, and after examination of the applicability of the certificate to that purchase with due care, neglects or fails to collect the tax herein provided, due to the presentation by the purchaser of a tax exemption certificate issued by the department of revenue and taxation, including those issued pursuant to R.S. 47:305.10, shall not be liable for the payment of the tax. 
(6)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale or use of materials, supplies, equipment, fuel, bait, and related items other than vessels used in the production or harvesting of catfish. The person who purchases the exempt items shall claim the exemption by executing a certificate at the time of purchase. The department of revenue and taxation shall provide the certificates to retail merchants. Any merchant who in good faith, and after examination of the applicability of the certificate to that purchase with due care, neglects or fails to collect the tax herein provided, due to the presentation by the purchaser of a tax exemption certificate issued by the department of revenue and taxation, shall not be liable for the payment of the tax. 
(b)  The "use tax," as defined herein, shall not apply to livestock and livestock products, to poultry and poultry products, to farm, range and agricultural products when produced by the farmer and used by him and members of his family. 
(c)  (1)  Where a part of the purchase price is represented by an article traded in, the sales tax is payable on the total purchase price less the market value of the article traded in. 
(2)  Where a part of the cost price of a motor vehicle is represented by a motor vehicle returned to the dealer's inventory, the use tax is payable on the total cost price less the wholesale value of the article returned. 
(d)  (1)  The sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in this city of the following tangible personal property is hereby specifically exempted from the tax imposed by this article: 
a.  Gasoline; 
b.  Steam; 
c.  Water (not including mineral water or carbonated water or any water put in bottles, jugs, or containers, all of which are not exempted); 
d.  Electric power or energy and any materials or energy sources used to fuel the general of electric power for resale or used by an industrial manufacturing plant for self-consumption or cogeneration; 
e.  Newspapers; 
f.  Fertilizer and containers used for farm products when sold directly to the farmer; 
g.  Natural gas; 
h.  All energy sources when used for boiler fuel except refinery gas. Refinery gas shall be subject to the tax imposed by this article, and similar local taxes, provided that its value shall be fifty-two cents ($0.52) per thousand cubic feet multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which shall be the posted price for a barrel of west Texas intermediate crude oil on December first of the preceding calendar year, and the denominator of which shall be twenty-nine dollars ($29.00), and provided further that such values shall be the maximum placed upon refinery gas by any local governmental subdivision or school board under any authority or grant of power to levy and collect sales or use taxes, provided that passage of this measure shall not in any manner prejudice any claim by the state, any local governmental subdivision, school board, or taxpayer to sales and use tax assessments or refund claims on refinery gas, claimed by the state, local government subdivision, school board, or taxpayer before passage of this measure. 
i.  New trucks, new automobiles, and new aircraft withdrawn from stock by factory authorized new truck, new automobile, and new aircraft dealers, and used trucks and used automobiles withdrawn from stock by new or used motor vehicle dealers, with the approval of the secretary of the department of revenue and taxation titled in the dealer's name for use as demonstrators; 
j.  Drugs prescribed by a physician or dentists; 
k.  Orthotic and prosthetic devices and wheelchairs and wheelchair lifts prescribed by physicians or licensed chiropractors for personal consumption or use; 
l.  The sale or purchase of any ostomy, ileostomy or colostomy device or any other appliance including catheters or any related item which is required as the result of any surgical procedure by which an artificial opening is created in the human body for the elimination of natural waste; 
m.  Patient aids prescribed by a physician or a licensed chiropractor for home use; 
n.  Food sold for preparation and consumption in the home including by way of extension and not of limitation bakery products; 
o.  Dairy products; 
p.  Soft drinks; 
q.  Fresh fruits and vegetables; 
r.  Package foods requiring further preparation by the purchaser; 
s.  Any and all medical devices used personally and exclusively by the patient in the medical treatment of various diseases under the supervision of and prescribed by a registered physician; 
t.  Orthotic devices, prosthetic devices, prostheses and restorative materials utilized by or prescribed by dentists in connection with health care treatment or for personal consumption or use. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the exemptions from the state sales and use tax provided in this subsection shall be applicable to any sales and use tax levied by any local governmental subdivision or school board. 
(2)  Sales of meals furnished to: the staff and students of educational institutions including kindergartens; the staff and patients of hospitals; the staff, inmates, and patients of mental institutions; and boarders of rooming houses, and occasional meals furnished in connection with or by educational, religious, or medical organizations, are exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the meals are consumed on the premises where purchased. However, sales by any of the above in facilities open to outsiders or to the general public are not exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(3)  Food sales by restaurants, drive-ins, snack bars, candy and nut counters, private clubs, and sales, made by an establishment not specifically exempted elsewhere who furnish facilities for the consumption of the food on the premises are not exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(4)  The exemption for food, drugs, orthotic and prosthetic devices, and wheelchairs and wheelchair lifts prescribed by physicians or licensed chiropractors for personal consumption or use; for patient aids prescribed by a physician or licensed chiropractor for home use; and ostomy, ileostomy or colostomy devices, or other appliances including catheters or related items required as the result of any surgical procedure by which an artificial opening is created in the human body for the elimination of natural waste applies only to sales taxes imposed by the State of Louisiana and does not apply to the tax authority notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, and specifically, but not exclusively, R.S. 33:2716.1. 
(5)  However the tax, or other local taxing authority shall not apply to the sale of prescription drugs under the pharmaceutical vendor program for Title XIX of the Social Security Act as administered by the Department of Health and Human Resources of the State of Louisiana. 
(6)  The exemptions from sales and use tax now or hereafter provided in Chapter 2 of Title 47 to be applicable to the city and the tax must, to be effective, specifically provide in the title and body of the bill that it is applicable to the city and the tax. 
(e)  It is not the intention of this article to levy a tax on bona fide interstate commerce; however, nothing herein shall prevent the collection of the taxes due on sales of tangible personal property into this city which are promoted through the use of catalogs and other means of sales promotion and for which federal legislation or federal jurisprudence enables the enforcement of this article upon the conduct of such business. It is, however, the intention of this article to levy a tax on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in this city, of tangible personal property after it has come to rest in this city and has become a part of the mass of property in this city. At such time as federal legislation or federal jurisprudence as to sales in interstate commerce promoted through the use of catalogs and other means of sales promotions enables the enforcement of this article against vendors that have no other nexus with this state, the following provisions shall apply to such sales on which sales and use tax would not otherwise be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-26. - Same-Ships and ships' supplies. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to sales of materials, equipment, and machinery which enter into and become component parts of ships, vessels, or barges, including commercial fishing vessels, drilling ships, or drilling barges, of fifty (50) tons load displacement and over, built in Louisiana nor to the gross proceeds from the sale of such ships, vessels, or barges when sold by the builder thereof. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to materials and supplies purchased by the owners or operators of ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce, where such materials and supplies are loaded upon the ship or vessel for use or consumption in the maintenance and operation thereof; nor to repair services performed upon ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce; nor to the materials and supplies used in such repairs where such materials and supplies enter into and become a component part of such ships or vessels; nor to laundry services performed for the owners or operators of such ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce, where the laundered articles are to be used in the course of the operation of such ships or vessels. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-27. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-28. - Same-Seeds used in planting crops. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale at retail of seeds for use in the planting of any kind of crops. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-29. - Same-Casing, drill pipe and tubing used in offshore drilling. 
    The sales tax shall apply to casing, drill pipe and tubing sold in this parish, for use offshore beyond the territorial limits of the state, for the production of oil, gas, sulphur and other minerals. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-31. - Same-Little theater tickets. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale of admission tickets by Little Theater organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-32. - Same-Tickets to musical performances of nonprofit musical organizations. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale of admission tickets by domestic nonprofit corporations or by any other domestic nonprofit organization known as a symphony organization or as a society or organization engaged in the presentation of musical performances; provided that this section shall not apply to performances given by out-of-state or nonresident symphony companies, nor shall this section apply to any performance intended to yield a profit to the promoters thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-33. - Same-Pesticides used for agricultural purposes. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to sale at retail of pesticides used for agricultural purposes, including particularly but not by way of limitation, insecticides, herbicides and fungicides. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-34. - Same-Motion picture film rental. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the amount paid by the operator of a motion picture theatre to a distributing agency for use of films of photoplay. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-35. - Same-Property purchased for first use outside the state. 
(a)  There shall be no sales or use tax due upon the sale at retail or use of tangible personal property, including diesel fuel, purchased within the city or imported into the city for first use exclusively beyond the territorial limits of the city. 
(b)  If the first use of tangible personal property purchased within or imported into the city for first use beyond the territorial limits of the city occurs in a city or parish of the state which imposes a sales or use tax, the exemption provided herein shall apply only if: 
(1)  The purchaser is properly registered for sales and use tax purposes in the city or parish of Louisiana or city or county of a state other than Louisiana of use and regularly reports and pays sales and use tax in such other city or parish of Louisiana or city or county of a state other than Louisiana; 
(2)  The city or parish of Louisiana or city or county of a state other than Louisiana in which the first use occurs grants on a reciprocal basis a similar exemption on purchases within that city or parish of Louisiana or city or county of a state other than Louisiana for use in Louisiana; and 
(3)  The purchaser obtains from the collection a certificate or letter authorizing him to make the nontaxable purchases authorized under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-36. - Same-Contracts prior to and within ninety days of tax levy. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not be applicable to sales of materials or services involved in lump sum or unit price construction contracts entered into and reduced to writing prior to the effective date of the statute or ordinance levying same or to sales or services involved in such contracts entered into and reduced to writing within ninety (90) days thereafter, if such contracts involve contractual obligations undertaken prior to such effective date and were computed and bid on the basis of sales taxes at the rates effective and existing prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-37. - Exclusions and exemptions; firefighting equipment purchased by bona fide organized public volunteer fire departments. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to purchases of equipment used in fire fighting by bona tide organized public volunteer fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-38. - Same-Admissions to entertainments furnished by certain domestic nonprofit corporations. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale of admissions to entertainment events furnished by recognized domestic nonprofit charitable, educational and religious organizations when the entire proceeds from such sales, except for necessary expenses connected with the entertainment events, are used for the purposes for which the organizations furnishing the events were organized. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-39. - Same-Nonprofit organizations; nature of exemption; limitations; qualifications; newspapers. 
(a)  (1)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to sales of tangible personal property at, or admission charges for, outside gate admissions to, or parking fees associated with, events sponsored by domestic, civic, educational, historical, charitable, fraternal, or religious organizations, which are nonprofit, when the entire proceeds, except for the necessary expense connected therewith, are used for educational, charitable, religious, or historical restoration purposes, including the furtherance of the civic, educational, historical, charitable, fraternal, or religious purpose of the organization. In addition, newspapers published in this state by religious organizations shall also be exempt from such taxes, provided that the price paid for the newspaper or a subscription to the newspaper does not exceed the cost to publish such newspaper. 
(2)  The exemption provided herein shall not apply to any event intended to yield a profit to the promoter or to any individual contracted to provide services or equipment, or both, for the event. 
(3)  This section shall not be construed to exempt any organization or activity from the payment of sales or use taxes otherwise required by law to be made on purchases made by these organizations. 
(4)  This section shall not be construed to exempt regular commercial ventures of any type such as bookstores, restaurants, gift shops, commercial flea markets, and similar activities that are sponsored by organizations qualifying hereunder which are in competition with retail merchants. However, the exemption provided in this section shall apply to thrift shops located on military installations, the operation of which is deemed to be an "event" for purposes of this exemption. 
(b)  This sponsorship of any event by any organization applying for an exemption hereunder must be genuine. Sponsorship will not be genuine in any case in which exemption from taxation is a major consideration leading to such sponsorship. 
(c)  An exemption certificate must be obtained from the tax collector, under such regulations as he shall prescribe, in order for nonprofit organizations to qualify for the exemption provided in this section. In the event the tax collector denies tax exempt status under this section, the organization may appeal such ruling to the city, which may overrule the tax collector and grant tax exempt status if the city determines that the denial of tax exempt status by the tax collector was arbitrary capricious or unreasonable. Provided however, that any organization which endorses any candidate for political office or otherwise is involved in political activities shall not be eligible for the exemption herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-40. - Same-Sales or purchases by blind persons. 
(a)  The tax levied and the collection, reporting, and remittance thereof required by this article shall not apply to sales or purchases made by blind persons in the conduct of a business which is exempt from license taxes by R.S. 46:371 through 46:373. 
(b)  In addition, the tax imposed by this article shall not apply to any nonprofit organization which utilizes public funds for not less than seventy-five (75) per cent of its operational funding and which primarily operates to provide funding for and training to blind persons. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-41. - Same-Cable television installation and repair. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to necessary fees incurred in connection with the installation and service of cable television. Such exemption shall not apply to purchases made by any cable television system, but shall only apply to funds collected from the subscriber for regular service, installation and repairs. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-42. - Same-Income from coin-operated washing and drying machines in a commercial laundromat. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to or be imposed upon the income on receipts from any coin-operated washing or drying machine in a commercial laundromat. A commercial laundromat, for purposes of this section, is defined to be any, establishment engaged solely in the business of furnishing washing or drying laundry services by means of coin-operated machines. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-43. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-44. - Same-Leased vessels used in the production of minerals. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to those vessels which are leased for use offshore beyond the territorial limits of this state for the production of oil, gas, sulphur, and other minerals or for the providing of services to those engaged in such production. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-45. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-46. - Same-Equipment, parts, and airplanes purchased by commuter airlines; definition. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to purchases or leases of airplane equipment, airplane parts, and airplanes by any commuter airline domiciled in the State of Louisiana. 
(b)  A "commuter airline" for the purposes of this section is defined as any airline transporting passengers and/or freight on a regularly scheduled basis, with a minimum of twenty (20) flights per week, whose schedule is published in the Official Airline Guide but which has been exempted from the general rate and route regulations of the Civil Aeronautics Board under the provisions of Section 298.11 of Subpart B of Part 298 of Chapter II of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations promulgated under the authority of Sections 1324 and 1386 of Title 49 of the United States Code. A commuter airline is further defined as any airline having ticket counters that are staffed at airports it serves, a reservations office operating at least twelve (12) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, and interline ticket and baggage agreements through the Air Traffic Conference of America. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-47. - Exclusions and exemptions; certain self-propelled vehicles removed from inventory. 
    A Louisiana retail dealer who ordinarily purchases for resale equipment of a type not subject to titling under Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 32, such equipment having a dealer's cost of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per unit, and such equipment being: (1) mobile, motorized self-propelled farm equipment and attachments thereto; (2) mobile, motorized self-propelled earth moving equipment and attachments thereto; and/or (3) mobile, motorized self-propelled construction equipment and attachments thereto; and who withdraws an item of such equipment from inventory, for rental, as a method for promoting sales, shall be exempt from the payment of a sales or use tax on the purchase price of the property when withdrawn from inventory for such rental. Such retail dealer shall be liable for the tax levied on the rental income, and a sales tax upon any ultimate sale of said item. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-48. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-49. - Same-Monetized bullion. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to sales of monetized bullion having a total value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. For purposes of this section, "monetized bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, or other metals, and heretofore, now, or hereafter used as a medium of exchange under the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign nation. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-51. - Same-New vehicles furnished by dealers for driver education purposes. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not be due on vehicles furnished by a dealer in new vehicles when withdrawn from inventory and furnished to a secondary school, college or public school board on a free loan basis for exclusive use in a driver education program accredited by the Louisiana Department of Education. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-52. - Same-Capital mass transit equipment. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to purchases of capital mass transit equipment by any political subdivision or by any agency as defined in R.S. 42:1111. 
(b)  Capital mass transit equipment is defined for the purposes of this section as buses, other vehicles, facilities, and other equipment useful and necessary for the provision of public transportation service. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-53. - Same-Gasohol. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage, to be used or consumed in this city, of any motor fuel known as gasohol, containing a blend of at least ten (10) per cent alcohol, if the alcohol therein has been produced, fermented, and distilled in Louisiana from agricultural commodities. Alcohol to be used in gasohol must have been rendered unsuitable for human consumption at the time of its manufacture or immediately thereafter. 
(b)  Gasohol, in order to qualify for this exemption must have been dyed a color which shall be different and distinct from other gasolines. The secretary of the department of revenue and taxation shall designate the color used and supplied by the dealer in the manufacture of gasohol. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Secs. 11-54-11-62. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-63. - Same-Sheltered workshop for mentally retarded. 
    The sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage for use or consumption in this city of each item or article of tangible personal property by a sheltered workshop for the mentally retarded licensed by the department of health and human resources as a day developmental training center for the mentally retarded shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-64. - Returns and payment of tax; penalty for absorption. 
(a)  General provisions; tax payable monthly. 
(1)  a.  Except as hereafter provided, the tax levied hereunder shall be due and shall be payable by all dealers monthly on the first day of the month, commencing June 1, 1997. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable under this article, it shall be the duty of all dealers to transmit, on or before the twentieth day of the month following the month in which this tax becomes effective, to the tax collector, upon forms prescribed, prepared, and furnished by him, returns showing the gross sales, purchases, gross proceeds from lease or rental, gross payments for lease or rental, gross proceeds derived from sales of services, or gross payments for services, as the case may be, arising from all taxable transactions during the preceding calendar month. Thereafter, like returns shall be prepared and transmitted to the tax collector by all dealers on or before the twentieth day of each month for the preceding calendar month. These returns shall show any further information the tax collector may require to enable him to correctly compute and collect the tax levied. Such returns shall be signed by the dealer filing the same, and his signature thereon shall constitute a warranty on the part of the dealer that he has read and examined the said returns and that, to the best of his knowledge and relief, the same are true, correct and complete. Every dealer, at the time of making the return required hereunder, shall compute and remit to the tax collector the required tax due for the preceding calendar month, and failure to so remit such tax shall cause said required payment of the tax to become delinquent. 
(2)  a.  Gross proceeds from rentals or leases shall be reported and the tax shall be paid with respect thereto, in accordance with rules and regulations for reporting as established by the tax collector following the month in which the payment for the lease or rental is actually collected by lessor. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  The tax collector, for good cause, may extend, for not to exceed thirty (30) days, the time for making any returns required under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  For the purpose of collecting and remitting to the tax collector the tax imposed by this article, the dealer is hereby declared to be the agent of the tax collector, acting for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-65. - Collection from interstate and foreign transportation dealers. 
    Persons, as defined in this article, engaged in the business of transporting passengers or property for hire in interstate or foreign commerce, whether by railroad, railway, automobile, motor truck, boat, ship, aircraft or other means, may, at their option under rules and regulations prescribed by the tax collector, register as dealers and pay the taxes imposed by section 11-21 on the basis of the formula hereinafter provided. 
    Such persons, when properly registered as dealers, may make purchases in this city or import property into this city without payment of the tax imposed by section 11-21 at the time of purchase or importation, provided such purchases or importations are made in strict compliance with the rules and regulations of the tax collector. Thereafter, on or before the twentieth day of the month following the purchase or importation, the dealer shall transmit to the tax collector, on forms secured by him, returns showing gross purchases and importations of tangible personal property, the cost price of which has not previously been included in a return to the state. The amount of such purchases and importations shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is mileage operated by the taxpayer in the city and its environs and the denominator of which is the total mileage, to obtain the taxable amount of tax basis. This amount shall be multiplied by the tax rate to disclose the tax due. 
    Each such dealer, at the time of making the return required hereunder, shall remit to the tax collector the tax due for the preceding calendar month as shown on the return. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-66. - Collector's authority to determine the tax in certain cases. 
(a)  In the event any dealer fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided in this article or in case the dealer makes a grossly incorrect report or a report that is false or fraudulent, the tax collector shall make an estimate of the retail sales of such dealer for the taxable period, of the gross proceeds from rentals or leases of tangible personal property by the dealer, or the cost price of all articles of tangible personal property imported by the dealer for use or consumption or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in this city, and of the gross amounts paid or charged for services taxable; and it shall be the duty of the tax collector to assess and collect the tax together with any interest and penalty that may have accrued thereon, which assessment shall be considered prima facie correct and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the dealer. 
(b)  In the event the dealer has imported tangible personal property and he fails to produce an invoice showing the cost price of the articles which are subject to tax, or the invoice does not reflect the true or actual cost, then the tax collector shall ascertain in any manner feasible the true cost price and shall assess and collect the tax, together with any interest and penalties that may have accrued, on the basis of the true cost as assessed by him. The assessment so made shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden shall be on the dealer to show the contrary. 
(c)  In the case of the lease or rental of tangible personal property, if the consideration given or reported by the dealer does not, in the judgment of the tax collector, represent the true or actual consideration, then the tax collector is authorized to ascertain in any manner feasible the true or actual consideration and assess and collect the tax thereon together with any interest and penalties that may have accrued. The assessment so made shall be considered prima facie correct and the burden shall be on the dealer to show the contrary. 
(d)  In the event such estimate and assessment requires an examination of books, records, or documents, or an audit thereof, then the tax collector shall add to the assessment the cost of such examination, together with any penalties accruing thereon, which shall be collected in the same manner as the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-67. - Termination or transfer of business. 
(a)  If any dealer liable for any tax, interest, or penalty levied hereunder sells his business or stock of goods or quits the business, he shall make a final return and payment within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. His successor, successors, or assigns, if any, shall withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of such taxes, interest, and penalties due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the tax collector showing that they have been paid, or a certificate stating that no taxes, interest, or penalties are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to withhold purchase money as above provided, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest, and penalties accrued and unpaid on account of the operation of the business by any former owner, owners, or assigns. 
(b)  In the case of a dealer who has quit a business, and who subsequently opens another similar business under the same ownership, whether that ownership is individual, partnership, corporation, or other, that dealer shall be liable for any tax, interest, or penalty owed by the original business. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-68. - Dealers required to keep records. 
(a)  (1)  Every dealer required to make a report and pay the tax under this article shall keep and preserve suitable records of the sales, purchases, or leases taxable under this article, and such other books of accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder, and other information as may be required by the tax collector; and each dealer shall secure, maintain and keep until the taxes to which they relate have prescribed, a complete record of tangible personal property received, used, sold at retail, distributed, or stored, leased or rented, within the city by the said dealer, together with invoices, bills of lading, and other pertinent records and papers as may be required by the tax collector for the reasonable administration of this article, and a complete record of all sales or purchases of services taxable under this article until the taxes to which they relate have prescribed. 
(2)  These records shall be open for inspection to the tax collector at all reasonable hours. 
(3)  The tax collector is authorized to require all dealers who take deductions on their sales tax returns for total sales under the minimum taxable bracket prescribed by him pursuant to section 11-24 to support their deductions by keeping written or printed detailed records of said sales in addition to their usual books and accounts. 
(b)  Any dealer subject to the provisions of this article who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, for any such offense. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-69. - Wholesalers and jobbers required to keep records. 
(a)  All wholesale dealers and jobbers in this state shall keep a record of all sales of tangible personal property made in this city whether such sales be for cash or on terms of credit. These records shall contain and include the name and address of the purchaser, the date of the purchase, the article purchased and the price at which the article is sold to the purchaser. These records shall be kept until the taxes to which they relate have prescribed and shall be open to the inspection of the tax collector at all reasonable hours. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, or both, for the first offense. For the second or each subsequent offense, the penalty shall be double. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-70. - Tax collector's authority to examine records of transportation companies. 
    The tax collector is specifically authorized to examine at all reasonable hours, the books, records and other documents of all transportation companies, agencies, or firms operating in this city, whether they conduct their business by truck, rail, water, airplane, or otherwise, in order to determine what dealers are importing or are otherwise shipping articles of tangible personal property subject to the tax levied by this article. When any such transportation company refuses to permit the examination of its books, as provided in this section, the tax collector may proceed by rule against it, in term time or in vacation, in any court of competent jurisdiction in the parish where such refusals occurred, to show cause why the tax collector should not be permitted to examine its books, records or other documents. This rule may be tried in open court or in chambers, and in case the rule is made absolute, the same shall be considered a judgment of the court, and every violation thereof shall be considered as a contempt of court and punished according to law. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-71. - Failure to pay tax on imported tangible personal property; grounds for attachment. 
    The failure of any dealer to pay the tax and any interest, penalties, or costs due under the provisions of this article on any tangible personal property imported from outside the city for use, consumption, distribution or storage to be used in this city, or imported for the purpose of leasing or renting the same, shall make the tax, interest, penalties, or costs ipso facto delinquent. This failure shall moreover be a sufficient ground for the attachment of the personal property imported wherever it may be found, whether the delinquent taxpayer is a resident or nonresident, and whether the property is in the possession of the delinquent taxpayer or in the possession of other persons. 
    It is the intention of this law to prevent the disposition of the said tangible personal property in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed by this article, together with interest, penalties and costs, and authority to attach is hereby specifically granted to the tax collector. The procedure prescribed by law in attachment proceedings shall be followed except that no bond shall be required of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-72. - System of import permits; seizure and forfeiture of vehicles used in importing without permit. 
(a)  In order to prevent the illegal importation of tangible personal property which is subject to tax, and to strengthen and make more effective the manner and method of enforcing payment of the tax imposed by this article, the tax collector is hereby authorized to put into operation a system of permits whereby any person or dealer may import tangible personal property by truck, automobile, or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having the truck, automobile or other means of transportation seized and subjected to legal proceeding for its forfeiture. Such system of permits shall require the person or dealer who desires to import tangible personal property subject to the tax imposed by this article, to apply to the tax collector for a permit, stating the kind of vehicle to be used, the name of the driver, the license number of the vehicle, the kind or character of tangible personal property to be imported, the date, the name and address of the consignee, and such other information as the tax collector may deem proper or necessary. These permits shall be free of cost to the applicant and may be obtained at the offices of the tax collector. 
(b)  The importation into this city of tangible personal property which is subject to tax, by truck, automobile, or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having first obtained a permit described above, (if the tax imposed by this article has not been paid), is prohibited and shall be construed as an attempt to evade payment of the tax; and the truck, automobile, or means of transportation other than a common carrier, as well as the taxable property may be seized by the tax collector in order to secure the same as evidence in a trial, and it shall be subject to forfeiture and sale in the manner provided for in this article. 
(c)  The tax collector is authorized in a summary proceeding, or by an action against the owner or operator of any truck, automobile or means of transportation other than a common carrier, used in the illegal importation and transportation of any article or articles of tangible personal property on which a tax is levied by this article, and on which the tax has not been paid, to demand the forfeiture and sale of the truck, automobile or other means of transportation, together with the said taxable property, used in the illegal importation and in violation of this article. 
(d)  In all cases where it is made to appear by affidavit that the residence of the owner of the automobile, truck or other means of transportation is out of the state, or is unknown to the tax collector, the court having jurisdiction of the proceeding shall appoint an attorney at law to represent the absent owner against whom the proceeding shall be tried contradictorily within ten (10) days after the filing of the same. The affidavit may be made by the tax collector or one of his assistants, or by the attorney representing the tax collector, if it is not convenient to obtain the affidavit of the tax collector or one of his assistants. The attorney appointed to represent the absent owner may waive service and citation of the petition or rule, but he shall not waive any legal defense. If, upon the trial of the proceeding, it is established that the automobile, truck, or other means of transportation, has been used to transport any article of tangible personal property upon which a tax is levied by this article, and upon which the tax has not been paid, without first having obtained a permit from the tax collector as provided herein, then the court shall render judgment accordingly, declaring the forfeiture of the taxable property and of the automobile, truck, or other means of transportation and ordering the sale thereof after ten (10) days' notice by advertisement in the official parish paper where the seizure is made, by the Civil Sheriff of the Parish of Acadia, or by the sheriff of the parish in which the seizure is made; this sale shall be made at public auction at the court house, to the highest bidder, for cash, and without appraisement. It is the intent and purpose of these proceedings to afford the owner of the automobile, truck or other means of transportation a fair opportunity for hearing in a court of competent jurisdiction. It is further the intent and purpose of these proceedings that the forfeiture and sale of the automobile, truck or other means of transportation, and of the taxable property being transported therein, shall be and operate as a penalty for the violation of this article by the illegal transportation and importation of tangible personal property subject to the tax; and the payment of the tax due on the article upon which a tax is levied by this article, at the moment of seizure or thereafter, shall not operate to prevent, abate, discontinue or defeat the forfeiture and sale of the property, All funds collected from the seized and forfeited property shall be paid to the tax collector, for credit to the city. The court shall fix the fee of the attorney representing the owner when appointed by the court, at a nominal sum not to exceed ten (10) per cent to be taxed as costs and to be paid out of the proceeds of the sale of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-73. - Failure to pay tax; rule to cease business. 
    Failure to pay the tax as provided in this article shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties, and costs to become immediately delinquent, and the tax collector has the authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the dealer, to show cause in not less than two (2) or more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, why the dealer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of business as a dealer. This rule may be tried out of term and in chambers, and shall always be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order rendered thereon shall be considered a judgment in favor of the tax collector, prohibiting the dealer from the further pursuit of said business until such time as he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered as a contempt of court, and punished according to law. For the purpose of the enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax levied hereunder, it is presumed that all tangible personal property imported or held in this city by any dealer is to be sold at retail, used or consumed, or stored for use or consumption in this city, or leased or rented within this city, and is subject to the tax herein levied; this presumption shall be prima facie only, and subject to proof furnished to the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-74. - Sales returned to dealer; credit or refund of tax. 
(a)  Whenever tangible personal property sold is returned to the dealer by the purchaser or consumer or in the event the amount paid or charged for services is refunded or credited to the purchaser or consumer after the tax imposed by this article has been collected, or charged to the account of the purchaser, consumer, or user, the dealer shall be entitled to reimbursement of the amount of tax so collected or charged by him, in the manner prescribed by the tax collector; and in case the tax has not been remitted by the dealer to the tax collector, the dealer may deduct the same in submitting his return. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the dealer as to the gross amount of such refunds during the period covered by the sworn statement, which period shall not be longer than ninety (90) days, the tax collector shall issue to the dealer an official credit memorandum equal to the net amount remitted by the dealer for the tax collected. This memorandum shall be accepted by the tax collector at full face value from the dealer to whom it is issued, in the remittance for subsequent taxes accrued under the provisions of this article. In cases where a dealer has retired from business and has filed a final return, a refund of tax may be made if it can be established to the satisfaction of the tax collector that the tax paid was not due. 
(b)  (1)  Whenever the unpaid balance of an account due to the dealer for the purchase of tangible personal property or the sale of services subject to sales taxation has been found to be bad in accordance with Section 166 of the United States Internal Revenue Code and has actually been charged off for federal income tax purposes, the dealer shall be entitled to reimbursement of the amount of tax previously paid by the dealer on such amounts. 
(2)  The prescription on such refund or credit shall begin to run from the date of signature on the federal income tax return charging off such debt. 
(3)  Whenever the balance of an account that had been determined to be worthless and sales tax refunded is recovered at a later date, the payment shall be reported as a new sale in the month recovered for sales tax purposes. 
(4)  This refund applies both to sales and use taxes imposed by the State of Louisiana and to such taxes authorized and levied by any school board, municipality, or other local taxing authority. All local taxing authorities shall grant such credit or refund as provided by subsection (b)(1) of this section. The taxing authority shall provide for the granting of such refund either by ordinance or by local rule or regulation. Such credit or refund shall be granted whenever the Louisiana Department of Revenue and Taxation has found the dealer to be entitled to reimbursement in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-75. - Sales tax refund. 
(a)  In the event tangible personal property, a part of and used in or about a person's home, apartment or homestead, in this state on which Louisiana sales tax has been paid by the owner of the property is destroyed by a natural disaster occurring in an area in Louisiana subsequently determined by the President of the United States to warrant assistance by the federal government, the owner thereof who was the purchaser who paid the Louisiana sales tax shall be entitled to reimbursement of the amount of the tax paid on such tangible personal property destroyed for which no reimbursement was received by insurance or otherwise. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the owner as to the amount of the taxes paid under the provisions of this article on tangible personal property destroyed as aforesaid, the tax collector shall make refund to said owner in the amount to which he is entitled. 
(b)  No refund shall be made under the provisions of this section unless a claim for refund covering the amount to which an owner is entitled is filed on or before the end of the third calendar year following the calendar year in which the property was destroyed. 
(c)  The tax collector is authorized to prescribe the forms and regulations for use in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-76. - Same-New housing construction. 
(a)  Any person who restores, renovates, or rehabilitates an existing structure or builds or causes the building of a new house and associated improvements in an approved housing development area pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 40:582.1 through 40:582.7 shall be entitled to a refund of the amount of tax paid under the provisions of this article and under the provisions of Chapter 2-A and Chapter 2-13 of Subtitle II of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 as a consequence of the purchase of materials used in the construction of such new house upon showing that he has complied with the provisions of R.S. 40:582.7. 
(b)  The secretary of the department of revenue and taxation is authorized to prescribe the forms and regulations for use in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-77. - Same-Sales and rentals covered by Medicare. 
(a)  Any person who has paid the tax upon the sale, lease, or rental of corporeal movable property when such sale, lease, or rental is paid by or under the provisions of Medicare, shall be entitled to reimbursement of the amount of tax paid on such property. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of such person as to the amount of taxes paid under the provisions of this article on such corporeal movable property and upon proof of payment by or under the provisions of Medicare, the tax collector shall make a refund to such person in the amount to which he is entitled. 
(b)  No refund shall be made under the provisions of this section unless a claim for refund covering the amount to which a person is entitled is filed on or before the end of the third calendar year from the date of the sale, lease, or rental of the property. 
(c)  The secretary is authorized to prescribe forms and regulations for use in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-78. - Tax collector to provide forms. 
    The tax collector shall design, prepare, print and furnish to all dealers, or make available to them, all necessary forms for filing returns, and instructions to insure a full collection from dealers and an accounting for the taxes due; but failure of any dealer to secure these forms shall not relieve the dealer from the payment of the tax at the time in the manner herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-79. - Cost of collection. 
    The cost of preparing and distributing the report forms and paraphernalia for the collection of the tax, and of the inspection and enforcement duties required herein, shall be borne by the revenue produced by this article, and the tax collector shall withhold from the first sums realized on the collection of the tax levied hereunder, a sum not to exceed one million one hundred thousand dollars ($1,100,000.00) per annum. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-80. - Disposition of collections. 
    The tax, revenues, funds, assessments, monies, penalties, fees or other income which may be collected or come into the possession of the tax collector, as an agent of the city, under any provision or provisions of this article shall be deposited weekly by the tax collector for the account of the city in a special fund designated "City of Crowley Street Paving Fund," which fund shall be a separate bank account established and maintained with the regularly designated fiscal agent or agents of the city, provided, however, any amount which is paid under protest or which is subject to litigation may be transferred to a separate account established by the tax collector with said fiscal agent pending the final determination of the protest of litigation. 
    All taxes collected under the provisions of this article in accordance with section 11-23(b), and the proceeds of all such taxes, less the cost of collecting these taxes herein provided for, shall be paid by the vehicle commissioner to the tax collector on or before the tenth day of the month following the collection of the tax; and on the same day that the vehicle commissioner transfers the proceeds of all taxes collected in accordance with section 11-23(b) to the tax collector he shall render to the tax collector a full and accurate accounting of all such taxes collected and the disposition thereof in such form as the tax collector may require. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Secs. 11-81-11-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
Subdivision A. - General Powers and Duties of Tax Collector 

Sec. 11-91. - Power and duties of tax collector. 
    The tax collector is authorized and requested, in the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed by this article, to employ all means prescribed by law for the collection and enforcement of the tax imposed by this article and by Chapter 2 of Subtitle I of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes with or without, in the tax collector's discretion, combining and consolidating procedures for the enforcement and collection of the tax imposed by this article with the procedures for the enforcement and collection of the tax provided by said Chapter 2. These means include particularly the establishment of a system of permits, the seizure of trucks, automobiles, or other means of transportation than common carriers, and of the taxable property, the forfeiture and sale thereof, and the judicial proceedings prescribed by this article. Also, such means of collection and enforcement include all remedies and enforcement and collection procedures prescribed by Chapter 18 of Subtitle II of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes. 
    It shall not be necessary for the tax collector to give bond, before assuming the duties hereby provided, and any duly authorized representative of the tax collector, when acting under his authority and discretion, shall have the same power as is conferred upon the tax collector by this article. The tax collector shall keep accurate records showing the name of the remitter, amount and type of all taxes paid to him under this article, reports filed with him and such other records as are necessary to the proper administration and execution of this article. Said records and files shall enjoy the same confidential character as is provided by R.S. 47:1508 and R.S. 47:1509, and may be destroyed after five (5) years from the last day of December of the year in which the tax to which the records pertain become due, but not less than one year after the receipt of the last payment of tax to which such records pertain. 
    The tax collector is authorized to promulgate, make and publish reasonable rules and regulations for the purpose of the proper administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of taxes under it, to the extent not inconsistent with law and this article. Such rules and regulations may, in the discretion of the tax collector be consolidated with rules and regulations applicable to the collection of other taxes. In general the tax collector shall have the same right to employ counsel, administer oaths, and grant extensions of time as is provided by Part I of Chapter 18 of Subtitle II of Title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes. The powers and duties given to and imposed upon the tax collector by Part II of said Title 47 may be used and shall be observed with respect to the taxes hereby levied, including the duty to determine the correct tax, the power to examine records and premises, the power to examine records of taxpayers and other persons, the power to conduct hearings, administer oaths and examine witnesses, and to subpoena them and to compel attendance and testimony. 
    In addition to other remedies, the tax collector may proceed to enforce the collections of taxes due under this article by means of any of the following alternate remedies or procedures: 
(1)  Assessment and distraint as provided in R.S. 47:1562 through 47:1573; 
(2)  Summary court proceedings provided in R.S. 47:1574; 
(3)  Ordinary suit under the provisions of the general laws regulating actions for the enforcement of obligations; 
(4)  If any tax imposed by this article is referred to an attorney-at-law for collection, there shall be added thereto an additional amount of ten (10) per cent of the tax, interest and other penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-92. - Confidential character of tax records. 
(a)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the records and files of the tax collector are confidential and privileged, and no person shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from such records and files except in the administration and enforcement of the tax laws of this parish or of a political subdivision of this parish. 
(2)  No person shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from any examination or inspection of the premises or property of any person in connection with the administration and enforcement of the tax laws of this parish or a political subdivision of this parish except to the taxing jurisdiction of his employment or, in the case of an already existing independent contractor arrangement, to the contracting taxing jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-93. - Preservation of returns and reports. 
(a)  All returns and reports filed with the tax collector pursuant to the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided for in this section, may be destroyed by order of the tax collector after five (5) years from the last day of December of the year in which the tax to which the records pertain became due, but not less than one year after the receipt of the last payment of tax to which such records pertain. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to internally generated reports used for the processing of tax information. The tax collector shall have the authority to establish procedures for the destruction of these reports. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-94. - Power to employ counsel. 
    The tax collector is authorized to employ private counsel to assist in the collection of any taxes, penalties or interest due under this article, or to represent him in any proceeding under this article. If any taxes, penalties or interest due under this section are referred to an attorney at law for collection, an additional charge for attorney fees, in the amount of ten (10) per cent of the taxes, penalties and interest due, shall be paid by the tax debtor. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-95. - Power to extend time to file returns and pay tax. 
    Upon the written request of the taxpayer and for good cause shown, the tax collector may grant reasonable extensions of time for the filing of returns and payment of tax due under this article; provided that such extensions of time shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days. Whenever such an extension is granted, the return or tax for which the extension is granted shall not become delinquent until the expiration of the extension period; but interest will accrue on the tax during the period of the extension, such interest to be computed in all cases from the date the tax would have become delinquent in the absence of an extension. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Subdivision B. - Investigations and Hearings 

Sec. 11-96. - Tax collector's duty to determine correct tax. 
    As soon as practicable after each return or report is filed under any of the provisions of this article, the tax collector shall cause it to be examined and may make such further audit or investigation as he may deem necessary for the purpose of determining the correct amount of tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-97. - Power to examine records and premises of taxpayer. 
    For the purpose of administering the provisions of this article, the tax collector, whenever he deems it expedient, may make or cause to be made by any of his authorized assistants or representatives an examination or investigation of the place of business, if any, the tangible personal property, and the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts, and documents of any taxpayer. Every taxpayer and every director, officer, agent, or employee of every taxpayer, shall exhibit to the tax collector or to any of his authorized representatives, the place of business, the tangible personal property and all of the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts, and documents of the taxpayer and to facilitate any such examination or investigation so far as it may be in his or their power so to do. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-98. - Retention of records by taxpayers. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any document or record which a taxpayer is required to maintain in regard to a tax levied pursuant to this article, shall be retained by the taxpayer until the tax to which they relate have prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-99. - Power to examine the records of third parties. 
    For the purpose of administering the provisions of this article, the tax collector whenever he deems it expedient may make or cause to be made by any of his authorized assistants or representatives an examination of the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts and documents of any individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, bank, syndicate or other group or combination, insofar as said books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts and documents relate to, bear on, associate with, identify, clarify or disclose, the liability of any person or group made liable for any tax, excise, permit, or license under this article of this chapter or assist in the enforcement or collection of any such liability. Every individual, director, officer, agent or employee of such individual, firm, co-partnership, joint adventure, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, bank, syndicate or other group or combination, shall exhibit to the tax collector or to any of his authorized assistants or representatives the pertinent books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts and documents and to facilitate any such examination and investigation so far as it may be in his or their power so to do. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-100. - Power to conduct hearings. 
    The tax collector or any of his authorized assistants may conduct hearings, administer oaths to, and examine under oath, any taxpayer, and the directors, officers, agents, and employees of any taxpayer, and any other witnesses, relative to the business of such taxpayer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-101. - Rule to show cause and examination of judgment debtor. 
(a)  Whenever the tax collector finds that any person has failed to file or refuses to file any return required by any provision of this article, the tax collector may institute against that person: 
(1)  A rule to show cause why the return should not be filed; and 
(2)  A rule to examine a judgment debtor, as provided for in Articles 2452 through 2456, Louisiana Code of Civil Procedure, where the tax due has been duly and finally assessed as otherwise provided. 
    The proceedings outlined herein shall be consistent with Article 2592 of Louisiana Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Subdivision C. - Assessment and Collection Procedure 

Sec. 11-102. - Alternative remedies for the collection of taxes. 
    In addition to following any of the special remedies provided in the various sections of this article, the tax collector may, in his discretion, proceed to enforce the collection of any taxes due under this section by means of any of the following alternative remedies or procedures: 
(1)  Assessment and distraint, as provided in R.S. 47:1562 through 47:1573 and sections 11-103-11-109.7 of this article; 
(2)  Summary court proceeding, as provided in R.S. 47:1574 and section 11-109.8 of this article; 
(3)  Ordinary suit under the provisions of the general laws regulating actions for the enforcement of obligations. 
    The tax collector may choose which of these procedures he will pursue in each case, and the counter-remedies and delays to which the taxpayer will be entitled will be only those which are not inconsistent with the proceeding initiated by the tax collector, provided that in every case the taxpayer shall be entitled to proceed under R.S. 47:1576 and section 11-109.9 of this article except (a) after he has filed a petition with the board of tax appeals for a redetermination of the assessment, or (b) when an assessment for the tax in question has become final, or (c) when a suit involving the same tax obligation is pending against him; and provided further, that the fact that the tax collector has initiated proceedings under the assessment and distraint procedure will not preclude him from thereafter proceeding by summary or ordinary court proceedings for the enforcement of the same tax obligation. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-103. - Determination and notice of tax due. 
    If a taxpayer falls to make and file any return or report required by the provisions of this article, or if the return or report made and filed does not correctly compute the liability of said taxpayer, the tax collector shall cause an audit, investigation or examination to be made to determine the tax, penalty and interest due, or he shall determine the tax, penalty or interest due by estimate or otherwise. Having determined the amount of tax, penalty and interest due, the tax collector shall send by mail a notice to the taxpayer at the address given in the last report filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article or if no report has been filed, to any address that may be obtainable, setting out his determination and informing the person of his purpose to assess the amount so determined against him after fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-104. - Protest to tax collector's determination of tax due. 
    The taxpayer, within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the notice provided in R.S. 47:1562, may protest thereto. This protest must be in writing and should fully disclose the reasons, together with facts and figures in substantiation thereof, for objecting to the tax collector's determination. The tax collector shall consider the protest, and in his discretion may grant a hearing thereon, before making a final determination of tax, penalty and interest due. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-105. - Assessment of tax, interest and penalties. 
    At the expiration of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the tax collector's notice provided in section 11-103, or at the expiration of such time as may be necessary for the tax collector to consider any protest filed to such notice, the tax collector shall proceed to assess the tax, penalty and the interest that he determines to be due under the provisions of this article. The assessment shall be evidenced by a writing in any form suitable to the tax collector, which sets forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount determined to be due, the kind of tax, and the taxable period for which it is due. This writing shall be retained as a part of the tax collector's official records. The assessment may confirm or modify the tax collector's originally proposed assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-106. - Notice of assessment and right to appeal. 
    Having assessed the amount determined to be due, the tax collector shall send, by registered mail, a notice to the taxpayer against whom the assessment lies, at the address given in the last report filed by said taxpayer, or if no report has been filed, to any such address as may be obtainable. This notice shall inform the taxpayer of the assessment made against him and notify him that he has sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the notice within which to pay the amount of the assessment or that he may pay the tax under protest and file suit for recovery under R.S. 47:1576 or section 11-109.10 of this article. 
    No assessment made by the tax collector shall be final if it is determined that the assessment was based on an error of fact or of law. An error of fact for this purpose means facts material to the assessment assumed by the tax collector at the time of the assessment to be true but which subsequently are determined by the tax collector to be false. Error of law for this purpose means that in making the assessor the tax collector applied the law contrary to the construction followed by the tax collector in making other assessments. The determination of an error of fact or of law under this section shall be solely that of the tax collector, and no action against the tax collector with respect to the determination shall be brought in any court, and no court shall have jurisdiction of any such action, it being the intent of this subsection only to permit the tax collector to correct manifest errors of fact or in the application of the law made by the tax collector in making the assessment; provided however, that all reductions of assessment based on such errors must be approved and signed by the tax collector and shall then be approved in the manner provided by law for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. The remedies of a taxpayer aggrieved by any action of the tax collector are by payment of the disputed tax under protest and suit to recover as provided by R.S. 47:1576 and section 11-109.10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-107. - Request for review by board of appeals for local sales and use taxes. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1986, whenever a taxpayer is aggrieved by an assessment made by the tax collector or by the tax collector's action or failure to act on a claim for refund or credit of an overpayment, such taxpayer may request a review by the board for a redetermination of the assessment or a determination of the alleged overpayment, by filing a petition with the board. 
(b)  When the tax collector notifies the taxpayer of an assessment, he shall also notify the taxpayer of the taxpayer's right to request a review by the board and shall notify the taxpayer of the time period within which such requests must be filed with the board. 
(c)  In order for the board to hear disputes which fall within the jurisdiction of the board as delineated in subsection (a) herein, a request must be filed with the board within thirty (30) days of the date of the assessment. The filing of a request for review shall suspend the time within which suit must be instituted until ninety (90) days after the filing. 
(d)  Any taxpayer protesting the payment of any amount found due by the local sales tax collector shall remit to the local sales tax jurisdiction the amount due and at that time shall give notice of intention to file a request for review with the board. Upon receipt of this notice, the amount remitted shall be placed in an escrow account and held by the tax collector for a period of thirty (30) days. If the request for review is filed within the thirty-day period, the funds shall be held pending outcome of the review. If the taxpayer prevails, the tax collector shall refund the amount to the claimant, with interest at the legal rate from the date the funds were received by the local taxing jurisdiction to the date of the refund. 
(e)  Rulings of the board shall be appealable. The appeal shall lie with the district court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-108. - Waiver of restrictions and delays. 
    The taxpayer shall at any time have the right, by a signed notice in writing filed with the tax collector, to waive the restrictions and delays prescribed in sections 11-103 through 11-106 which must ordinarily be observed before an assessment may become final. When such a waiver is executed, the assessment is final when made and is immediately collectible by distraint and sale. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109. - Assessment and notice when tax is in jeopardy. 
    If the tax collector finds that a taxpayer designs quickly to depart from the parish or state to remove therefrom any property subject to any tax or to any lien for a tax, or to discontinue business, or to do any other act tending to prejudice or render wholly or partly ineffectual any proceedings that might be instituted to collect such tax, whereby it shall have become important that such proceedings be instituted without delay, he may immediately make a determination, from any available information or by estimate or otherwise, of the amount of tax, penalty, and interest such taxpayer is liable to pay under this article. Having made such determination, the tax collector shall immediately assess said amount, and by a writing to be retained as part of his official records, indicate such assessment has been made, and without any notice, proceed to distrain any property belonging to the taxpayer. This type of assessment may be made whenever a tax becomes due under the provisions of this article, regardless of whether it is then payable or not. 
    As soon as is feasible after such assessment, and not later than two (2) calendar days thereafter, the tax collector shall send by registered mail a notice to the taxpayer against whom the assessment lies, at the address given in the last report filed by said taxpayer, or if no such report has been filed, to any such address as may be obtainable. Such notice shall inform the taxpayer of the assessment, its basis, and jeopardous nature; make demand for immediate payment thereof; and give notice that any property distrained or to be distrained will be subject to sale as provided in this article, to satisfy the assessment. 
    The taxpayer against whom the assessment lies can stay distraint of his property, or sale of his property already distrained, as the case may be only by the immediate payment of the assessment. Such payment may be made under protest with the effect provided in R.S. 47:1576 and section 11-109.10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.1. - Assessment and claims in bankruptcy and receivership. 
    Upon the adjudication of bankruptcy of any taxpayer in any bankruptcy proceeding, or the appointment of a receiver for any taxpayer in a receivership proceeding, before any court of this state or of the United States, the tax collector may immediately make a determination from any available information or by estimate or otherwise of the amount of tax, penalty and interest the taxpayer is liable to pay under this article, and immediately assess said amount, and by a writing to be retained as a part of his official records indicate that such assessment has been made. Such assessment may be made whenever a tax becomes due under the provisions of this article, regardless of whether it is then payable or not. Claims for such assessments, and additional interest and attorney's fees thereon, shall be presented for adjudication in accordance with law, to the court before which the bankruptcy or receivership proceeding is pending despite the pendency of delays before assessment provided in sections 11-103 through 11-106. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.2. - Assessment of tax shown on face of taxpayer's returns. 
    Whenever a taxpayer files returns and computes the amount of any tax due, such tax together with any penalty and interest due or accruing thereon, whether computed or not, shall be considered assessed and shall be entered by the tax collector as an assessment in his official records without the necessity of observing the delays or giving the notice ordinarily required prior to assessment. 
    If the taxpayer fails to accompany his return filed with a proper payment, as required by this article, the tax collector shall immediately send a notice by mail to such person, addressed to the address appearing on the return or any available address if no address appears, informing him of the amount due, or the balance of the amount due if a partial payment has been made, and demanding payment of such amount within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice. If payment has not been received at the expiration of such time, the assessment shall be collectable by distraint and sale as is herein provided. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed as denying the right of the taxpayer to pay the assessment under protest or to claim a refund of the assessment after payment, all in manner as is hereinafter set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.3. - Collection by distraint and sale authorized. 
    When any taxpayer fails to pay any tax, penalty and interest assessed, as provided in this article, the tax collector may proceed to enforce the collection thereof by distraint and sale. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.4. - Distraint defined. 
    The words "distraint" or "distrain," as used in this article, shall be construed to mean the right to levy upon and seize and sell, or the levying upon or seizing and selling, of any property or rights to property of the taxpayer including goods, chattels, effects, stocks, securities, bank accounts. evidences of debt, wages, real estate and other forms of property, by the tax collector or his authorized assistants, for the purpose of satisfying any assessment of tax, penalty or interest due under the provisions of this article. 
    Property exempt from seizure by Articles 644 and 645 of the Louisiana Code of Practice is exempt from distraint and sale herein. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.5. - Distraint procedure. 
    Whenever the tax collector or his authorized assistants shall distrain any property of a taxpayer, he shall cause to be made a list of the property or effects distrained, a copy of which, signed by the tax collector or his authorized assistants shall be sent by registered mail to the taxpayer at his last known residence or business address, or served on the taxpayer in person. This list shall be accompanied with a note of the sum demanded and a notice of the time and place where the property will be sold. Thereafter, the tax collector shall cause a notice to be published in the official journal of the parish wherein the distraint is made, specifying the property distrained, and the time and place of sale. The sale shall be held not less than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the notice mailed or served on the taxpayer or the date of publication in the official journal, whichever is later. The tax collector may postpone such sales from time to time, if he deems it advisable, but not for a time to exceed thirty (30) calendar days in all. If the sale is continued to a new date, it shall be readvertised. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.6. - Surrender of property subject to distraint. 
    Any person subject to distraint, or whom a levy has been served, shall, upon demand by the tax collector or his authorized assistants, making such levy, surrender such property, or rights of property of which he is in possession, or which he subsequently comes into possession, until such time as the levy is recalled, subject to distraint, to the tax collector or his authorized assistant, unless such property or right is, at the time of demand, subject to an attachment or execution under any judicial process. Any such person failing or refusing to surrender any such property or rights shall be liable to the parish in a sum equal to the value of the property or rights not so surrendered, but not exceeding the amount of the taxes, penalties, and interest and other cost and charges which are due. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.7. - Sale of distrained property. 
    The tax collector, or his authorized assistants, shall sell at public auction for cash to the highest bidder so much of the property distrained by him as may be sufficient to satisfy the tax, penalties, interest, and costs due. He shall give to the purchaser a certificate of sale which will be prima facie evidence of the right of the tax collector to make the sale, and conclusive evidence of the regularity of his proceedings in making the sale, and which will transfer to the purchaser all right, title and interest of the taxpayer in and to the property sold. 
    Out of the proceeds of the sale, the tax collector shall first pay all costs of the sale and then apply so much of the balance of the proceeds as may be necessary to pay the assessment. Any balance beyond this shall be paid to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.8. - Collection by summary court proceeding authorized. 
    In addition to any other procedure provided in this article or elsewhere in the laws of this parish or state and for the purpose of facilitating and expediting the determination and trial, of all claims for taxes, penalties, interest, attorney fees, or other costs and charges arising under this article, there is hereby provided a summary proceeding for the hearing and determination of all claims by or on behalf of the parish, or by or on behalf of the tax collector, for taxes, excises, and licenses and for the penalties, interest, attorney fees, costs or other charges due thereon, by preference in all courts, all as follows: 
(1)  All such proceedings, whether original or by intervention or third opposition, or otherwise, brought by or on behalf of the parish, or by or on behalf of the tax collector, for the determination or collection of any tax, excise, license, interest, penalty, attorney fees, costs or other charge, claimed to be due under any provision of this article, shall be summary and shall always be tried or heard by preference, in all courts, original and appellate, whether in or out of term time, and either in open court or chambers, at such time as may be fixed by the court, which shall be not less than two (2) nor more than ten (10) days after notice to the defendant or opposing party. 
(2)  All defenses, whether by exception or to the merits, made or intended to be made to any such claim, must be presented at one time and filed in the court of original jurisdiction prior to the time fixed for the hearing, and no court shall consider any defense unless so presented and filed. This provision shall be construed to deny to any court the right to extend the time for pleading defenses; and no continuance shall be granted by any court to any defendant except for legal grounds set forth in the Louisiana Code of Practice. 
(3)  That all matters involving any such claim shall be decided within forty-eight (48) hours after submission, whether in term time or in vacation, and whether in the court of first instance or in an appellate court, and all judgments sustaining any such claim shall be rendered and signed the same day, and shall become final and executory on the fifth calendar day after rendition. No new trial, rehearing or devolutive appeal shall be allowed. Suspensive appeals may be granted, but must be perfected within five (5) calendar days from the rendition of the judgment by giving of bond, with good and solvent security, in a sum double that of the total amount of the judgment, including costs. Such appeals, whether to a court of appeals or to the Supreme Court, shall be made returnable in not more than fifteen (15) calendar days from the rendition of the judgment. 
(4)  Whenever the pleadings filed on behalf of the parish, or on behalf of the tax collector, shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the tax collector or of one of his assistants or representatives or of the counsel or attorney filing the same, that the facts as alleged are true to the best of the affiant's knowledge or belief, all of the facts alleged in said pleadings shall be accepted as prima facie true and as constituting a prima facie case, and the burden of proof to establish anything to the contrary shall rest wholly on the defendant or opposing party. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.9. - Injunctions prohibited. 
    No court of this state shall issue any process whatsoever to restrain the collection of any tax, penalty, interest, or other charge imposed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.10. - Remittance of tax under protest; suits to recover. 
(a)  Any taxpayer protesting the payment of any amount found due by the tax collector, or the enforcement of any provision of the tax laws in relation thereto, shall remit to the tax collector the amount due and at that time shall give notice of intention to file suit for the recovery of such tax. Upon receipt of this notice, the amount remitted shall be placed in an escrow account and held by the tax collector or his duly authorized representative for a period of thirty (30) days. If suit is filed for recovery of the tax within the thirty-day period, the funds in the escrow account shall be further held pending the outcome of the suit. If the taxpayer prevails, the tax collector shall refund the amount to the claimant. 
(b)  This section shall afford a legal remedy and right of action in any parish court having jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter, for a full and complete adjudication of any and all questions arising in the enforcement of this article as to the legality of any tax accrued or accruing or the method of enforcement thereof. In such action, service of process upon the tax collector shall be sufficient service, and he shall be the sole necessary and proper party defendant in any such suit. 
(c)  This section shall be construed to provide a legal remedy in the parish courts in case such taxes are claimed to be an unlawful burden upon interstate commerce, or the collection thereof, in violation of any act of Congress or the United States Constitution, or the Constitution of Louisiana. 
(d)  Upon request of a taxpayer and upon proper showing by such taxpayer that the principle of law involved in an additional assessment is already pending before the courts for judicial determination, the taxpayer, upon agreement to abide by the decision of the courts, may remit the additional assessment under protest, but need not file an additional suit. In such cases, the tax so paid under protest shall be placed in an escrow account and held by the tax collector until the question of law involved has been determined by the courts and shall then be disposed of as therein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.11. - Tax obligation to constitute a lien, privilege and mortgage. 
    Except as is specifically provided in the laws regulating building and loan associations, any tax, penalty, interest or attorney fee due under the provisions of this article shall operate as a lien, privilege and mortgage on all of the property of the tax debtor, both movable and immovable; which said lien, privilege and mortgage shall be enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action, at law, or may be enforced as otherwise provided by this article. The tax collector may cause notice of such lien, privilege and mortgage to be recorded at any time after the tax becomes due. whether assessed or not, and regardless of whether or not then payable, in the mortgage records of any parish wherein the tax collector has reason to believe the tax debtor owns property. The lien, privilege and mortgage created by this section shall affect third parties only from the date of recordation and shall take their respective ranks by virtue of recordation. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.12. - Cancellation of lien, privilege and mortgage. 
    In any case where the tax, penalty or interest secured by a recorded lien, privilege and mortgage have been paid, the tax collector or his authorized assistants or attorneys may authorize the cancellation thereof. 
    In other cases, the tax collector may authorize the cancellation or release of a lien, privilege or mortgage subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The tax collector, upon application of a taxpayer, may authorize the cancellation of any lien, privilege or mortgage or other encumbrance recorded by virtue of this article, provided the taxpayer furnishes a surety bond in favor of the tax collector executed by a surety company duly qualified to do business in this state in an amount of not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the amount of the obligation due, including penalties, interest, and other costs incurred. 
(2)  The tax collector may authorize the release of any real property from the effect and operation of any lien, privilege, mortgage or other encumbrance, recorded by virtue of this article, provided, that the tax collector is satisfied that the remaining real property belonging to the tax debtor and upon which said lien, privilege and mortgage bears is valued at not less than the amount of the remaining tax obligation, including all penalties, interest and other costs incurred, and the amount of all prior liens upon such property. In determining the value of the remaining property due consideration shall be given to prior ranking encumbrances, if any exist on said property. 
(3)  The tax collector may issue a certificate of release of any part of the property subject to any lien, privilege, mortgage, or other encumbrance recorded by virtue of this article, if there is paid over to the tax collector in part satisfaction of liability an amount determined by the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.13. - Prescriptive period for taxes, interest, and penalties interruption and suspension of prescription period. 
(a)  Sales and use taxes levied by this tax authority shall prescribe as of three (3) years from the thirty-first day of December in the year in which such taxes became due. 
(b)  The prescriptive period running against any such sales and use tax shall be interrupted by: 
(1)  The action of the tax collector in assessing the amounts of such taxes in the manner prescribed by law; 
(2)  Filing of a summary proceeding in court; 
(3)  Filing of any pleadings by the tax collector or by the taxpayer with any state or federal court; 
(4)  Filing of a false or fraudulent tax return; 
(5)  Failure to file a tax return, with intent to defraud. 
(c)  The running of such prescriptive period may also be suspended by means of a written agreement between any taxpayer and the tax collector made prior to the lapse of such period. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Subdivision D. - Interest and Penalties 

Sec. 11-109.14. - Failure to pay tax, interest on unpaid taxes. 
    Failure to pay any tax and any interest, penalties or costs due as provided in this article shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties, and costs to become immediately delinquent in the manner and with the effect provided herein. 
    Whenever any taxpayer fails to pay any tax, or any portion thereof, due under the provisions of this article on or before the day when it shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount of tax due interest at the rate of one and one-quarter (11/4) per cent per month from the due date until paid, except in the case of a waiver under R.S. 47:1565.1, if the tax is paid within ten (10) days after notice of the assessment is mailed to the taxpayer, the interest shall be computed to the thirtieth day after the filing of such waiver or to the date the deficiency is paid, whichever is earlier. Such interest shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the, tax due and can be enforced in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax, and shall not be waived or remitted. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.15. - Penalty for failure to make timely return. 
    When any taxpayer fails to make and file any return required to be made under the provisions of this article at the time such return becomes due, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) per cent of the tax if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per cent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the tax in the aggregate. The specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were a part of the tax due, and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.16. - Waiver of penalty when return is not timely filed. 
    If the failure to make any return at the time such return becomes due is attributable, not to the negligence of the taxpayer, but to other causes set forth in written form and considered reasonable by the tax collector, the tax collector may remit or waive payment of the whole or any part of the specific penalty provided for such failure; but in any case where the penalty exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), it can be waived by the tax collector only after approval by the taxing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.17. - Penalty for false or fraudulent return. 
    When the taxpayer files a return that is false or fraudulent or grossly incorrect and the circumstances indicate that the taxpayer had intent to defraud the tax authority of any tax due under this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty of fifty (50) per cent of the tax found to be due. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were a part of the tax due, and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.18. - Negligence penalty. 
    If any taxpayer fails to make any return required by this article or makes an incorrect return, and the circumstances indicate willful negligence or intentional disregard of rules and regulations, but no intent to defraud, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty of five (5) per cent of the tax or deficiency found to be due, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is the greater. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were a part of the tax due, and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.19. - Insufficient funds check in payment of taxes; penalty. 
    In the event a check used to make payment of a tax, interest or penalty due under this article is returned unpaid by the bank on which it is drawn because of insufficient funds in the account on which it is drawn, such shall constitute a failure to pay the tax, interest or penalty due and a specific penalty shall be imposed on the taxpayer in addition to all other penalties provided by law. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax, interest or penalty, in payment of which the check was given and may be enforced in a separate action or in any action instituted for the collection of the tax, interest or penalty. The specific penalty imposed under this section shall be an amount equal to the greater of one per cent of the check or five dollars ($5.00). After receipt of three (3) insufficient fund checks during any two-year period, the tax collector may require payment of the taxes, interest or penalties due by the taxpayer to be paid by certified check, money order or cash. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.20. - Examination and hearing costs. 
    If any taxpayer fails to make any return required by this article, or makes a grossly incorrect report, or a false or fraudulent report, and the tax collector, in performance of his duty to ascertain the amount of tax due, makes an examination of books, records, or documents, or an audit thereof, or conducts a hearing, or subpoenas witnesses, then there may be added to the amount of tax found to be due, a specific penalty, in addition to any other penalty provided, in an amount as itemized by the tax collector to compensate for all costs incurred in making such examination or audit, or in holding such hearing, or in subpoenaing and compensating witnesses. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax due, and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.21. - Distraint cost penalty. 
    Whenever the tax collector uses the distraint procedure to enforce the collection of any tax, there shall be imposed with respect to the tax for the collection of which the distraint procedure is used, a specific penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) to compensate for the costs of the distraint procedure. This specific penalty shall be in addition to any penalty assessed as provided by law and shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax due, and may be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.22. - Penalty for nonpayment of tax. 
    Upon taxes not paid and delinquent thirty (30) days after the date upon which the tax is due, there shall be an interest penalty of one and one-quarter (11/4) per cent per month on the amount of the tax due, which shall be collected by the tax collector, together with and in the same manner as the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Subdivision E. - Refunds for Overpayments 

Sec. 11-109.23. - Refunds of overpayments authorized. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the "overpayment" means a payment of tax, penalty or interest when none was due, or the excess of the amount of tax, penalty or interest paid over the amount due; provided that the power of the tax collector to refund overpayments shall be as prescribed and limited in this section. 
(b)  The tax collector shall make a refund of each overpayment where it is determined that: 
(1)  The tax was overpaid because of an error in mathematical computation; 
(2)  The tax was overpaid because of a construction of the law contrary to the tax collector's construction of the law at the time of payment; or 
(3)  The overpayment resulted from a change made by the tax collector in an assessment under the provisions of section 11-106. 
    Such refunds shall be made out of current collections; except where judgment has been obtained by a taxpayer against this taxing authority, no public property or public funds shall be subject to seizure and no judgment shall be exigible, payable, or paid, except from funds appropriated by the legislature or by this tax authority against which judgment has been rendered (Article 12, Section 10 of the 1974 Louisiana Constitution). 
    This section shall not be construed to authorize any refund of tax overpaid through a mistake of law arising from the misinterpretation by the tax collector of the provisions of any law or of the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. In the event a taxpayer believes that the tax collector has misinterpreted the law or promulgated rules and regulations contrary therewith, his remedy is by payment under protest and suit to recover as provided in section 11-109.10. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.24. - Interests on refunds or credits. 
(a)  The tax collector shall compute on all refunds or credits and allow interest as part of the refund or credit as follows: 
(1)  From date of payment of the taxes, but prior to submission by the taxpayer of a claim for refund, interest shall be computed at a rate of two (2) per cent per annum. 
(2)  From date of submission by the taxpayer of a claim for refund, or from payment under protest, or from the date that the taxpayer gave the tax collector notice of the taxpayer's intention to file suit for the recovery of any taxes paid, interest shall be at the same rate as that imposed herein upon taxes not paid and delinquent. 
(3)  The interest rate provided for in subsection (2) of this section shall not be applicable for a sixty-day period from the date the taxpayer makes a claim for refund, if a refund is the result of the taxpayer's administrative error; however, the interest for this sixty-day period shall be computed under the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(b)  No interest on refunds or credits shall be allowed if it is determined that a person has deliberately overpaid a tax in order to derive the benefit of the interest allowed by this section. Payments of interest authorized by this section shall be made from funds derived from current collections of the tax to be refunded or credited. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.25. - Prescription of refunds and credits. 
(a)  (1)  After three (3) years from December 31 of the year in which the local sales and use tax becomes due or after one year from the date the sales and use tax is paid, whichever is later, no refund or credit for overpayment shall be made unless a claim for credit or refund has been filed by the taxpayer with the tax collector before the expiration of such period. 
(2)  The maximum amount that shall be refunded or credited shall be the amount paid within said three-year or one-year period. 
(3)  The tax collector shall prescribe the manner of filing claims for refund or credit. 
(4)  In any case where a taxpayer and the tax collector consent in writing to an extension of the period during which an assessment of tax may be made, the period for refunding or crediting overpayments as provided in this section shall be extended in accordance with the terms of the agreement between the taxpayer and the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Subdivision F. - Criminal Penalties 

Sec. 11-109.26. - Criminal penalty for failing to account for parish tax monies. 
    Any person required under this article to collect, account for, or pay over any tax, penalty, or interest imposed by this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, penalty, or interest, shall in addition to other penalties provided by law, be fined not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or imprisoned, with or without hard labor, for not more than five (5) years, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.27. - Criminal penalty for evasion of tax. 
    Any person who willfully fails to file any return or report required to be fed by the provisions of this article, or who willfully files or causes to be filed, with the tax collector, any false or fraudulent return, report or statement, or who willfully aids or abets another in the filing with the tax collector of any false or fraudulent return, report or statement, with the intent to defraud the parish or evade the payment of any tax, fee, penalty or interest, or any part thereof, which shall be due pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Subdivision G. - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 11-109.28. - Effective date of article. 
    This article, being an ordinance affecting the public health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Crowley, Louisiana, shall be and become effective on the day of its enactment, provided that the effective date of the tax herein levied shall become effective on July 1, 2012, and the payments by the dealers hereunder to the tax collector for the first monthly report and remittances of the avails of the tax to the tax collector falls due on September 20, 2012, all as hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.29. - Citation. 
    This article may be cited or otherwise referred to as the "City of Crowley Fifteen-Year One-Half of One Percent (1/2 of 1%) Sales and Use Tax Ordinance No. 1437." 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
Sec. 11-109.30. - Venue. 
    An action to enforce the collection of taxes, including any applicable interest, penalties, or other charges, levied by this article shall be brought in the court of competent jurisdiction of this parish. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 5-24-12) 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE BUSINESS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal tax on insurance business, R.S. 22:1076. 

Sec. 11-110. - Imposition of tax. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on any insurer engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract, which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax for state purposes, all as is authorized by Section 1076 of Title 22 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, on risks located in this municipality as follows: 
(1)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations, whether such insurer is operating in this state or through an agent or other representative or otherwise, ten dollars ($10.00) on gross annual premiums up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and an additional license thereafter of seventy dollars ($70.00) on each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The maximum license on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any one insurer, shall not exceed twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000.00). 
(2)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, workers' compensation, employers' liability, property damage, livestock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operating in this state through agents or other representative or otherwise, shall be as allowed by the aforementioned statutes, viz: 
1st class: When the gross receipts are not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the license shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
2nd Class: When the gross receipts are more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
3rd class: When the gross receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), and not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) the license shall be eighty dollars ($80.00). 
4th class: When the gross receipts exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
    The maximum license tax on such businesses payable to this municipality by any insurer shall not exceed the maximum limit of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), as provided for by Louisiana Revised Statutes 22:1076, above referred to; provided, that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers pay only one-third ( 1/3 ) of the above rates provided in said subsection (2); and provided further, that the amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this section shall be one-third ( 1/3 ) of the amount so fixed, if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by Louisiana Revised Statutes, Title 22, Chapter 1, Part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the total admitted assets of the payer, less assets in an amount equal to the reserves on its policies issued in foreign countries in which it is authorized to do business and which countries require an investment therein as a condition of doing business, is invested and maintained, either in bonds of the state or in bonds of municipal, school, road or levee district, or other political subdivisions of this state or in mortgages on property located in this state, or in real property in this state which shall be requisite for the convenient accommodation of the transaction of its own business, or in policy loans, or other loans to residents of this state, or to corporations organized under the laws of this state and domiciled in this state, or in stock of homestead building or loan associations organized under the laws of this state, to the extent such stock is guaranteed or insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or other federal or state agency. 
(Code 1965, § 21-266; Ord. No. 1114, § 1, 7-14-87) 
Sec. 11-111. - Due date; term of collection of delinquencies. 
    All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year, and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on March 1st. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with Louisiana Revised Statutes, 47:1601 and 47:1602. 
(Code 1965, § 21-267; Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 7-14-87) 
Sec. 11-112. - Tax on fire, wind storm and extended coverage premiums. 
    Each insurer engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, wind storm and extended coverage and doing business within the corporate limits of the city shall pay a separate and distinct license tax on the annual amount of premiums or receipts on policies covering all risks located or situated within the corporate limits, as follows: 
1st class. When the gross annual premiums are less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), the license tax shall be five dollars ($5.00); 
2nd class. When the gross annual premiums are three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), or more, and less than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license tax shall be seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50); 
3rd class. When the gross annual premiums are four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), or more, and less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the license tax shall be ten dollars ($10.00); 
4th class. When the gross annual premiums are five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or more, and less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the license tax shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00); 
5th class. When the gross annual premiums are ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or more, and less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), the license tax shall be twenty dollars ($20.00); and 
6th class. When the gross annual premiums are fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), or more, the license tax shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1965, § 21-268) 
Sec. 11-113. - Tax on life, accident, health or service insurance premiums. 
    Each insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies or contracts or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations, and doing business within the city shall pay a separate and distinct license tax on the annual amount of premiums or receipts on all risks located or residing within the corporate limits, as follows: 
1st class. When the gross annual premiums or receipts are two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less, the license shall be ten dollars ($10.00); the additional license thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) on each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums or receipts in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Code 1965, § 21-271) 
Sec. 11-114. - Tax on plate glass and boiler insurance premiums. 
    Plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay only one-third of the rate provided in section 11-115. 
(Code 1965, § 21-270) 
Sec. 11-115. - Tax on other types of insurance premiums. 
    Each insurer engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, workers' compensation, employer's liability, property damage, livestock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary or any other kind of insurance, whatsoever, except life, accident and health insurance and fire, wind storm and extended coverage insurance, and doing business within the city shall pay a separate and distinct license tax on the annual amount of receipts or premiums on policies covering all risks located or situated within the corporate limits and all risks of insurers residing within such corporate limits, as follows: 
1st class. When the gross premiums or receipts are not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the license tax shall be twenty dollars ($20.00); 
2nd class. When the gross annual premiums or receipts are more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the license tax shall be forty dollars ($40.00); 
3rd class. When the gross annual premiums or receipts are more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license tax shall be sixty dollars ($60.00); 
4th class. When the gross annual premiums or receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) and not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the license tax shall be eighty dollars ($80.00); 
5th class. When the gross annual premiums or receipts are more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license tax thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums or receipts in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
(Code 1965, § 21-269) 
Sec. 11-116. - Penalty on delinquent tax. 
    In case of any failure to make payment of license tax as required by this article, ten (10) per cent shall be added to the amount of the tax due, and paid to the tax collector of the city, along with the tax due, unless evidence to the collector's satisfaction is submitted to such collector to show that such failure was due to some unforeseen or unavoidable reason, other than mere neglect. If the delinquency be for more than thirty (30) days after the due date for payment and the ten (10) per cent penalty shall be added without any discretion on the part of the tax collector. 
(Code 1965, § 21-272) 
Sec. 11-117. - Procedure for collection of delinquent licenses. 
(a)  The procedure to collect the delinquent licenses due hereunder shall be by rule, which shall be tried and heard by preference whether in or out of term time and either in open court, or in chambers at such time as may be fixed by the court, which shall not be less than two (2) nor more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, after service on the defendant or opposing party. 
(b)  All defenses, whether by exception or plea to the merits made or intended to be made to any such claim shall be presented and filed at one time in the court of original jurisdiction, prior to the hour fixed for the hearing, and no court shall consider any defense unless so presented and filed. This provision shall be considered to deny any court the right to extend the time for pleading defenses; and no continuations shall be granted by any court to any delinquent except for legal grounds set forth in the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. 
(c)  Whenever the pleadings are accompanied by the tax collector's affidavit, or by that of the counsel or attorney representing such collector, to the effect that the facts alleged are true to the best of the affiant's knowledge and belief, all of the said facts shall be accepted as prima facie true and as constituting a prima facie case and the burden of proof to establish anything to the contrary shall rest wholly on the defendant or opposing party. 
(Code 1965, § 21-273) 
Sec. 11-118. - Failure to pay tax. 
    Failure to pay the tax levied by this article shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause said tax and penalty to become immediately delinquent. 
(Code 1965, § 21-274) 
Sec. 11-119. - Attorney's fees when referred to attorney for collection. 
    In the event that any taxes, penalties or interest due under this article are referred to an attorney for collection, an additional charge, for attorney's fees, in the amount of ten (10) per cent of the taxes, penalties and interest due shall be paid by the tax debtor. 
(Code 1965, § 21-275) 
Sec. 11-120. - License tax-Established. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on any insurer engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax for state purposes, all as authorized by Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, title 22, section 1076, on risks located in this municipality as follows: 
(1)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies, other than programs of benefits authorized or provided pursuant to the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, title 42, chapter 12, parts I and II, or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations whether such insurer by operating in this state through an agent or other representative or otherwise: 
a.  Ten dollars ($10.00) on gross annual premiums up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and an additional license thereafter of seventy dollars ($70.00) on each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); 
b.  The maximum license on such businesses payable to this municipality by any one insurer shall be twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000.00). 
(2)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, worker's compensation, employers' liability, property damage, livestock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary, or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operation in this state through agents or other representative or otherwise, not more than the following: 
a.  1 st class. When the gross receipts are not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the license shall be forty dollars ($40.00); 
b.  2 nd class. When the gross receipts are more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00); 
c.  3 rd class. When the gross receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) and not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the license shall be eighty dollars ($80.00); 
d.  4 th class. When the gross receipts exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or fraction thereof, in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00); 
e.  [Maximum payable.] The maximum license tax on such businesses payable to this municipality by any insurer shall be nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), provided that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay only one-third of the above rates provided in subsection (2). 
(3)  The amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this section shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by Louisiana Revised Statutes [of 1950], title 22, chapter 1, part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixth of the total admitted assets of the payer are invested and maintained in qualifying Louisiana investments as defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes [of 1950], title 22, section 1068(C). 
(Ord. No. 1262, § 1, 9-10-02) 
Sec. 11-121. - Same-Due date. 
    All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on June 1. A penalty of five (5) per cent per month shall be added to the amount of tax due and payable to this municipality along with the tax due. The amount of any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to this section shall not be greater than twenty-five (25) per cent of the total amount of the tax due. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with Louisiana Revised Statutes [of 1950] title 22, section 1076 and title 47, section 1601. 
(Ord. No. 1262, § 1, 9-10-02) 
Secs. 11-122-11-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHAIN STORE TAX 

Sec. 11-130. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon each person engaged in the business of operating or maintaining, as part of a group or chain, any stores within the corporate limits of the city where goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of any description, whatsoever, are sold or offered for sale at retail under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control and who are commonly recognized as a member of a chain or as a branch store, as described in Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 47:10, as amended, under the authority of said legislation. 
(Code 1965, § 21-281) 
Sec. 11-131. - Additional to other taxes. 
    The license tax herein levied shall be in addition to ad valorem taxes ad any other license taxes presently or hereafter levied. 
(Code 1965, § 21-282) 
Sec. 11-132. - Tax rate. 
    The license tax for the businesses described herein and levied upon the stores operating within the corporate limits of the city shall be based on the number of stores or merchandise establishments included under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control, whether within this municipality or not and whether within the state or not; and the license tax for each store or establishment shall be as follows: 
Number of Stores in Group At least But not More Than License Tax   2  10 $ 10.00  11  35   15.00  36  50   20.00  51  75   25.00  76 100   30.00 101 125   50.00 126 150  100.00 151 175  150.00 176 200  200.00 201 225  250.00 226 250  300.00 251 275  350.00 276 300  400.00 301 400  450.00 401 500  500.00 501 and over  550.00  
(Code 1965, § 21-283) 
Sec. 11-133. - Half-year amount. 
    The license tax herein levied for any store opened in this municipality after June thirtieth of any year shall be one-half of the annual amount. 
(Code 1965, § 21-284) 
Sec. 11-134. - Filing date. 
    Every person engaged in the business described herein, commonly known as a chain store, within the corporate limits of this municipality shall, on or before the first day of February of each year, render to the city clerk a report containing a true and complete statement, showing the number of stores or establishments operated or maintained in this municipality and the name, location and street address of each store, the total number of such stores, whether in this municipality or the state or not, as of the report date, and, whenever a new store, which was not included in the report, is opened within the corporate limits of this municipality, a supplemental report, setting forth the required information, shall be filed prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of opening. 
(Code 1965, § 21-285) 
Sec. 11-135. - Payment; delinquency. 
    The license taxes levied by this article shall be due on the due date of the reports required by section 11-134 and payment of such license taxes shall accompany the reports and shall become delinquent if not paid when due. 
(Code 1965, § 21-286) 
Sec. 11-136. - Penalties. 
(a)  When any taxpayer fails to pay any tax, or any portion thereof, levied under this article on or before the day when it shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount of the tax due, interest at the rate of one per cent per month from the due date until paid. 
(b)  When any taxpayer fails to make any return required to be made under the provisions of this article at the time such return becomes due, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) per cent of the tax, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per cent for each additional thirty (30) days, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the tax in the aggregate. 
(c)  When the taxpayer files a return that is false or fraudulent or grossly incorrect and the circumstances indicate that the taxpayer had intent to defraud this municipality, of any tax due under this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty of fifty (50) per cent of the tax found to be due hereunder. 
(d)  In the event that any taxes, penalties or interest due under this article are referred to an attorney at law for collection, an additional charge, for attorney's fees, in the amount of ten (10) per cent of the taxes, penalties and interest, shall be paid by the tax debtor. 
(Code 1965, § 21-287) 
Sec. 11-137. - Issuance, display of license. 
    Upon payment of the license tax levied hereunder, a separate license shall be issued by the city clerk for each store for which the tax has been paid as above provided; and it shall be the duty of the licensee to post the license in a conspicuous place in each store. 
(Code 1965, § 21-288) 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF AMUSEMENTS 

Sec. 11-138. - License required. 
    No raffles, bingo, keno or like games shall be conducted in the City of Crowley without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1107, § 1, 9-25-86) 
Sec. 11-139. - Compliance with state law. 
(a)  All applicants for a city license to operate a raffle, bingo and keno or like games of chance shall comply with the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statute 33:4861.1 et seq. 
(b)  All charitable licensed organizations without the requirement that any such organization fully qualified with the Internal Revenue Service for an exemption including but not limited to Mardi Gras carnival associations, civic or service association, volunteer fire departments, booster clubs, and parent/teacher associations shall be in compliance with LA-R.S. 33:4861.4. 
(c)  Each applicant for a license shall file with the clerk a written application duly executed and verified in compliance with LA-R.S. 33:4861.5. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the issuance of licenses for charitable raffles, bingo and keno or like games of chance shall comply with the provisions and limitations of Louisiana Revised Statutes for amounts of all games of chance, and notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary and charitable licensed organization may conduct a progressive mega-jackpot bingo game in accordance with the provisions of LA-R.S. 33:4861.26. 
(Ord. No. 1107, § 1, 9-25-86; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 1-9-96) 
Sec. 11-140. - License fee. 
    Licensees shall pay to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) annually for the issuance of such license hereunder payable in advance upon initial issuance of said license. 
(Ord. No. 1107, § 1, 9-25-86) 
Sec. 11-141. - Video bingo license required. 
    Electronic video games shall not be conducted in the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1152, § 2, 4-13-93) 
Sec. 11-142. - Application for license, compliance with state law. 
    Any licensed charitable organization shall apply for a license to operate, use or lease electronic video bingo machines which application shall be filed with the clerk of the city, and shall contain all information requested thereon. Applicants shall further comply with all Louisiana laws relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1152, § 3, 4-13-93) 
Sec. 11-143. - License fee. 
    Each licensed charitable organization which shall meet the criteria of the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes shall be issued a license for the ownership, use or lease of each electronic video bingo machine. Each said license shall be issued at a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) annually per machine for the ownership, use or lease thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1152, § 4, 4-13-93) 
Secs. 11-144-11-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF ADULT AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 11-160. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose: It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented business in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment; or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to: Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California, Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: six hundred (600) in 1982; two thousand two hundred (2,200) in 1983; four thousand six hundred (4,600) in 1984; eight thousand five hundred fifty-five (8,555) in 1985; and two hundred fifty-three thousand four hundred forty-eight (253,448) through December 31, 1992. 
(8)  There have been increased numbers of reported cases of AIDS in the State of Louisiana. 
(9)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in southwest Louisiana. 
(10)  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with thirty-three thousand six hundred thirteen (33,613) cases reported in 1982, and forty-five thousand two hundred (45,200) through November, 1990. 
(11)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at high level, with over one-half million (500,000) cases being reported in 1990. 
(12)  In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(13)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(14)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(15)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (15) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(20)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(21)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(22)  In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct. 
(23)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(24)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serve as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(25)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-201, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-161. - Definitions. 
    Words, terms and phrases in this article shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically-, electrically-, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(b)  Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues, or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others. 
(c)  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear semi-nude; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexually activities;" or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproduction which are characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified sexually activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(d)  Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; and either 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours, [or] 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
(e)  Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(f)  Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
(g)  Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
(h)  Employee, employ, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another status. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
(i)  Enforcement officer shall mean the city zoning administrator or such person as may be designated by the city council. 
(j)  Escort means a person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees or offers: 
(1)  To act as a companion, guide, or date; or 
(2)  To privately model lingerie; or 
(3)  To privately perform a striptease. 
(k)  Escort agency means a person or business association that for a fee, tip, or other consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes. 
(l)  Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business, to any oriented business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
(m)  Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issue authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
(n)  Nude, nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, public [pubic] area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(o)  Operate or cause to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
(p)  Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
(q)  Regularly features or regularly shown means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
(r)  Seminude or in a seminude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
(s)  Seminude model studio means a commercial establishment which regularly features a person (or persons) who appears semi-nude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Louisiana or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation, [or] a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(t)  Sexually [sexual] encounter center means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities". The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
(u)  Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, seminude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
(v)  Specified anatomical areas means 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, public [pubic] region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(w)  Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries; 
(2)  For which: 
(A)  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(B)  Less than (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(C)  Less than (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(3)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application or a person residing with the applicant. 
(x)  Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The founding [fondling] of another person's genitals, public region, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as a part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in [subsections] (1) and (2) above. 
(y)  Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) per cent, as the floor areas exist on the date this article takes effect. 
(z)  Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-202, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-162. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(a)  Adult arcades; 
(b)  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
(c)  Adult cabarets; 
(d)  Adult motels; 
(e)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(f)  Adult theaters; 
(g)  Escort agencies; 
(h)  Seminude model studios; and 
(i)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-203, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-163. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this article. 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  An application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the enforcement officer a completed application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city treasurer. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application shall be notarized. The application shall include the information called for in subsections (1) through (6), and where applicable, subsection (7), as follows: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used in the preceding five (5) years. 
(2)  The current business address. 
(3)  Either a set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this article, or the applicant's Social Security number, to be used for the same purpose. 
(4)  If the applicant is for a sexually oriented business license, the name, business location, legal description, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business. 
(5)  Written proof of age, in the form of either (i) copy of a birth certificate and current photo, (ii) a current driver's license with picture, or (iii) other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(6)  The issuance jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, and whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended, and if so, the reason or reasons therefore. 
(7)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
The information provided pursuant to subsections (1) through (7) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested to the enforcement officer within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  The application for a sexually oriented business licenses shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
(e)  If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If the person that wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual (such as a corporation), each officer, director, general partner, or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 11-164, shall be considered as a licensee if a license is granted. 
(f)  A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article, where applicable. 
(g)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the enforcement officer on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only: (1) to other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function, or (2) as may otherwise be required by law or a court order. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-204, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-164. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, the enforcement officer shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the enforcement officer to deny or grant the license. Within twenty (20) days after the receipt of a completed application, the enforcement officer shall either issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to the applicant. The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant is delinquent in the payment of city taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the application in relation to a sexuality-oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by section 11-163 for issuance of the license. 
(4)  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect under this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, "conviction:" 
(A)  Means conviction or a guilty plea; and 
(B)  Includes a conviction of any business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction for a specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or a controlling interest. 
(5)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(6)  An application has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(7)  The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to operate under the City of Crowley Zoning Article, or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses in the appropriate zoning district(s). 
(b)  An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to subsection (a)(4) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by the applicable subsection in subsection 11-161(w) (sic) has elapsed. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce such license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-205, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-165. - Fees. 
(a)  The non-refundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall be set by the city council at an amount determined to be sufficient to pay the cost of administering this program, subject to subsection (b) herein. 
(b)  In no event shall the fees exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the initial license and one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license. In no event shall the fees exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial license, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the renewal fee, for a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-206, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-166. - Inspection. 
(a)  For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article, an applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county, or city agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this article, normally and regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business in occupied or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-207, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-167. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 11-163. An application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date that the denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-208, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-168. - Suspension. 
    The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(a)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or 
(b)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-209, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-169. - Revocation. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in section 11-168 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the officer determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either (i) in exchange for money, or (ii) in a public place or within public view. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 11-170, the enforcement officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business for one year from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of subsection 11-170(b) are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(4) of this section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-210, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-170. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  If the enforcement officer determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this article, the enforcement officer shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the enforcement officer. Within five (5) working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the mayor, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three (3) days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the mayor shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding. 
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the mayor shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not received by the mayor in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the mayor finds that grounds as specified in this article exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the mayor sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
If the mayor finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five (5) days after the hearing, the mayor shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously issue the license. 
(b)  When a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-211, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-171. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-212, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-172. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than permitted, as defined and described in the City of Crowley Zoning Article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within three hundred (300) feet of: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. "School" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined in the zoning article; 
(4)  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreational authorities; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the zoning article; 
(6)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or 
(7)  Any premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within two hundred (200) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (b). The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
(f)  For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(g)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on March 1, 2003, that is in violation of subsections (a) through (f) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be pertained to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use of may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within two hundred (200) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
(h)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection (c) of this section within two hundred (200) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application is made for a license after the applicant's previous license has expired or been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-213, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-173. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to a accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not between altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city. 
(4)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot candles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (1) through (14) of subsection (a) herein commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-214, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-174. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to act as an escort, for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-215, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-175. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, is at least six (6) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to an employee, while that employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-216, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-176. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
    A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-217, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-177. - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-218, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-178. - Exemptions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under section 11-175 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(a)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Louisiana; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(b)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(c)  In a structure: 
(1)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-219, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-179. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 111-171 of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or thirty (30) days imprisonment. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-220, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-180. - Severability. 
    Each section and provision of this article are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-221, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-181. - Conflicting articles repealed. 
    All articles or parts of articles in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-222, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 11-182. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be enforced from and after March 1, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 6-223, 1-14-03) 
Secs. 11-183-11-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF TRANSIENT AND OPEN-AIR BUSINESSES 

Sec. 11-200. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by reducing the creation of unsafe conditions and circumstances on public and private property, to discourage the sale of inferior quality merchandise, to require disclosure of adequate information to accurately identify persons and entities to establish a requirement for jurisdiction and service of process for civil claims, to require posting of a security bond, to provide requirements for sales records and receipts and written evidence and filings of reports of all transactions and to provide a method for enforcement of violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-201. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly otherwise requires or unless otherwise defined in specific portions of the article, the following words shall have the respective meanings ascribed to each in this section: 
    Business means any business, trade or occupation unless exempted hereinafter. 
    City means the City of Crowley. 
    Event . An event shall consist of any transaction involving the sale, solicitation, taking orders or offering for sale of goods within the corporate limits. An event shall commence at 12:00 a.m. on the date stated on the license/permit as the beginning date and shall end at 11:59 p.m. on the date stated on the license/permit. The applicant shall request a commencement date and ending date which may be approved or changed by the clerk. 
    Merchandise means any consumer item, new or used, wares, goods, food, food products, plants, paintings, mirrors, artifacts or any sellable product except for the items listed hereafter. 
    Open-air merchant means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other association, including agents, representatives and employees thereof, who exhibits merchandise, including models or samples thereof, in, upon or about a vehicle, mobile unit or other means of conveyance, cart, stand, temporary building, portable unit or tent, whether enclosed or unenclosed, or who exhibits such merchandise on any private street, driveway, lot, parking lot or other outdoor property within the City of Crowley, for the purpose of selling, offering to sell or taking orders for the sale of such merchandise. 
    Peddler . For the purpose of this article, a peddler means any person who, for himself or any other person, goes from house to house, or place to place, or store to store, exposing and selling the merchandise which he carries with him and delivering same at the time of or immediately after the sale or without returning to the base of business operation between the taking of the order and the delivery of the goods; however, any person who uses the same vehicle or a combination of one or more vehicles for the purpose of taking orders and delivering merchandise, regardless of the fact that the vehicle returns to the base of operations between the taking of the order and the delivery of the merchandise, shall be deemed a peddler, unless such person can show that the merchandise delivered is accompanied by an invoice or delivery ticket prepared at the base of operations and which conforms to the original order and that the person delivering the merchandise has permitted no deviation from the original order by allowing the purchaser to reject, cancel, increase or decrease the quantity at the time of delivery or to offset against such quantity any merchandise delivered at a prior time which is being returned. This extension of the meaning of the term peddler shall not be interpreted so as to prevent rejection or cancellation of bona fide orders or the return of inferior merchandise, but shall be construed so as to prevent persons peddling merchandise from escaping their tax liability by subterfuge through means of so-called "standing order" or blanket advance orders, increase and decrease in quantities at the time of delivery, arbitrary rejections and cancellations, and offset of merchandise returned by reason of non-sale rather than obligation of warranty, all of which are hereby declared to be mere devices to prevent normal methods of operations so as to disguise the business of a peddler as an ordinary wholesale business. Peddler shall include but is not limited to hawkers, itinerant vendors, and any retail dealers not having a fixed place of business. 
    Person means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity. 
    Separate location means a separate location exists unless a similar or associated type of business is operated as a unit (single license) under a single roof or on the same contiguous tract or land. 
    Transient merchant means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other association, including agents, representatives and employees thereof, who exhibits merchandise, including models or samples thereof, in any hotel or motel room, rooming house, store, club, storehouse, house, or other permanent building structure, for the purpose of selling, offering to sell or taking orders for the sale of such merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 1436, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-202. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other unincorporated association having a licensed permanent retail location in the City of Crowley provided that: 
(1)  The name of such licensed retail business is used in connection with all merchandise sold or offered for sale. 
(2)  All vendees are notified that all merchandise is sold under the auspices of said licensed permanent retail business. 
(3)  The name of the licensed permanent establishment is clearly included in all advertisements in connection with the sale of such merchandise. 
(4)  The owner or owners of the licensed retail establishment expressly assume responsibility for all merchandise sold within the establishment, building or structure, or on the same parcel of property whether sold from a vehicle, mobile unit or other means of conveyance, cart, stand, temporary building, portable unit or tent, whether enclosed or unenclosed. 
(b)  The provision of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales of meat, seafood, vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products. 
(2)  Sales of handcrafted items at arts and crafts shows, fairs or festivals sponsored by a Louisiana nonprofit corporation. 
(3)  Sales made at events commonly known as flea markets, stamp shows, coin shows, arts and crafts shows, trade shows or other exhibitions, provided the manager, promoter, coordinator or other persons in authority for such market, show or exhibition and with the applicable requirements of the City of Crowley. 
(4)  Authorized sales by participating vendors on fairgrounds during a local or parish fair. 
(5)  Sales of soft drinks or refreshments. 
(6)  Sales of secondhand or used clothing. 
(7)  Sales of cut flowers. 
(8)  Sales of balloons and other trinket items at parades and circuses, provided that the sponsor of the parade or circus has obtained the proper permit and authorization from the City of Crowley. 
(9)  Sales of handcrafted items made or produced by an individual who has obtained a valid home-occupation license from the City of Crowley as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-203. - Annual license tax. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license tax, as specified under the provisions of section 11-1 of this chapter, upon each person acting as a transient merchant or open-air merchant in the City of Crowley who may be subject to such license under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-204. - License required; payment of fees and charges; annual license; limitation of events. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to transact any business or phase of business in the City of Crowley, including advertising, without first applying to the City of Crowley for a license or permit required by this chapter. 
(b)  Payment of the annual license fee and any additional charges for application for license/permit shall be paid before the license is issued. 
(c)  The annual peddler's license/permit shall be valid during the period of January 1st to December 31st of each calendar year. The license/permit shall be valid for a maximum of ten (10) days during the calendar year and may be used for not more than three (3) separate events as defined herein. No event shall last more than ten (10) days, consecutively or cumulative. During the calendar year, the license/permit may be used for a single event of ten (10) days or up to three (3) separate events as defined herein not to exceed a total of ten (10) days. Thereafter, the license/permit shall no longer be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The license/permit shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on the tenth day designated on the license/permit on the third event, whichever shall occur first. 
(d)  Applicant shall request a commencement date and end date for each event which shall be approved by the clerk and stated on the license/permit. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 1436, § 2, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-205. - Application for license/permit. 
(a)  Every person or legal entity subject to the provisions of this section, before selling at retail or offering for sale at retail within the incorporated limits of the City of Crowley any goods, wares or merchandise, either from stock or by sample, shall make application with the City of Crowley for a license/permit to conduct such business within the City of Crowley. Such application shall be in writing, duly sworn by the applicant in person, or by the applicant's duly authorized representative, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address and telephone number of the person having the management, supervision or ownership of such business. 
(2)  The name, complete address, telephone number and local address or location of the person having supervision of the licenses premises while engaged in such business in the city. 
(3)  Photocopy of a valid driver's license, valid identification card, military identification issued by a governmental agency of any state or United States. In the event such form of identification cannot be provided, the permit shall not be issued. 
(4)  The capacity and authority in which such person will act; that is, whether as proprietor, agent or employee. 
(5)  The name, complete address and telephone number of the person or legal entity for whose account the business shall be conducting, and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated. 
(6)  The complete address of the permanent or established business location of the person, legal entity or owner of the business. 
(7)  The complete address, legal description or other identifying information in the city where the applicant proposes to engage in such business, the name, complete address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the business is to be conducted, a copy of the lease or other instrument authorizing the use of the property by the owner stating all terms and conditions required thereon. 
(8)  A list of all places or locations, other than the permanent place of business of the owner, where such transient merchant or open-air merchant within the six (6) months next preceding the date of such application conducted or carried on a temporary or transitory business, stating the nature thereof and giving the complete street addresses and locations of any building or structure on which such business was conducted. 
(9)  a.  The applicant shall designate the commencement date of door to door sales or solicitation or the open display for sale or taking orders shall begin and the last date of the event if less than ten (10) days from the commencement date. Otherwise, the end date shall be the tenth day after the commencement date and shall be entered on the application and the license/permit. 
b.  The applicant may specify commencement and ending dates for more than one event not to exceed three (3) separate events as designated by commencement and ending dates so long as the cumulative number of days does not exceed ten (10) and no more than three (3) events. Under no circumstances shall the number of commencement and ending dates exceed the total of three (3) events and a cumulative total of the event days exceed the maximum stated herein. 
c.  The dates shown on the license/permit issued may be changed upon written request to the city clerk. All requests for changes of the event commencement and ending dates and/or the number of events must be received not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date requested. Upon receipt of a timely request, the city clerk shall issue an amendment to the license/permit which shall state the commencement and ending dates of the event/events requested and the amendment shall be attached to the original license/permit and displayed as required herein. 
(10)  A statement of the nature, character and quantity of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold at retail, offered to be sold at retail or taking orders to be sold at retail in the city, including the brand name or manufacturer's name, and the gross amount of the merchandise at invoice costs of such merchandise. 
(11)  A statement as to whether the goods are to be sold at retail from stock in possession or ordered by sample, whether delivery is to occur at the time of sale at the retail location and whether the same are to be sold at retail at auction or public outcry, or by personal solicitation, or otherwise. 
(12)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or to be done in order to attract customers and the media or method used to disseminate said advertising. 
(13)  The names of all sales personnel or employees who have committed crimes within the past five (5) years, the number of arrests or convictions of misdemeanors or crimes, and the nature of the offenses for which arrested or convicted, if any. 
(14)  To the application must be appended a letter from the firm for which the applicant purports to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as its representative. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, vendor, solicitor, peddler or canvasser to engage in business until he shall have first applied to and obtained a permit to engage in business, in accordance with the above provisions and has paid all taxes and fees required by law for the transaction of such business in the incorporated limits of the City of Crowley; the City of Crowley shall issue such permit in writing which state the date same was issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on and the expiration date of such permit, the place where such business may be carried on under such permit, and the name of the person or persons authorized to carry on the same, which permit shall be signed by the City of Crowley or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 1436, § 3, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-206. - General regulations and restrictions. 
    No licensee/permittee shall operate in the following areas of public space or specified distances therefrom: 
(a)  On or within a public street, boulevard, highway, roadway, alleyway, right-of-way, park, parking lot, emergency lane, neutral ground, shoulder, public building or facility or any other public property dedicated for a specific use situated within the city or on private property except specifically authorized by this article. 
(b)  Within ten (10) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(c)  Within ten (10) feet of any public or private driveway, loading zone or bus stop. 
(d)  In any location which will not leave a minimum of five (5) feet of unobstructed pedestrian space or such greater amount of space, private building or structure. 
(e)  In any area within twenty (20) feet of a building entrance or exit. 
(f)  On the median strip of a divided roadway. 
(g)  Within twenty (20) feet of any fire hydrant, fire escape or designated fire lane. 
(h)  Within ten (10) feet of any private or public parking space or access ramp designated for persons with disabilities. 
(i)  On the premises of a festival or special event as defined in the written rules and regulations, or on the grounds of any public park, facility, recreation center or multipurpose facilities, except in conjunction with a festival or special public event. 
(j)  No such transactions shall be conducted on any area of private property within ten (10) feet of the property line of the licensed/permitted location. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-207. - Issuance of permit. 
    No permit shall be issued until the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of application and after proper investigation of said applicant and provided said applicant meets all requirements herein set forth and has complied with all other applicable ordinances. The permit issued shall be valid for a period of duration of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-208. - Location of operation. 
    No licensee/permittee shall operate except in the specific location, address or description designated on the license/permit. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-209. - Designation of merchandise. 
    No licensee/permittee shall sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, any goods or merchandise other than the merchandise, goods or wares designated on the license/permit. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-210. - Hours of operation; door to door/outdoor display and illumination and security requirements. 
(a)  No licensee/permittee shall conduct door to door sales or solicitations for sales, or orders for delivery of goods or merchandise or by entering onto private property and/or knocking on doors of private residences or businesses before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever shall occur first. 
(b)  No licensee/permittee utilizing outdoor display, whether from open vehicles, trailers, tents or otherwise, shall exhibit for sale, offer for sale, solicit orders for the sale or delivery of any goods or merchandise or conduct any sales or transactions before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  The licensee/permittee utilizing outdoor display, whether from open vehicles, trailers, tents or otherwise, shall exhibit for sale, offer for sale, solicit orders for the sale or delivery of any goods or merchandise or conduct any sales or transactions, may continue operations and transactions until the hour of 10:00 p.m. only when the location of the display of goods and merchandise specified in the license/permit is illuminated by permanent security lights providing sufficient illumination to illuminate the area designated as the location of the display of goods and merchandise and the entire parking lot. 
(d)  All goods and merchandise displayed outdoors shall be secured in a vehicle, trailer, cargo box or otherwise not later than 10:30 p.m. and outdoor displays utilizing tents or other nonsecured structure shall have sides or flaps which can be closed and reasonable secured with all goods and merchandise placed therein with twenty-four-hour security lights. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 1436, § 4, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 11-211. - Cleanliness of premises; litter receptacles required/maintained. 
    The licensee/permittee must keep the area upon which they conduct the sale of merchandise and those areas immediately adjacent thereto free from all refuse, litter and trash. The licensee/permittee shall be responsible to collect all trash and debris attributable to their business activity or caused by their business activity and to deposit same into an appropriate trash container. The licensee/permittee shall provide a sufficient number of trash receptacles for litter which shall be clearly marked and maintained and emptied regularly. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-212. - Ingress and egress; compliance with law enforcement. 
    No licensee/permittee shall conduct his business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, create a nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property, or obstruct adequate access to emergency and sanitation vehicles. The licensee/permittee shall comply with the instructions of a law enforcement officer or fire department officer to move from a location in the interest of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-213. - Zoning. 
    No license/permit issued herein shall be construed as having an affect on zoning, historic district, special district or other regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-214. - Bonding. 
    Before such license is issued by the City of Crowley, the applicant will be required to furnish a performance bond in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such bond will be held by the City of Crowley for a period of ninety (90) days after all orders of goods, wares and retail merchandise have been delivered to the persons from whom the orders are taken, to assure delivery of said orders to the satisfaction of such persons, and to be in compliance with the specifications stated in the order and meeting the requirements of the solicitations and advertisements. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-215. - Placard required. 
    Prior to the conducting of the business activity under this article, the licensee/permittee must submit to the City of Crowley the permit secured from the sheriff and secure from the city a permit placard not less than three (3) feet by three (3) feet and no more than six (6) feet by six (6) feet which shall contain the trade name of the vendor, the authorized location, and the year of authorization together with the parish authorization to conduct such business activity which placard must be displayed conspicuously at the location at all times during the conduct of the business. The licensee/permittee must provide a photograph of said placard. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-216. - Inspection. 
    Immediately upon issuing any permit provided for above, the city clerk, city inspector or any designated representative may at any time thereafter and at all reasonable hours make an inspection of the place of business as provided in said permit. The city inspector shall determine whether or not such business is carried on or conducted by the person or persons and in the manner provided in the permit, and the application upon which the permit was issued, and whether or not the other provisions of this article are being observed in the carrying on of such business. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-217. - Prices to be posted. 
    All vendors under this article must have the minimum and maximum price of the merchandise, wares, goods, food, food products, seafood of any kind, beverages, plants, flowers, paintings, mirrors, or any artifact or saleable product whatsoever posted conspicuously on a sign no smaller than three (3) feet by five (5) feet and no larger than six (6) feet by eight (8) feet. No other signs, except one permit placard, shall be permitted. The licensee/permittee must provide a photograph of said placard. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-218. - Record of sales. 
(a)  Each licensee/permittee shall maintain a separate register, book, ledger or other means of identifying transactions in an electronic format which shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years and shall be made available for inspection by any police officer, law enforcement official, inspector or sales tax/license tax/permit official at any time. All daily records shall consist of the transaction log recording each individual transaction or sale, identifying the item sold, the description of the item sold, the number thereof sold, the amount of the transaction, the amount of sales taxes charged and the amount collected. 
(b)  The licensee/permittee shall issue and deliver a receipt of each transaction to each customer. Daily records shall be compiled in electronic form and transmitted via email to the office of the city clerk or may be transferred onto a disc or copies made of ledgers or books shall be hand delivered or mailed via United States mail prepaid and properly addressed to the office of the city clerk no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the termination of the sales event or occupancy and for each occupancy or occurrence thereafter for the term of the annual license. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-219. - Violations. 
    The violation of any of the foregoing provisions or the doing of business otherwise than provided in the application and permit issued thereon shall each constitute a violation of the license/permit and the City of Crowley may suspend the operation of such permit not to exceed ten (10) days and upon the request of the holder of such license/permit, grant a hearing and rule upon such violation. Should the City of Crowley find that there has been a violation of the conditions of the license/permit, such license/permit shall be immediately forfeited, surrendered and cancelled. A forfeiture of the license/permit shall not entitle the licensee/permittee to any refund of taxes or fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11-220. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any licensee/permittee who fails to obtain said license/permit or to comply with any regulations contained herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be imprisoned for a period of not more than sixty (60) days or fined the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or both, at the discretion of the court. A licensee/permittee so convicted shall forfeit said license/permit and shall not be entitled to a refund of the fees paid therefor. Every day that a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1431, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Chapter 12 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Use of city-owned vehicles generally, § 2-9; liability for damage to city property, § 2-10. 
Editor's note- The city personnel are members of the state municipal retirement system. See ordinances on file in city clerk's office. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Employment preference for residents of the city. 
(a)  The city does hereby declare its policy to employ persons who reside within the corporate limits of the city to provide employment opportunity for residents of the city and to insure the availability of employees for duty on short notice and for emergencies. 
(b)  The city shall employ persons who actually reside within the corporate limits of the city provided all other considerations are equal. 
(Code 1965, § 2-22; Ord. No. 1176, § 1, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 1201, § 3, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 12-2. - Sick leave for non-civil service employees. 
(a)  All persons employed full-time by the city shall be entitled to ten (10) days sick leave during each calendar year, which leave may be accumulated for a three-year period for a term of thirty (30) full days if not used during the year which same accrues. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to civil service employees. 
(c)  Each full-time employee shall be granted not more than five (5) days personal leave annually which shall be subject to approval by the department head after written application requesting leave. Personal leave days may be used only during the calendar year earned and if not used during such year shall not accrue. 
(Code 1965, § 2-13; Ord. No. 1371, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Sec. 12-3. - Same-Application for; deduction from accumulation. 
    In the event that any employee entitled to sick leave suffers any illness or disability, the employee shall execute an application for sick leave on the forms to be furnished by the city. The periods of such illness or disability shall be deducted from the sick leave provided for hereinabove. 
(Code 1965, § 2-16) 
Sec. 12-4. - Same-Certification of application. 
    In the event that an illness or disability exists for a period of more than three (3) days, the application for sick leave shall be certified by the physician attending such employee. 
(Code 1965, § 2-17) 
Cross reference- See also § 12-10(6). 
Sec. 12-5. - Same-Disability exceeding. 
    For any period of illness or disability in excess of the current or accrued sick leave of any employee, a pro rata per diem deduction shall be made from the remuneration, pay or salary of such employee. 
(Code 1965, § 2-18) 
Sec. 12-6. - Same-Applying vacation against. 
    In the event that an employee has no sick leave remaining to such employee's credit, such employee may, by written request, apply any accrued vacation time against such period of disability, in order to avoid the deduction provided for in section 12-5. 
(Code 1965, § 2-19) 
Sec. 12-7. - Annual vacation; accumulation of vacation time; compensation in lieu of vacation and employee termination; city officials. 
(a)  After one year of employment with the city, each full-time city employee shall be entitled to one week paid vacation, which shall be taken within the next year of employment. After two (2) consecutive years of employment with the city, each employee shall be entitled to two (2) weeks annual vacation and for each year of employment thereafter. Annual vacation shall be earned upon the anniversary date of employment of each employee. 
(b)  Annual vacation shall not be accumulated and shall be taken each year after being earned, except any employee upon retirement may accumulate one year of annual vacation, earned in the year prior to retirement. 
(c)  Compensation in lieu of vacation shall not be paid, except upon the termination of an employee, any accumulated vacation time shall be paid together with any wages due as of the effective date of the employee's termination. 
(d)  Elected officials shall not be covered by this section. 
(Code 1965, § 2-15; Ord. No. 1268, § 1, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 12-8. - Effect of overtime. 
    In the event any employee described in section 12-2 works in excess of forty-eight (48) hours per week and thereby acquires an overtime credit, such employee shall be entitled to a compensatory leave of absence, with pay, which leave may be used by such employee as additional sick leave, additional vacation or for such other purpose as such employee deems advisable. Said compensatory leave may be accumulated during a period of not more than four (4) years. Provided, this section shall not be applicable to the chief executive officers of any of the departments of the municipal government, and their supervisory assistants, such as the chief of police, assistant chief of police, superintendent of the sewage disposal plant or assistant superintendent, chief of the fire department, assistant chief of the fire department, street commissioner or assistant street commissioner. 
(Code 1965, § 2-20) 
Sec. 12-9. - Application for leave of absence. 
    In the event any employee desires or requires a leave of absence, with or without pay, for any other purpose, such employee shall execute an application, requesting same and such application shall be acted upon by the governing authority at any regular or special meeting of the governing authority. 
(Code 1965, § 2-21) 
Sec. 12-10. - Dress requirements for members of police and fire departments; moonlighting; residence telephone; sick leave certification. 
    For the purpose of maintaining and increasing the efficiency of the members of the police and fire departments of the city and of the departments, the following rules and regulations governing such members are hereby established: 
(1)  All members of the departments, except clerical employees and special officers, when on duty, shall be attired in uniform, furnished at the expense and cost of each such member, the type and color to be designated by the chief of the department, and to consist of the following items: 
(a)  Police department: 
(i)  Summer uniform. Dress cap, black tie, summer shirt, summer trousers, black belt, black sox, black shoes, holster belt, hand gun, cap badge, breast badge, collar insignia; 
(ii)  Winter uniform. Dress cap, black tie, winter shirt, winter trousers, jacket, black belt, black sox, black shoes, holster belt, hand gun, cap badge, breast badge, collar insignia. 
(b)  Fire department: 
(i)  Summer uniform. Dress cap, black tie, summer shirt, summer trousers, black belt, black sox, black shoes, cap badge, breast badge, collar insignia; 
(ii)  Winter uniform. Dress cap, black tie, winter shirt, winter trousers, black belt, black sox, black shoes, cap badge, breast badge, collar insignia. 
(2)  Once designated, the type and color of the uniforms may be changed only by the governing authority; 
(3)  All items of such uniforms shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and shall be repaired or replaced, by the employee, when damaged or worn, on the instructions of the chief of each department; 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Each member of the departments shall maintain, at such member's expense, a telephone in such member's residence; 
(6)  No member of the departments shall be granted any sick leave or any pay for alleged period of illness or disability except upon the certification of such illness or disability by a qualified doctor of medicine or doctor of dentistry. 
(Code 1965, § 2-25; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 4-8-97) 
Cross reference- See § 12-4 as to certification of sick leave application. 
Sec. 12-11. - Regulation and restriction of assignment of police personnel to overtime duty. 
    The chief of police of the city shall have full power to assign police personnel to duties, subject to the following limitations and provisions: 
(1)  Compliance by the chief of police with the provisions of any civil service statutes governing such personnel; 
(2)  Compliance with the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 33:2213, as amended, establishing maximum regular hours of duty by police personnel; 
(3)  Only in the event of an emergency, the chief of police may assign personnel to overtime duty to the extent and for which the governing authority has budgeted and appropriated funds for the payment of overtime duty; 
(4)  As the governing authority is given full authority to control and manage the fiscal affairs of the municipality, no police personnel shall be assigned to overtime duty unless funds have been budgeted therefor and remain unexpended, unless such assignment to overtime duty is approved in writing by the mayor, or, in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tem or by action of the governing body; 
(5)  In the event that chief of police deems it advisable to assign police personnel to overtime duty in the absence of an emergency, the chief shall make application to the governing authority for approval of such assignments and for the appropriation of the necessary funds to compensate such personnel for such overtime duty. 
(Code 1965, § 2-25.1) 
Sec. 12-12. - Use of police vehicles beyond corporate limits. 
    No police officer shall drive, operate or use any police vehicle acquired for use by the police department, beyond the corporate limits of the city except in line of official duty. 
(Code 1965, § 2-26.1) 
Cross reference- Use of city vehicles generally, § 2-9. 
Sec. 12-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-14. - Hiring criteria for law enforcement personnel. 
(a)  All applicants for law enforcement positions where the person will be employed by the City of Crowley and issued a law enforcement commission shall consent to and undergo a psychological evaluation directed by the chief of police as part of the application process and shall consent to the results of said evaluation being provided to the chief of police and elected officials for the purposes of determining the suitability of the applicant for employment as a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  Any applicant refusing to consent to a psychological evaluation and to execute the necessary release forms as may be required by the provider shall be deemed unfit and ineligible for employment. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Secs. 12-15-12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE 

Sec. 12-20. - Established. 
    The reserve police force of the city is hereby established, organized and regulated. 
(Code 1965, § 7-6; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-21. - Qualifications of applicants. 
    All applicants for membership in the reserve police force shall be: 
(1)  A citizen of the United States; 
(2)  A qualified elector of the state; 
(3)  Of good moral character and temperate and industrious habits; 
(4)  Not less than eighteen (18) years of age, nor more than fifty (50) years of age, at the time of original appointment; 
(5)  A high school graduate or possess a general equivalency diploma; 
(6)  The chief of police, in his sole discretion, may waive the educational requirements in subsection (5) upon written finding that the applicant's age, experience, training, performance and other relevant factors prove to the satisfaction to the chief of police that the applicant will otherwise be able to maintain the standards and qualifications of a reserve police officer; 
(7)  In the event the chief of police waives educational requirements pursuant to subsection (6) above, the applicant shall immediately enroll in a state certified educational program to obtain an general equivalency diploma (GED) which shall be completed within one year of the date of the applicant's appointment. 
(Code 1965, § 7-7; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 1482, § 1, 12-7-16) 
Sec. 12-22. - Appointment of personnel. 
    The following procedure shall be followed in the appointment of personnel to the reserve police force: 
(1)  All applications shall be in writing, or a form to be furnished by the city; 
(2)  The governing authority shall make all appointments to said organization after consultation with the chief of police and police committee; 
(3)  All initial appointments of personnel shall be for a probationary period of six (6) months, subject to confirmation of or revocation of such probationary appointment thereafter. Failure of the governing authority to revoke such probationary appointment within three (3) months after such probationary period has expired shall constitute confirmation of such appointment. 
(Code 1965, § 7-8; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-23. - Total authorized strength. 
    The governing authority shall provide, by motion, from time to time, the total authorized strength of the reserve police force. 
(Code 1965, § 7-9; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-24. - Discharge at age sixty-five. 
    Upon any member of the force reaching the age of sixty-five (65), such member shall be discharged from active duty and shall be entitled to honorary membership in the organization. 
(Code 1965, § 7-10; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1201, adopted April 8, 1997, repealed § 12-25 in its entirety. Former § 12-25 pertained to resignations from the police force and derived from the 1965 Code, § 7-11 and Ord. No. 1165, § 1, adopted May 9, 1995. 
Sec. 12-26. - Discipline or dismissal. 
    Any reserve police officer may be disciplined or dismissed for any cause for which a regular police officer of the city may be disciplined or dismissed under the procedure hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Written charges against such officer shall be filed with the city clerk and submitted to the governing authority; 
(2)  Said officer shall be served with written notification of the filing of such charges and a true copy thereof not less than ten (10) days prior to any action thereon by the governing authority; 
(3)  Such officer may apply in writing for a hearing before the governing authority and may request that such hearing be either private or public; 
(4)  In the event that application is made for a hearing, no action shall be taken on the charges until after the hearing is held; 
(5)  The mayor shall set the date for the hearing and shall notify the officer of such date. 
(Code 1965, § 7-12; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-27. - Positions or ranks. 
    The positions or ranks of the reserve police force shall correspond to those of the regular police, except that the rank of the commanding officer of such reserve police shall be that of "commandant", but no such position or rank shall bear a higher designation than those of the regular police and, in addition thereto, one (1) member of the organization shall be named and designated as "executive officer" to assist the reserve police commandant in the internal operation of the organization, provided that the wearing of any insignia, badge or other indication or evidence of rank by any reserve police officer while such person is on duty in the city is prohibited and shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action. 
(Code 1965, § 7-13; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-28. - Promotions. 
    The governing authority shall make all promotions of personnel of the force in the following manner: 
(1)  All promotions shall be made from the next lower rank and only upon need of additional personnel in the higher position; 
(2)  The police committee shall consult with the chief of police and the chief of the reserve police force and make recommendations on promotions to the governing authority prior to action by such body; 
(3)  All patrolmen shall be promoted to patrolman first class after one (1) year of service in the reserve. 
(Code 1965, § 7-14; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-29. - Command. 
    When on active duty with the police department of the city, all reserve police officers shall be under the immediate command of the ranking regular police officer on the scene and the overall command of the chief of police. 
(Code 1965, § 7-15; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-30. - Rights, privileges, etc. 
    When on active duty with the police department of the city, the reserve police officers shall have all the rights, privileges, immunities and powers provided by statutes or ordinances for police officers of the department and by any applicable statute governing or regulating reserve police. 
(Code 1965, § 7-16; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-31. - Attendance of classes and instruction. 
    All reserve police personnel shall attend such classes and instruction as required by the municipal authorities and the minimum requirements of state civil defense regulations. 
(Code 1965, § 7-17; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-32. - Reporting for duty. 
    Members of such force, when reporting for duty, shall be properly attired, which attire shall be clean, neat and in good repair, and such personnel shall act as police officers only when called to duty by the chief of police or, in the chief's absence or inability to act, the mayor or acting mayor, and only under the command of the chief of police or senior police officer on duty. 
(Code 1965, § 7-18; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-33. - Failure to report for duty. 
    Failure to report for duty on three (3) occasions within any calendar year, without valid cause or conflict with employment, shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action against any member of the force. 
(Code 1965, § 7-19; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-34. - Care and return of equipment. 
    Each member of the force shall be liable for the care and return, in good condition, of all equipment issued to such member and shall be liable for loss thereof or damage thereto, ordinary wear and tear excepted. 
(Code 1965, § 7-20; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-35. - Application for position on police force. 
    All members of the detachment shall be accorded particular consideration, subject to the provisions of the civil service law, upon applying for a position in the police force. 
(Code 1965, § 7-21; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Sec. 12-36. - Citations and ribbons. 
    The following citations and accompanying ribbons designed to be worn on their uniform shall be awarded to members of the detachment for meritorious service: 
(1)  Certificate of appreciation, signed by the mayor and chief of police, awarded for one (1) year of honorable service and completion of basic training; 
(2)  Certificate of merit, signed by the mayor and chief of police, awarded for five (5) years of honorable service; 
(3)  Certificate of honor, signed by the mayor and chief of police, awarded for ten (10) years of honorable service; 
(4)  Honorable discharge. This award shall be presented to members who have completed not less than ten (10) years of honorable service, or reached retirement age, upon retirement or release from service for whatever cause so long as the release is honorable and not punitive. 
(Code 1965, § 7-22; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 5-9-95) 
Secs. 12-37-12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTAL PAY PLAN-MUNICIPAL POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 12-50. - Supplemental pay allowance. 
    There is hereby established a supplemental allowance to provide for the standardization and synchronization of pay of probationary police officers and firemen from the date upon which they are hired until the date upon which the probationary shall be qualified for state supplemental pay, which shall hereby be known as the "city supplemental pay allowance". 
(Ord. No. 1208, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 12-51. - Not to be considered base pay. 
    The city's supplemental pay allowance it not to be considered or construed, in whole or part, as base pay. Any discontinuance of same, whether as a result of the officer's receipt of state supplemental pay or provisions to pay, shall merely constitute a cessation of a special benefit and not a reduction of the city salary. 
(Ord. No. 1208, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 12-52. - Determining gross salary. 
    For the purpose complying with the applicable statutes identifying state supplemental pay as "salary" for determining overtime rates, holiday pay, longevity increases, tax deductions and retirement plan contributions, such special benefit known as the city supplemental pay allowance shall be identified and included as gross salary for such purposes as provided in the state supplemental pay plan. Such gross salary will determine general increases and other benefits including salary adjustments for longevity, leave of absence, suspensions without pay or other similar actions. 
(Ord. No. 1208, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 12-53. - The amount of payment. 
    For the purposes of computing the amount of the city supplemental pay allowance, the amount of supplemental pay to be paid as a special benefit by the city is the maximum amount of state supplemental pay as provided by Louisiana Statutes 33:2218.1 et seq. Said supplemental pay shall be increased by the same amount as provided by amendment to the state supplemental pay plan. 
(Ord. No. 1208, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-98) 
Sec. 12-54. - Suspension or termination of plan. 
    The city may suspend and/or terminate this special benefits of the city supplemental pay allowance at any time and such cessation or termination of the special benefit shall not constitute a reduction in gross salary. 
(Ord. No. 1208, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-98) 
Chapter 13 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Moving buildings over streets, § 5-140 et seq.; barbed wire prohibited along streets, § 7-5; obstruction of drainage, § 9-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Numbering of buildings-Duty of property holders. 
    It is hereby made the duty of each property holder to number or have numbered any dwellings or business hours belonging to such person within the limits of the city in conformance herewith. 
(Code 1965, § 20-36) 
Sec. 13-2. - Same-System. 
(a)  Beginning at Parkerson Avenue, and extending east and west, all streets shall be numbered with the even numbers on the right side and odd numbers on the left side, and beginning at the Southern Pacific Railroad, and extending both north and south, all avenues shall be numbered with the even numbers on the right side and odd numbers on the left side. Said numbers shall be based upon one number for each twenty (20) feet of frontage and the numbers on streets and avenues north of Southern Pacific Railroad shall begin from Front Street and the first block shall contain numbers 1 to 99; from First Street to Second Street 100 to 199; Second Street to Third Street 200 to 299; Third Street to Fourth Street 300 to 399; Fourth Street to Fifth Street 400 to 499; Fifth Street to Sixth Street, Hutchinson Avenue intervening 500 to 599; continuing with 100 numbers to each block; except blocks from 13th Street to 14th Street, Northern Avenue intervening shall contain numbers 1300 to 1399; 14th Street to 15th Street 1400 to 1499, etc.; and where acreage or unplatted areas exist between two (2) platted areas, the numbering shall be continued as hereinabove set forth and each three hundred sixty (360) feet of such unplatted areas shall be considered one block and intervening street. 
(b)  The numbers of the streets running east and west shall start from Parkerson Avenue, both north and south Crowley, the first block east and west of said avenue shall contain numbers from 100 to 199, and the second block from 200 to 299 and continuing with 100 numbers for each block to the limits of the city, east and west, and where acreage or unplatted areas exist between two (2) platted areas, the numbering shall be continued as hereinabove set forth and each three hundred eighty (380) feet of such unplatted area or areas shall be considered one block and intervening street. 
(c)  The numbers of streets and avenues in south Crowley running north and south shall begin at Mill Street, and the block to 14th Street (now Clay Street) shall contain numbers 300 to 399, to 15th Street (now Cedar Street) 400 to 499; to 16th Street (now Oak Street ) 500 to 599; continuing with 100 numbers to each block to the southern limits of the city, and where acreage or unplatted areas exist between two (2) platted areas, the numbering shall be continued as hereinabove set forth and each three hundred sixty (360) feet of such unplatted area or areas shall be considered one block and intervening street. 
(Code 1965, § 20-37) 
Sec. 13-3. - Same-Requirements for numbers. 
    Street numbers shall be provided and installed by the property owner or occupant and shall be no less than two (2) inches in height. They shall be clearly visible from the street. 
(Code 1965, § 20-38) 
Sec. 13-4. - Same-Provisions to be filed; future maps to conform. 
    A copy of sections 13-1 through 13-3 shall be recorded in the public records of this parish, and all future maps of the city shall be made to conform herewith. 
(Code 1965, § 20-39) 
Sec. 13-5. - Defacing, damaging streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to deface or damage in any manner whatsoever, any of the paved streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-1) 
Cross reference- Heavy vehicles on asphalt streets, § 14-2. 
Sec. 13-6. - Burning prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to burn trash, leaves, grass or any other combustible material on any of the paved streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-2) 
Cross reference- Burning trash in open areas, § 8-5. 
Sec. 13-7. - Spilling gasoline, oil. 
    It shall be unlawful to pour or spill gasoline, oil or any other similar substances on any of the paved streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-3) 
Sec. 13-8. - Duty to trim trees over sidewalks. 
(a)  All property owners in the city shall be required to trim the branches of trees on their property and on the banquette abutting their property so as to leave an unobstructed space at least seven (7) feet high over the sidewalks. 
(b)  Any person or persons failing to comply with this section shall be notified by the street commissioner and given a reasonable time in which to comply, and failure to comply with said notice shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 20-4) 
Cross reference- Tree regulations generally, § 5-150 et seq. 
Sec. 13-9. - Obstructions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause the placing or maintaining, of any material, item or thing which in any way obstructs or impedes the use of any street or sidewalk; provided, that temporary obstructions, such as, but not limited to, the loading and unloading of merchandise or during building operations, shall be allowed upon permission granted by the police chief. The police chief may attach reasonable conditions to such permission, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  The size or extent of such obstruction. 
(2)  The location of the obstruction. 
(3)  The duration of the obstruction. 
(4)  Required safety precautions. 
(Code 1965, § 20-37) 
Cross reference- Railroad train blocking crossing, § 14-30. 
State Law reference- Obstructing public passage, R.S. 14:100.1. 
Sec. 13-10. - Paving and repair of railroad track crossings. 
(a)  Railroad companies operating in the city, whose tracks are laid on or across the public roads, highways or streets of the city, shall keep in good repair and suitable for vehicular traffic, with hard surfacing, that portion of such public way lying between the rails of such railroad tracks and for a distance of two (2) feet on the outside of each rail of the tracks used or operated by then, together with the necessary headers. 
(b)  The railroad grade crossings, when in need of replacement or major repair, shall be rubber pads or timber railroad crossings, including the space between the rails, and shall conform to the existing and future street, road or highway construction. The timbers used in any such crossings shall be treated with creosote or other preservative. 
(c)  Whenever any railroad shall have two (2) or more railroad tracks on or across any such road, highway or street, the entire space between all of the tracks shall be hard-surfaced and kept in good repair at all times and shall be of the same width as the connecting public way and conform to Louisiana State Highway Specifications, September 7, 1972, "Railroad Highway Grade Crossings Policy," a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, or with common standard specifications of said railroad company, whichever has the higher standards. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to suffer or permit its crossings over public streets, highways and roads in the city to fall into a state of disrepair or to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Failure of any railroad company, officer, managing agent or other supervising agent, to repair and maintain the tracks of the railroad across or on any streets, roads or highways in the city in the manner set forth hereinabove, shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this section. 
(f)  Each day any violation of any provision of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 20-7) 
Sec. 13-11. - Posting notices, advertisements, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful to tack or nail to any pole, post, fence or building upon or abutting upon the streets of the city, any card, circular, poster, paper or advertisement of any kind. 
(Code 1965, § 8-36) 
Secs. 13-12-13-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1231, adopted April 1, 2000, amended and re-enacted Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 20-17-20-25 and Ord. No. 1196, adopted Mar. 11, 1997. 

Sec. 13-20. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities, private or public, to make any excavation, cut or opening or boring below any street, alley, shoulder, sidewalk, banquette, median, boulevard, neutral ground, curb or gutter, ditch or planting space located within public right-of-way in the City of Crowley, hereinafter "street", or conduct construction activities upon or adjacent to street pavement without first obtaining a permit from the City of Crowley, hereinafter, "city". 
(b)  Hereinafter, the word "city" shall mean the city limits in the context of location, and shall mean the mayor, inspector or duly authorized representative in the context of person. 
(c)  In the event emergency repairs are necessary to restore or maintain service, the entity making the emergency repairs need not obtain a permit in advance of making said repairs; but shall comply with all other applicable provisions of these regulations. The city building inspector, hereinafter "inspector", shall be notified of the emergency by telephone before any such work commences. The city shall be formally notified and the permit shall be obtained at the first reasonable opportunity after such emergency repairs have commended. No permit shall be required when any person has been awarded a public contract pursuant to the laws of the State of Louisiana for the construction of improvements on behalf of the city. The City of Crowley department shall not be required to obtain a permit for right of way excavation outside pavement areas, but all city work shall adhere to construction specifications contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-21. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to excavate, cut open or bore under shall make written application for a permit on forms provided for said purpose in the office of the city inspector. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide full name, address and telephone number, the exact location of the proposed work or description of the proposed work, the purpose of the proposed work and a schematic diagram shall be drawn as near to scale as possible and shall submit sufficient data, plans, specifications or drawings which shall clearly define the proposed work and the plans for street right of way restoration. 
(c)  The permit shall be secured prior to the commencement of all work, except as provided for under an emergency. 
(d)  Any work or excavation within the public rights-of-way which is conducted without a permit shall be stopped and no further work shall be allowed to recommence until the proper permit has been issued for said work. 
(e)  It shall be the obligation of all applicants to make investigations necessary to locate all underground utilities, structures, pipelines, and conduits in the area in which work is contemplated. 
(f)  The permittee shall maintain and protect any and all existing structures and utilities within the limits of the work area or as reasonably near thereto. 
(g)  The City of Crowley shall determine whether such plans and drawings are sufficient and require existing detail of other utility locations and the opinion of the work to justify such a requirement. 
(h)  No deposit shall be required for a permit to perform work within city right-of-way. However, the permittee is fully responsible to restore the work area to a condition as good or better than the original condition. 
(i)  It shall be the duty and obligation of the permittee to safeguard the public by maintaining the necessary guards, barricades and safety lights, etc., in accordance with law and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition, hereinafter MUTCD. The permittee shall maintain the street in a good and safe condition. The permittee shall hold harmless and indemnify the city from any and all claims, causes of action, lawsuits, damages to property, person or death, or as a result of such work by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-22. - Installation requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All utility owners, contractors, construction crews, equipment operators, etc., herein referred to as "permittee", shall be prohibited from placing any construction equipment directly on the street pavement at any time without an approved means of protecting the street surface. Rubber tire equipment will generally be approved as protective of the street surface. Permittees shall be prohibited from depositing any spoil and/or other construction materials (unprotected) on the street pavement at any time before, during or after the initiation of such activities, except that the holder of a utility franchise issued by the City of Crowley shall be exempt from this requirement, so long as permittee's actions in conducting such operations cause no harm or damage to the street or street pavement. All wheels, cleats, matting or other such protective barriers used for preservation of the existing street pavement shall require prior approval from the city. 
(2)  All street pavement shall be bored and no street pavement shall be removed except otherwise provided herein. Where applicable, borings shall begin at the outfall end of the pipe whenever possible. Suitable pits or trenches shall be evacuated at each end of the bore hole for the purpose of conducting the operations and for placing the joints of pipe. Adequate sheeting and bracing shall be provided on the pavement side to prevent cracking of or damage to the street pavement. The method used shall be such as not to weaken or damage the over burden. The pipe should not vary significantly either laterally or vertically from the intended straight line and grade. Any such variation shall be without any abrupt changes in direction. Any pipe damaged or misaligned shall be removed and replaced. The use of water and other fluids in connection with boring operation will be permitted only to the extent necessary to lubricate the cuttings. Jetting is not permitted. Any overcutting of the bore hole will be remedied by pressure grouting the entire length of the installation. 
(3)  Excavation and backfill associated with boring operations shall be conducted in conformance with section 13-23. 
(b)  Water lines. All street pavement must be bored. All water line of six (6) inch outside pipe barrel diameter or greater shall be encased. The casing must be installed by boring such that the borehole is not greater by two (2) inches than the outside barrel diameter of the casing. Any water line less than six (6) inches outside barrel diameter shall be bored such that the bore hole is not greater by two (2) inches than the outside diameter of the bell of the water pipe. If this requirement cannot be met, then pipe of barrel diameter less than six (6) inches must be encased. Pipes made of acceptable material that require no joints may be installed without casing. When pipes are encased, the casing shall extend across the street pavement from ditch line to ditch line or to not less than two (2) feet beyond back of curb. Pipes or casings shall not be less than forty-two (42) inches below the pavement surface not less than twenty-four (24) inches below the theoretical flow line of the side ditches. The crown of the borehole will be not less than forty-two (42) inches below the surface of the pavement. Taps into existing facilities under street pavement that exist at less than forty-two (42) inches below the pavement will be allowed. 
(c)  Gravity sewer lines. All street pavement must be bored. Gravity sewer lines shall be installed by boring method such that the diameter of the bore hole is not larger than the outside diameter of the gravity sewer pipe barrel (not flange) plus three (3) inches; if this requirement cannot be met, the sewer pipe must be encased. When pipes are encased, the casing shall extend across the street pavement from ditch line to ditch line or to not less than two (2) feet beyond back of curb. Pipes or casings shall not be less than forty-two (42) inches below the pavement surface nor less than twenty-four (24) inches below the theoretical flow line of the side ditches. The casing shall be installed by boring such that the borehole is not greater than two (2) inches than the outside barrel diameter of the casing. The crown of the borehole must be not less than forty-two (42) inches below the pavement surface unless it is required to tie into existing lines. 
(d)  Sewer force mains. All street pavement must be bored. Any sewer force mains of six (6) inch outside pipe barrel diameter or greater shall be encased. When pipes are encased, the casing shall extend across the street pavement from ditch line of ditch line or to not less than two (2) feet beyond back of curb. Pipes or casings shall be not less than forty-two (42) inches below the pavement surface nor less than twenty-four (24) inches below the theoretical flow line of the side ditches. Boring and casing requirements shall be the same as for water lines. 
(e)  Electrical. All street pavement must be bored. Boring and casing requirements shall be the same as for gravity sewer lines. 
(f)  Gas. All street pavement must be bored. Any six (6) inch outside pipe barrel diameter line or greater shall be encased. When pipes are encased, the casing shall extend across the street pavement from ditch line to ditch line or to not less than two (2) feet beyond back of curb. Pipes or casings shall be not less than forty-two (42) inches below the pavement surface nor less than twenty-four (24) inches below the theoretical flow line of the side ditches. The same requirements apply as for water lines except that any gas line operated under pressure greater than two hundred (200) pounds per square inch must be encased regardless of its diameter. 
(g)  Telephone and television cable. All street pavement must be bored. Boring and casing requirements shall be the same as for gravity sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-23. - Street excavation, backfill and restoration. 
    Removal of the street pavement and excavation below the street pavement will not be allowed except in extreme cases. The applicant for a permit requiring removal of and excavation below street pavement shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the inspector that an exception is warranted. This includes connections to existing facilities which lie beneath the street pavement. When street pavement is removed and excavated, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  General: 
(1)  Trenches shall be excavated at right angles to the roadway centerline or as near [to] right angles as possible. No existing drainage structures may be used for the purpose of pipe crossing. If a street pavement is cut, it will be done one travel lane at a time, thereby allowing traffic on the other lane; except that with proper justification and city approval, the entire pavement may be cut at one time. 
(2)  Ditches, banquettes, shoulders and/or planting spaces subject to trenching shall be replaced in the condition which existed prior to the excavation or better, particularly regarding sod or grass, and proper elevation of finished surface. All excess material shall be removed and well graded to assure no obstructions to mowing operation. In planting areas, no trench or excavation shall be made that will remove or endanger any shrubbery, flowers, trees or other planting, but should it be determined that a trench must be excavated at a location that would cause removal or endanger any planting, special arrangements shall be made with the city for said work and replacement or replanting of same prior to making excavations. 
(3)  When the permitted utility repair(s) or installation work and backfill is completed, the temporary pavement patching shall be completed and traffic restored that same day in accordance with subsection (c) hereinbelow. The temporary pavement restoration work shall then be completed before the beginning of construction on another section of the permittee's project. In any case, the permanent pavement restoration shall be completed no more than thirty (30) days (weather permitting) after traffic is first restored on the temporary pavement patching. 
(b)  Trenching and backfilling. Trenching and backfilling procedures shall be in accordance with sound engineering practices and following procedures: 
(1)  All excavations shall be shored and sheeted adjacent to pavement as required to prevent the trench wall from moving and damaging the pavement surface. 
(2)  It shall be duty and obligation of the permittee to barricade the excavation or cover the opening, as is necessary, to insure a safe working area in accordance with acceptable standards (MUTCD). The permittee shall hold harmless and indemnify the city from any and all claims, causes of action, lawsuits, damages to property, person or death, or as a result of such work by the permittee. 
(3)  All backfill for excavations below street pavement (includes that part of the trench within 2 (two) feet of pavement edges) shall consist of 610 grade limestone (compacted in 6 (six) inch to 8 (eight) inch lifts to ninety-five (95) per cent of standard proctor density) or flowable fill equivalent to "Filcrete" or backfill treated with a soil stabilizer equivalent to "Perma-Soil" or approved combination thereof. 
Flowable fill shall be cementitious grout mixture of sand, cement, and water in the following proportions: 
Ingredient Amount  Cement 188 lbs. Sand 3,010 lbs. Water 46.2 gals.  
The above mix design will produce one cubic yard of mixture and takes into consideration a five point seven (5.7) per cent moisture in the sand aggregate. Any alteration of this mix is not acceptable and must be removed at the permittee's expense. The contractor shall notify the city when ready for backfilling and the city inspector shall observe conditions prior to and during backfilling operations. 
Perma-Soil, or equal, shall be used in accordance with its manufacturer's instructions to increase the compressive strength to at least that of the limestone or flowable fill backfill method specified herein. 
(4)  Where soil backfill alone is required or preferred by the utility owner to be placed around the pipe for protective measures, it shall be selected "A-4" soil classification, as per the American Association of State Highway and Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development's classification system for soils, and shall be free of all foreign matter. Protective soil cover shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) inches above the top of the pipe. Soil that is dug out of the excavation may be used for backfill if it meets the aforementioned soil classification and is approved by the city. The backfill soil must be sufficiently pulverized and dry (or moist) in order to attain proper compaction. All soil backfill under the street pavement shall be mechanically tamped in six (6) inch layers to ninety-five (95) per cent of standard proctor density. In areas outside the street pavement, soil backfill shall be compacted in six (6) inch layers to ninety (90) per cent of standard proctor density. Sand backfill will not be used beneath any pavement or around any drainage structure unless requested in writing and approved in writing by a qualified representative of the city. Sufficient "end" plugs of acceptable soil material will be required to continue the sand backfill. 
(c)  Temporary pavement patching. All temporary pavement patching shall be accomplished in accordance with sound engineering practices and the following procedures: 
a.  Immediately upon completion of the utility repair or installation, limestone or flowable fill backfill will be brought up to match precisely the existing street surface as a temporary, but smooth-riding pavement patch and traffic shall be restored as soon as possible thereafter. 
b.  Permittee shall be responsible for maintaining this smooth-riding temporary pavement patch until the permanent patch is made. Permittee will respond immediately to any call by the city for repair of the temporary patch. 
(d)  Permanent concrete pavement restoration. All permanent concrete pavement restoration shall be accomplished in accordance with sound engineering practices and the following procedures: 
1.  A four thousand (4,000) psi (minimum) Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) pavement shall be used for street restoration and a two thousand five hundred (2,500) psi (minimum) PCC pavement shall be used for sidewalk and curb restoration. 
2.  The pavement shall be carefully cut to produce a straight, clean edge around the patch to be restored, with all corners square. The patch shall be a rectangle or square with its perimeter lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street centerline. 
3.  If a street pavement cut is made within two (2) feet of an existing crack or pavement joint, the cut shall be extended past the crack or to the joint. 
4.  If a street pavement cut is made near an existing curb and gutter, both the curb and gutter and the intermediate pavement shall be removed and restored in kind to prevent any subsequent destabilization of the existing curb and gutter structure. Any evidence of such destabilization resulting from the permittee's construction work shall, upon demand from the city, require permittee to immediately remove and replace all structures in kind at no cost to the city in accordance with sections 13-25 and 13-26 of this article. 
5.  All excavated material, loose material, debris, etc. shall be hauled out of the work area and disposed of by the permittee. 
6.  An epoxy-bonding agent is to be applied to the inside edge of the cut immediately before pouring concrete. The epoxy resin system to be used must be first approved by the city. Instead of the above mentioned epoxy-bonding agent, it will be acceptable to install steel dowels which will bind the new pavement to the old existing pavement and provide for load transfer. These dowels must be installed in a manner acceptable to the city. Any franchisee of the City of Crowley shall be exempt from the requirements of this paragraph, so long as permittee's finished street patches remain stable and in satisfactory condition. 
7.  Whenever Portland Cement Concrete is used in the street restoration process, the permittee shall submit to the city inspector documentation from the concrete supplier showing the concrete design mix and strength of the concrete actually delivered to the site of street restoration. 
8.  All concrete placement, vibration and form work and curing shall be in accordance with the 1992 edition (section 601) or the applicable section of the latest subsequent edition of the Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. The finished texture shall be a "broom finish". 
9.  Traffic [may] not resume on the newly restored pavement until a compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) psi is attained in the concrete at the patch. The permittee shall provide for effective traffic control and maintenance during the concrete curing period in accordance with acceptable standards (MUTCD). At any time after the patch is completed, any evidence of failure of a patch shall be met with a demand from the city in that it be immediately removed and replaced in kind at no cost to the city in accordance with sections 13-25 and 13-26 of this article. 
10.  If the restoration encompasses a contraction or expansion joint, the permittee shall replace it. The new joint shall match the original design and be of the same quality or better. 
11.  Minimum patch width shall be four (4) feet wide. 
12.  The existing concrete pavement shall be cut back a minimum of twelve (12) inches past the vertical trench wall, allowing the newly restored pavement to be supported on the existing road base and/or undisturbed earth. 
13.  The minimum thickness of restored pavement shall be the thickness of the existing pavement or ten (10) inches whichever is greater. 
(e)  Permanent asphaltic concrete pavement restoration. All permanent asphaltic concrete pavement restoration shall be accomplished in accordance with sound engineering practices and the following procedures: 
1.  The pavement shall be saw cut to produce a straight, clean edge around the patch to be restored with all corners square. Minimum patch width shall be six (6) feet. The patch shall be a rectangle or square with its perimeter lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street centerline. 
2.  Full-depth asphaltic concrete shall be compacted from the subgrade layer to the finished pavement grade in layers not to exceed three (3) inches in thickness. 
3.  Full-depth asphaltic concrete shall be a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches below the existing asphalt pavement surface or to the bottom of the existing base, whichever is greater. 
4.  All asphaltic concrete materials, tack, coat, etc. shall conform to the above mentioned latest version of specifications of the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development. 
5.  Prior to compacting asphaltic concrete within the trench or restoration of the pavement, a tack coat shall be applied to the top and the inside edge of the existing cut asphaltic concrete pavement once it is swept clean. 
6.  Compaction of the asphaltic concrete shall be obtained by mechanical tampers or rollers that will adequately compact the asphaltic concrete in all areas of the trench. The compaction tools must be approved by the city. 
7.  When the final layer of asphalt is laid down to be compacted, it shall be a thickness of twenty (20) per cent more than the desired compacted thickness. This will compact flush with the plane of the existing pavement. Example: If desired thickness is two and one-half (21/2) inches, lay down three (3) inches, since 2.5 × 0.2 = 0.5?, and 0.5? + 2.5? = 3.0?. 
8.  The finished asphalt shall be "finished rolled" until all creases are removed from the new pavement. 
9.  The newly restored asphalt shall be protected by means of a flagman or some effective barrier to prevent traffic from driving on the patch until it has sufficiently cooled. 
10.  On all streets having asphaltic concrete surfacing on a PCC pavement, a composite patch shall be required (see Exhibit D [on file in the city clerk's office]). The existing concrete pavements shall be cut back a minimum of twelve (12) inches past the vertical trench wall, allowing the newly restored pavement to be supported on the existing road base and/or undisturbed earth. A two-inch thick space shall be left between the PCC patch and the top of the existing asphaltic concrete surface, to provide for the correct restoration of the new asphaltic concrete pavement, the same requirements for concrete pavement restoration and asphaltic concrete pavement restoration mentioned previously apply here. Traffic should not resume on the newly restored base and asphalt pavement until the concrete base reaches a compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) psi, see subsection (d)9. 
11.  As an alternative to either the full depth asphaltic concrete or the composite pavement restoration requirements outlined above, a twelve-inch thick, black-pigmented PCC permanent patch (i.e., colored a shade of black to match that of the existing pavement) will be allowed. This alternate will be subject to all the requirements of subsection (d) herein. 
12.  On all asphalt surfaced streets, except those that have full-depth asphalt bases, a PCC base may be used instead of a full-depth asphalt. The concrete base shall be a minimum four thousand (4,000) psi, and shall be placed over the compacted subgrade and shall have a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches or to the bottom of the existing base, whichever thickness is greater. A two-inch thick space shall be left between the restored base and the top of the existing asphaltic concrete surface, to provide for the correct restoration of the new asphaltic concrete pavement. The same requirements for concrete mentioned previously apply here. Traffic should not resume on the newly restored base and asphalt pavement until the concrete base reaches a compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) (psi see subsection (d)9. 
(f)  Franchisee's compliance and revocation of exemption. If, at anytime, the city engineer and the street commissioner shall certify to the mayor and board of aldermen that the operations and activities of a franchisee or its subcontractor shall have caused damage to the city streets, the franchisee shall comply with all provisions of this article. The franchisee shall have ten (10) days in which to appeal the decertification to the mayor and board of aldermen. The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the ability to recertify the franchisee for the exemption and/or may permanently disqualify the franchisee from any further exemption from the requirements of this article as occasion may require. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 1234, §§ 2, 3, 4, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-24. - Inspection. 
    The city may assign an inspector to the work site on a periodic basis to observe the workmanship and quality of materials being used in the restoration work. The inspector shall act only as an observer in the permittee's effort to accomplish the results as outlined herein. The presence of an inspector does not relieve the permittee of the obligation to fully comply with the intent of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-25. - Unacceptable work. 
(a)  Should any person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities fail to replace materials, fail to restore areas at least to their original conditions, or in any way fail to comply with conditions of these regulations, the city shall notify the permittee, in writing, to be delivered either by certified mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery to the permittee's designated representative on the application of the permit, that such work is unacceptable or fails to meet or comply with these regulations, a description thereof and shall inform the permittee of the necessary work or restoration required, which work shall be completed within a reasonable time. 
(b)  Should any permittee, person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities fail to begin to perform necessary work for restoration to original condition or comply with these regulations after ten (10) days of receipt of said notice, the city shall have the right to perform all necessary work to comply with the regulations and/or prompt restore the are to original condition. Upon completion of all necessary work by the city, the city shall invoice the permittee, person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities responsible for said work, for the actual cost of construction and engineering, plus twenty-five (25) per cent administrative charge. In the event that said invoice is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of date of receipt thereof, the city shall have the right to enforce collection of same together with reasonable attorney fees and all court costs in connection with prosecuting the claim in any court of proper jurisdiction. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to revoke a permit upon any violation by the permittee of these regulations. The city shall have the right to refuse to grant permit to a person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities who has, in the past, failed to comply with all the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-26. - Failure to work: warranty. 
(a)  Should settlement occur over the restored borings, trenches or excavations or should there occur any other failure due to faulty construction within a period of one year after restoration is completed, it shall be the obligation of the permittee to correct said settlement and/or failure including refilling, tamping and repaving, re-sodding and re-seeding. 
(b)  The city shall notify, by certified mail or by personal delivery, the permittee of any condition due to settlement and/or any other failure of restoration. The permittee shall have ten (10) days after receipt of said notice to make the necessary corrections, including the opening, refilling, tamping and repaving, re-sodding and re-seeding as may be required by the city. 
(c)  In the event the permittee fails to respond to the proper notice as set forth above, the city shall have the right to perform the necessary corrective work. In the event the city performs the necessary corrective work, the permittee shall be obligated to pay the city the actual cost to the city plus as twenty-five (25) per cent administrative charge. After the city has performed the necessary corrective work, the city shall invoice the said permittee for the actual cost plus a twenty-five (25) per cent administrative charge. In the event that said invoice is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of date of receipt thereof, the city shall have the right to enforce collection of same together with reasonable attorney fees and all court costs in connection with prosecuting the claim in any court of proper jurisdiction. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to revoke a permit upon any violation by the permittee of these regulations. The city shall have the right to refuse to grant permit to a person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities who has, in the past, failed to comply with all the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-27. - Compliance with specifications required. 
    It shall be the duty of the permittee to do all work in strict accordance with the specifications, terms, and conditions set out in his application, permit and these regulations. Any failure to comply therewith shall be punishable in accordance with the applicable conditions of the city Code. In addition thereto, the permittee shall be liable to the city for any cost, expense or liability incurred by the city by reason of the failure of the permittee to strictly comply with the specifications, terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Secs. 13-28, 13-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS, STORM DRAINS, DRIVEWAYS AND WALKWAYS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND STREETS 

Sec. 13-30. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities, private or public, to install, construct, remove or replace culverts, pipes, storm drains, driveways, walkways or any other structure which may affect drainage within the public right-of-way of any street, alley, shoulder, sidewalk, banquette, median, boulevard, curb or gutter, ditch or planting space located within public right-of-way in the City of Crowley, hereinafter "street", without first obtaining a permit from the City of Crowley. 
(b)  Hereinafter, the word "city" shall mean the corporate boundary of the city in the context of location, and shall mean the mayor, inspector or duly authorized representative in the context of person. 
(c)  No permit shall be required when any person has been awarded a public contract, pursuant to the laws of the State of Louisiana, for the construction of improvements on behalf of the city. The City of Crowley shall not be required to obtain a permit for work to be performed, but all city work shall adhere to construction specifications contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-31. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to install, construct, remove or replace culverts, pipes, storm drains, driveways, walkways or any other structure which may affect drainage within the public right-of-way of any street, alley, shoulder, sidewalk, banquette, median, boulevard, curb or gutter, ditch or planting space located within public right-of-way in the city shall make written application for a permit on forms provided for said purpose in the office of the city inspector. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide full name, address and telephone number, the exact location of the proposed work or description of the proposed work, the purpose of the proposed work and a schematic diagram shall be drawn as near to scale as possible and shall submit sufficient data, plans, specifications or drawings which shall clearly define the proposed work and the plans for street right-of-way restoration. 
(c)  The permit shall be secured prior to the commencement of all work. 
(d)  Any work or excavation within the public rights-of-way which is conducted without a permit shall be stopped and no further work shall be allowed to recommence until the proper permit has been issued for said work. 
(e)  It shall be the obligation of all applicants to make investigations necessary to locate all underground utilities, structures, pipelines, pipelines and conduits in the area in which work is contemplated. 
(f)  The permittee shall maintain and protect any and all existing structures and utilities within the limits of the work area or as reasonably near thereto. 
(g)  The City of Crowley shall determine whether such plans and drawings are sufficient and requiring existing detail of other utility locations and the opinion of the work to justify such a requirement. 
(h)  No deposit shall be required for a permit to perform work within city right-of-way. However, the permittee is fully responsible to restore the work area to a condition as good or better than the original condition. 
(i)  It shall be the duty and obligation of the permittee to safeguard the public by maintaining the necessary guards, barricades and safety lights, etc., in accordance with law and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition, hereinafter MUTCD. The permittee shall maintain the street in a good and safe condition. The permittee shall hold harmless and indemnify the city from any and all claims, causes of action, lawsuits, damages to property, person or death, or as a result of such work by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-32. - Pipe size, alignment, elevations and slopes. 
(a)  Prior to installation, proper pipe sizes, elevations and slopes shall typically be determined and set by the city. All pipe sizes shall be approved by the inspector. No pipes shall be smaller than the largest of the two (2) nearest (one upstream, one downstream of the proposed pipe) street crossing pipes. However, in any case, no pipes shall be smaller than fifteen (15) inches inside diameter. Vertical control of the invert of the pipe and offsets from the centerline of the pipe should be computed and recorded on a cut sheet for installing the pipe, as directed by the inspector. 
(b)  The permit must be applied for at least one week prior to the anticipated date of installation to allow sufficient time to determine compliance with all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-33. - Material selection. 
(a)  Continuous subsurface storm drains, major drainage structures, flumes and other systems which are required to be watertight (Type 3 joints), shall be constructed of the following materials, to-wit: 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). 
(2)  Reinforced concrete pipe arch (RCPA). 
(3)  Ribbed polyvinyl chloride culvert pipe (RPVCCP). 
(b)  Other subsurface storm drains (Type 2 joints) including street cross drains and side drains for driveways and non-continuous ditches may use the following materials, to-wit: 
(1)  Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe (BCCSP). 
(2)  Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe arch (BCCSPA). 
(3)  Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). 
(4)  Reinforced concrete pipe arch (RCPA). 
(5)  Ribbed polyvinyl chloride culvert pipe (RPVCCP). 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-34. - Allowable materials. 
(a)  Reinforced concrete pipe. 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM designation: C76 for Class III Wall B. Circular reinforcement rather than elliptical reinforcement shall be used in all concrete pipe. 
(2)  Nonreinforced concrete pipe shall not be allowed under any circumstances. 
(b)  Corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch. Corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch shall conform to the requirements of Type I (culvert pipes, circular section) and TYPE II (culvert pipes, other than circular section) of AASHTO designation: M36 amended as follows: 
(1)  Helical pipe to be joined shall have either helical or annular ends and joining shall be made with approved coupling bands. Pipe with annular ends shall have the exposed ends of seams spot welded. 
(2)  The minimum sheet thickness, or gage, shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations based on fill height and LDOTD standards for same. 
(3)  For smooth lined pipe, the inside circumference of the pipe shall be fully lined with bituminous material in accordance with AASHTO designation: M190 Type D. 
(4)  For paved invert pipe, the invert shall be paved with bituminous material conforming to AASHTO designation: M190 Type C. 
(c)  Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch. Bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch shall conform to AASHTO designation: M190, amended as follows: 
(1)  AASHTO designation: M36 is amended in accordance with subsection (c) hereinabove. 
(2)  The coating shall be Type A, fully bituminous coated unless otherwise specified. 
(d)  Asbestos bonded corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch. 
(1)  Asbestos bonded corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch shall be fabricated from asbestos bonded sheets. The base metal and the fabrication of pipes and connecting bands shall conform to subsection (c) hereinabove. The steel sheets shall be coated on both sides with a layer of asbestos fibers applied by pressing a sheet of asbestos fiber into the molten metallic bonding medium. Immediately after the metallic has solidified, the asbestos fibers shall be thoroughly impregnated with a bituminous saturant. The finished sheets shall be of the first-class commercial quality, free from blisters and unsaturated spots. 
(2)  After fabrication, the asbestos bonded pipe and pipe arch shall be fully bituminous coated with a Type A coating in accordance with AASHTO designation: M190. Smooth lined and paved invert pipe shall be coated in accordance with subsection (c) hereinabove. 
(3)  The helical fabrication process is not allowed for asbestos bonded corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch. 
(e)  Corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch. Corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch shall conform to AASHTO designation: M 196, except helical pipe to be joined shall have either helical or annular ends, and joining shall be made with approved coupling bands. Pipe and annular ends shall have the exposed ends of seams spot welded. 
(f)  Corrugated aluminized steel pipe and pipe arch. Corrugated aluminized steel pipe shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Corrugated aluminized steel pipe shall be fabricated with sheet material conforming to AASHTO designation: M274-80I. 
(2)  Aluminized steel pipe shall be furnished either as circular or as a pipe-arch, and shall be fabricated with helical or annular corrugations. 
(3)  Corrugated aluminized steel pipe shall be joined with approved coupling bands. 
(4)  Corrugated aluminized steel pipe fabrication shall conform to the current AASHTO M36 specifications for corrugated steel pipe, amended in accordance with subsection (c) hereinabove. 
(g)  Structural plate pipe and pipe arch. Structural plate pipe and pipe arch shall conform to AASHTO designation: M167. Aluminum alloy structural plate pipe and pipe arch shall conform to AASHTO designation: M219. 
(h)  Plastic pipe. Plastic pipe may be of any of the following material types or products listed below. Joints shall be bell and spigot type with rubber gaskets conforming to ASTM F 477. Perforations, if approved, shall conform to AASHTO M 252. 
(1)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
a.  Smooth wall PVC pipe: Pipe fifteen (15) inch diameter shall conform to ASTM D 3034; pipe larger than fifteen (15) inches shall conform to ASTM F 679, T-1 Wall. 
b.  Ribbed PVC pipe: Pipe shall conform to ASTM F 794, Series 46, and shall have a minimum cell classification of 12454-C as defined in ASTM D 1784. 
c.  Profile wall PVC pipe: Pipe shall conform to ASTM F 949 and shall have a minimum cell classification of 12454-C as defined in ASTM D 1784. 
(2)  Polyethylene (PE) pipe. 
a.  Corrugated PE pipe: Pipe shall conform to AASHTO M 294, Type S, and shall have a minimum cell classification of 315412C as defined in ASTM D 3350. 
b.  Profile wall PE pipe: Pipe shall conform to ASTM F 894, RSC 160, and shall have a minimum cell classification of 334433C as defined in ASTM D 3350. 
(i)  Joint materials. Joint materials for pipe shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Rubber gaskets. Rubber Gaskets for pipe joints shall conform to AASHTO designation: M198, Type A. Each pipe manufacturer or supplier shall be capable of furnishing certificates of analysis certifying that gaskets conform to the above specifications. 
(2)  Flexible plastic gaskets. Flexible plastic gaskets for pipe joints shall conform to AASHTO designation: M198, Type B. 
(j)  Metal pipe gage. Metal pipe shall have a minimum sheet thickness (gage) as required by the manufacturer based on fill height and LDOTD standards. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-35. - Trenching and bedding. 
(a)  All trenches shall be excavated so that the walls are as nearly vertical as possible and to a minimum width which will provide working room to obtain specified compaction. Where required to safeguard construction workers or adjacent structures the sides of the trench shall be properly sheathed and braced. Where in the opinion of the inspector damage may result from withdrawing the sheathing, the sheathing will be required to be left in place. Proper cuts into the trench bottom shall be made at each bell to distribute the load to the barrel of the pipe. 
(b)  Any water accumulated in the trenches shall be removed prior to laying the pipe. During excavation, material suitable for backfilling shall be stockpiled in an orderly manner, a sufficient distance from the edge of the excavation to avoid overloading and to prevent slides or cave-in. 
(c)  For plastic pipe, bedding material shall be placed up to twelve (12) inches above pipe, street crossings and pipe under or within five (5) feet of pavement. 
(d)  Bedding material shall be placed up to the top of the pipe for side drains. 
(e)  If unstable material is encountered at the trench bottom, unstable material shall be excavated as necessary for complete removal and replaced with bedding material. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-36. - Setting or laying pipe. 
    When lines and grades are established by the city, all pipe shall be carefully laid to the lines and grades established by the city. Any pipe which is not true in alignment or which shows settlement after laying, shall be removed and relaid. The interior of all pipe shall be kept clear of debris as the work progresses. All tongue and groove joints shall be laid with the groove upgrade. All lifting holes in concrete pipe shall be sealed with precast concrete plugs, and joint material conforming to section 13-24(i) shall be used to make the seal water tight. 
Sec. 13-37. - Pipe joints. 
(a)  Concrete pipe. 
(1)  Concrete pipe shall have joints conforming to AASHTO designation: M198 and shall be joined with gasket material conforming to section 13-24(i). The procedure used in installing the gasket material shall be as recommended by the gasket manufacturer. 
(2)  The method of joining concrete pipe sections shall be such that the ends are fully entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even. An approved mechanical pipe puller shall be used for joining pipes for pipes greater than forty-two (42) inches I.D. All joint material protruding from the inside of the pipe shall be neatly trimmed to conform with the inside walls of the pipe. 
(3)  Type III joints having flexible plastic gasket only, shall be wrapped with plastic filter cloth for a minimum of twelve (12) inches on each side of the joint. Ends of the cloth shall be lapped at least ten (10) inches and edges of cloth shall be suitably secured. 
(4)  Fabric shall be a pervious sheet of plastic yarn. Plastic yarn shall consist of a long-chain synthetic polymer composed of at least eighty-five (85) per cent by weight of propylene or ethylene fabric and shall be constructed so that yarns will retain their relative position with respect to each other. Edges of fabric shall be finished to prevent the outer yarn from pulling away from the fabric. The fabric shall be an approved product from the LDOTD Qualified Products List. The fabric shall conform to the following requirements: 
Weight, oz./sq.yd., min. ASTM D1 910 3.0 Test Method EOS. (U.S. Sieve) LDOTD TR 630 50+ Test Method Aug. Grab Tensile lbs./in. min. ASTM D1 682 90 Test Method Grab Tensile (Any direction) ASTM D1 682 lbs./in. min. 75 Test Method Permeability Factor cm./sec., min. Method LDOTD TR 631 8 Test  
    The fabric shall be secured on each end section of each pipe by means of a noncorroding plastic strapping having a minimum breaking strength of three hundred eighty (380) pounds and securing the ends with a self-sealing buckle. Prior approval of this product by the city will be required before installation. 
(b)  Metal pipe. 
(1)  Metal pipe shall be joined by coupling bands conforming to subsection 13-24(i). Bands shall be fabricated from corrugated metal sheets of the same material as the pipe and shall have the same coating as used on the pipe. The thickness of the band may be two (2) standard sheet thicknesses lighter than the pipe, but not less than 0.064 inch thick nor more than 0.109 inch thick. Bands shall lap an equal distance on each of the pipe sections to be joined and shall be sealed with gasket material conforming to subsection 13-24(i). The gasket material shall be placed in two (2) corrugation recesses on each side of the pipe connection and overlapped in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(2)  Connecting bands shall consist of a single piece corrugated band with the same corrugations as the pipe. The bands shall be drawn tight by either one bolting through angles or using one-half inch galvanized steel rod and lugs with a minimum of four (4) rods used. Smooth stab-type bands and dimple bands will not be allowed for metal pipe and helically corrugated bands will not be allowed on pipe arch. 
(3)  Connecting bands shall be twelve (12) inches wide for pipe less than thirty-six (36) inches in diameter or pipe arch up to thirty-six (36) inch by twenty (22) inch; and twenty-four (24) inches wide for culverts thirty-six (36) in diameter and greater or for forty-three (43) inch by twenty-seven (27) inch pipe arch and greater. 
(c)  Plastic pipe. Bell and spigot joints: Gaskets shall be rubber O-rings. Just before jointing, O-ring and gasket seat shall be cleaned of dirt and other foreign material and coated with a flax soap lubricant. Pipe sizes less than forty-eight (48) inches may be joined by any method which fully seats joints without damaging pipe; larger pipe sizes shall be joined with a mechanical puller. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-38. - Backfilling. 
(a)  Upon completion and approval of the joints by the city inspector, backfill material, free from large clumps, rocks, or other hard substances shall be deposited evenly on both sides of the pipe in layers not exceeding eight (8) inches thick. Each layer shall be compacted by use of approved mechanical tampers to ninety-five (95) per cent of maximum density. Maximum density and in-place density shall be determined in accordance with LDOTD Designations: TR 418 and TR 401, respectively. Backfilling shall proceed in this manner to a point twelve (12) inches above the top of the pipe. Backfilling around the pipe shall avoid displacement of or damage to the pipe. All backfill material shall be approved before placement. 
(b)  The remainder of the backfill over and above twelve (12) inches above the surface of the pipe shall be thoroughly compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) per cent of maximum density at optimum moisture, except as provided below street or structural surfaces. No damage shall occur during compaction. Backfill material shall contain no stumps or roots and shall be free of lumber, trash, or other debris. The method of compaction shall be approved by the city. 
(c)  On surfaced streets or areas designated by the city, backfilling from a point twelve (12) inches above the top of the pipe to street grade shall be accomplished by depositing the backfill material in layers not exceeding eight (8) inches in thickness and tamping each layer with approved mechanical tampers to a density of ninety-five (95) per cent of maximum density in accordance with the requirements designated in the previous paragraph. This requirement shall apply for the width of the roadway plus five (5) feet on each side unless otherwise approved. If necessary, compaction shall be verified through compaction tests ordered by the city. In the event the material excavated during the trenching operation has a high moisture content, this material shall be dried to optimum moisture by blading and disking or other suitable methods prior to backfilling. If unsuitable material for backfilling is encountered in a given location, suitable material obtained from offsite or other locations shall be used in the backfill operation. 
(d)  Backfill for all plastic drainage pipe shall be granular material or flowable fill in accordance with section 13-23 regarding excavations and construction activities within public rights-of-way in the City of Crowley. Installed pipe that has deformed beyond acceptable limits shall be removed and replaced or relaid using better procedures. Relaying will be permitted only if the pipe returns to the proper shape upon removal and no other damage or cracks are evident. The minimum cover for all plastic pipe shall be twelve (12) inches. 
(e)  In lieu of the previously described method of obtaining suitable backfill material, backfill with granular material or flowable fill conforming to the above requirements for plastic pipe shall be allowed. All granular material shall be compacted to the same density described previously in this paragraph. If part of the trench lies in an area designated to be surfaced and paralleling the centerline of the roadway the total width of the trench shall be compacted as designated in this paragraph. 
(f)  It is expressly understood that all easements and rights-of-way shall be restored to a condition equal to its original condition or better, and in a condition satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-39. - Flushing drainage lines. 
    If storm drainage lines are found to contain sand, gravel or other foreign matter when inspected by the city they shall be flushed with a sufficient volume of water to remove all foreign matter prior to final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-40. - Maintenance of traffic. 
(a)  Pipe installation operations shall be conducted in such a manner so that interference with public travel will be minimized. Suitable bridges, detours or other temporary facilities for the accommodation of public or private travel may be required, as directed by the city. Maintenance of traffic may be curtailed providing that permission is obtained from the owners or tenants of private property or proper public authority, or both, to obstruct traffic within the said limits and time agreed upon. 
(b)  The city police and local fire protection authorities shall be kept informed at all times of the location of construction operations and potential conflict with fire lanes and shall maintain access for firefighting equipment as requested by the fire department. 
(c)  One-way traffic shall be maintained on all streets during construction, except where suitable detours or other arrangements are agreed to. All barricades, warning signs, lights, temporary signals and other protective devices to be utilized in the maintenance of traffic shall conform with the Louisiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-41. - Care of streets, sidewalks and roads. 
(a)  All excess materials, debris or other obstructions shall be removed from the streets or roads immediately after the backfilling has been completed. No cross streets, sidewalks or roads shall be wholly obstructed, except by special permission from the city. 
(b)  Streets, sidewalks, roads and culverts shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with section 13-23 regarding excavation and construction activities within public rights-of-way of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-42. - Barricades. 
    Barricades shall be provided at locations where there exists an open hole or trench or trenches that have not had sufficient settlement to withstand traffic loads. All such barricades shall be properly lighted at night with electric or oil flares, and shall conform with the MUTCD. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-43. - Protection of public or private property and easements. 
(a)  All underground and above ground utilities shall be continuously maintained and protected, including the restoration of all public utilities, including water mains, water services, gas mains, gas services, culverts, drains, ditches, curbs, sidewalks, landscaping and/or other facilities which may be damaged, to a condition at least equal to their original status. All water mains and services shall be repaired within six (6) hours. 
(b)  All work shall be accomplished so as to cause the least amount of disturbance and a minimum amount of damage. Trenches shall not be left open during weekends or holidays, and trenches shall not be left open for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(c)  Where required by the city, the top soil shall be stripped from the trench or construction area and stock-piled in such a manner that it may be replaced, upon completion of construction. Ornamental trees and shrubbery shall be carefully removed, with the earth surrounding their roots wrapped in burlap and replanted in their original positions within forty-eight (48) hours. All shrubbery or trees destroyed, or damaged, shall be replaced with material of equal quality. In the event that it is necessary to trench through any lawn areas, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after the trenches have been backfilled, the backfilling and compacting to be as described for surfaced areas. The lawn area shall then be cleaned, by sweeping or other means, of all earth and debris. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-44. - Excess material. 
    Material excavated during the trenching operation, that is not used for backfilling the pipe, shall be promptly hauled off. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-45. - Qualified products. 
    The LDOTD qualified products list may be referred to for the approval of specific products proposed for all work under these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-46. - Regulations regarding excavations and construction activities within public rights of way in the city of crowley. 
    All work and construction performed under this article shall adhere to the provisions of article II of this chapter insofar as they apply to excavation and construction activities within public rights of way for protection of the street pavement and surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-47. - Inspection. 
    The city may inspect the work site on a periodic basis to observe the workmanship and quality of materials being used in the restoration work. The inspector shall act only as an observer in the permittee's effort to accomplish the results as outlined herein. The presence of an inspector does not relieve the permittee of the obligation to fully comply with the intent of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-48. - Unacceptable work. 
(a)  Should any person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities fail to replace materials, fail to restore areas at least to their original conditions, or in any way fail to comply with conditions of these regulations, the city shall notify the permittee, in writing, to be delivered either by certified mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery to the permittee's designated representative on the application of the permit, that such work is unacceptable or fails to meet or comply with these regulations, a description thereof and shall inform the permittee of the necessary work or restoration required, which work shall be completed within a reasonable time. 
(b)  Should any permittee, person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities fail to begin to perform necessary work for restoration to original condition or comply with these regulations after ten (10) days of receipt of said notice, the city shall have the right to perform all necessary work to comply with the regulations and/or prompt restore the are to original condition. Upon completion of all necessary work by the city, the city shall invoice the permittee, person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities responsible for said work, for the actual cost of construction and engineering, plus twenty-five (25) per cent administrative charge. In the event that said invoice is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of date of receipt thereof, the city shall have the right to enforce collection of same together with reasonable attorney fees and all court costs in connection with prosecuting the claim in any court of proper jurisdiction. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to revoke a permit upon any violation by the permittee of these regulations. The city shall have the right to refuse to grant permit to a person, firm, corporation or owner of utilities who has, in the past, failed to comply with all the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-2000) 
Sec. 13-49. - Failure of work; warranty. 
(a)  Should there occur any failure due to faulty materials or construction within a period of one year after installation is completed, it shall be the obligation of the permittee to correct said failure including re-installing, re-backfilling, re-tamping, re-paving, re-sodding and re-seeding. 
(b)  The city shall notify the permittee, by certified mail or by personal delivery, of any failure of corrective work or restoration. The permittee shall have ten (10) days after receipt of said notice to make the necessary corrections, including the re-installing, re-backfilling, re-tamping and re-paving, re-sodding and re-seeding as may be required by the city. 
(c)  In the event the permittee fails to respond to the proper notice as set forth above, the city shall have the right to perform the necessary corrective work. In the event the city performs the necessary corrective work, the permittee shall be obligated to pay the city the actual cost to the city plus a twenty-five (25) per cent administrative charge. After the city has performed the necessary corrective work, the city shall invoice the said permittee for the actual cost plus a twenty-five (25) per cent administrative charge and the said permittee shall have ten (10) days in which to pay the invoice in full. In the event the said permittee fails to pay the invoice in full within the said ten (10) days, the city shall have the right to enforce collection of said actual cost, plus twenty-five (25) administrative charge plus all cost of prosecuting the suit in any court of proper jurisdiction. 
(d)  In addition thereto, the City of Crowley shall have the right to revoke a permit upon any violation by the permittee of these regulations, and shall have the right to refuse a future permit to a person, firm, or corporation who has, in the past, failed to comply with all the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Sec. 13-50. - Compliance with specifications required. 
    It shall be the duty of the permittee to perform all work in strict accordance with the specifications, terms, and conditions set out in his application, permit and these regulations. Any failure to comply therewith shall be punishable in accordance with the applicable conditions of the city Code. In addition thereto, the permittee shall he liable to the city for any cost, expense or liability incurred by the city by reason of the failure of the permittee to strictly comply with the specifications, terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Secs. 13-51-13-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 1314, adopted March 8, 2005, enacted provisions to be designated as §§ 13-50-13-58. In as much as there already exists § 13-50, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 13-60-13-68. Original numbering can be found in history notes at the end of each section. 

Sec. 13-60. - General. 
    Prior to preparation of a geometric division of land, it is suggested that the developer contact the zoning and planning administrator to obtain a copy of subdivision regulations. The developer should thoroughly familiarize himself with these regulations and with the proposals of the master plan as they pertain to the tract of land being considered for development. 
    The sale of lots, a plat, or tract that has not been approved by the city planning commission and/or the city council is strictly forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-50), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-61. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city planning commission of Crowley has jurisdiction over all subdivisions, existing and proposed in the city limits. Prior to the sale of any lot from a plat, the proposed plat for the subdivision must be submitted to the planning commission for review. Written approval will be issued prior to recordation with the clerk of courts of the sale of any lot. If the plat is disapproved, the planning commission will issue written reasons for disapproval. 
    Public monies will not be spent for any reason in subdivisions that have not met the requirements established by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-51), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
    A.A.S.H.T.O. means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way used primarily for vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on the street. 
    Arterial street means a street designated to handle the volume of traffic created by major traffic generators with emphasis on thru movement. 
    City means the City of Crowley, being in Acadia Parish, State of Louisiana. 
    City council means the chief legislative body of the City of Crowley. 
    Collector street means a street that provides transition from minor streets to major streets, including the principal and circulation streets of a residential development. 
    Commission or Planning commission shall refer to the body of the city planning commission of Crowley, Louisiana. 
    Comprehensive plan means the reports, maps, charts and other descriptive material in the comprehensive plan for the planning area made and adopted by the planning commission. 
    Conceptual plan means a preliminary plan of an undeveloped tract of land showing general land use, thoroughfares and primary natural or man-made characteristics of the site. 
    Construction plan means plans and specifications for the construction of on- and off-site improvements for a tract of land as prepared by a civil engineer registered within the state. 
    Crosswalk means a public right-of-way utilized primarily for pedestrian access along, through or across a block or any portion thereof. 
    Cul-de-sac means a public right-of-way, characteristically short with a vehicular turnaround at the end. 
    Designated review agent (DRA) means an individual appointed by the mayor to review and approve or disapprove subdivision plats, construction plans and other matters that may be pertinent to the development and/or resubdivision of subdivisions. 
    Double frontage means a lot with access to two (2) parallel streets. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific purpose or purposes of a designated strip of land to the general public, a corporation or other individuals. 
    Industrial subdivision means a subdivision of land with a primary function serving industrial or wholesale development. 
    Limited access highway means a street to which access is prohibited except at specific points. 
    Lot, tract, or plat means a unit or area of land for transfer of ownership or development or both. 
    Major street means a street designed to handle fast moving or heavy traffic. 
    Major thoroughfare plan means a plan which delineates a system of streets adopted by the planning commission. 
    Marginal access street (frontage road) means a street which is parallel to and adjacent to a major street, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Minor street means a street that is used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. Mobile home park means an area of land to serve mobile homes, with no transfer of title. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision of land serving mobile homes where title is to be transferred. 
    Official map means a map showing existing and established streets and additions resulting from approval of subdivision plats and the subsequent recording of such approved plats. 
    Planning area means the area under the jurisdiction of the planning commission. 
    Plat means the metes and bounds description of the boundary survey and interior lot and block dimensions of the subdivision prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state. 
    Preliminary plat means a plat that depicts the geometric layout of a subdivision with all proposed street, lots and easements drawn to scale. 
    Protective covenant means a restriction on the use of private property within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development. Protective covenants regulating the use of land represent an express agreement between the subdivider and the lot purchasers. 
    Public improvements means any of the following: roadway pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water and sanitary sewage systems, storm sewers, electric power and gas lines, street lighting systems and other appurtenant construction as related to the subdivision preliminary plan. 
    Residential subdivision means a subdivision constructed for either single-family or multiple-family habitations. 
    Reverse frontage means a lot abutting two (2) parallel streets with access to only one (1) street. 
    Right-of-way means the strip of land dedicated to public use lying between the property lines of a street, alley, crosswalk, or easement title to which shall rest in the public for the purpose stated in such dedication. 
    Servitude means a strip reserved for public utilities, drainage and other public purposes, the title of which shall remain with the property owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of servitude. 
    Sight flare means the angle of vision at an intersection. 
    Street means a right-of-way dedicated to public use that provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
    Subdivider means a person, firm or corporation or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) of more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development, and with regard to parishes, for the purpose of sale or of building development for purposes other than agricultural. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
    Subdivision preliminary plat means a drawing or set of drawings showing a proposed subdivision of land together with the public improvements which are to be installed therein. 
    Zoning and planning administrator (ZPA) means an individual appointed by the city council to enforce zoning and/or planning ordinances, conduct reviews of plats submitted for subdivisions or resubdivision, conduct public hearings, and other matters pertinent to the regulation and development of subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-52), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-63. - Procedure. 
    The following procedures will be utilized for the purpose of reviewing the development of subdivisions. 
(a)  Conceptual (optional). The conceptual approval phase of the procedure allows the commission to review the plan prior to an investment of undue effort and funds by the developer. This phase allows the commission a chance to review the concept of the plan and to insure that the developer fully understands the regulations set forth in this article. The prerequisites of the conceptual plan are outlined in subsection 13-64(a). 
(1)  The developer or his agent shall submit to the zoning and planning administrator five (5) copies of the conceptual plan at least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting of the commission. 
(2)  The staff shall review the conceptual plan and make its recommendations in writing prior to its meeting. Approval of the conceptual plan by the commission allows the developer to proceed to the next phase, the preliminary plan. If the plan is disapproved, the developer must resubmit the conceptual plan with the suggested changes, as outlined by the commission. 
(b)  Preliminary plats. 
(1)  The developer or his agent shall submit to the zoning and planning administrator and/or its staff five (5) full size copies of the preliminary plan at least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting of the commission. The developer must obtain utility service agreements from either public or private utility concerns. This agreement must state that the utility concern can adequately support the proposed development and indicate what cost, if any, must be borne by the developer. 
(2)  A subdivision fee is required and payable to the City of Crowley. (See fee schedule, section 13-66.) 
(3)  As outlined in subsection 13-64(b), it shall be the responsibility of the developer or his agent to furnish the ZPA with the names and addresses of all adjacent property owners and a fee payable to the City of Crowley to cover the cost of a public hearing and notification of adjacent property owners when submitting the preliminary plat. (See fee schedule, section 13-66.) 
(4)  One (1) week prior to the commission meeting, a public hearing will be called to discuss the proposed subdivision. The staff will send notification of the hearing to the developers and adjacent landowners by certified mail at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the purpose, date, time and place of the hearing and include a copy of the proposed preliminary plat. If subsequent addendums alter the proposed plan in a minor or nominal manner, an additional public hearing will not be necessary. The decision to call future public hearings will be at the discretion of the commission. 
(5)  The staff will review the comments and opinions expressed at the hearing and the comments of the utility concerns prior to the formulation of written recommendations. 
(6)  Upon review, the commission may grant approval of the preliminary plat. This approval allows the developer to proceed with the development of engineering plans for the construction of the subdivision. If the commission rejects the preliminary plat, the developer is required to resubmit the revised or amended plat for further review. 
(c)  Engineering (designated review agent). Prior to the initiation of the construction of the subdivision, the engineering plans for construction must be reviewed and approved by the designated review agent. 
(1)  A civil engineer, registered in the state, is required to submit to the designated review agent five (5) copies of the construction plans and specifications. A fee is required for review of streets and sewer and for final review of streets and sewer. (See fee schedule, section 13-66.) 
(2)  The DRA will evaluate the construction plans and submit comments in writing. 
(3)  The DRA will either approve or disapprove of engineering plans. Approval of the plans entitle the developer to begin actual construction. If the plan is disapproved, revisions will be made and resubmitted for review. 
(4)  Upon approval by the DRA, the ZPA may record the approved plat with the parish clerk of court providing a performance bond is issued to the City of Crowley in the amount of one hundred (100) per cent of all improvements. In the absence of a performance bond, no sale or recordation is to take place until final approval is received and accepted by the commission. 
(d)  Final. Final approval of a subdivision is granted after the development has been inspected as constructed and the engineering certification has been submitted to and accepted by the designated review officer. 
(1)  The written request for final approval must be submitted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date requested for final inspection. The developer's engineer shall submit certification that the construction was completed as per approved plans under his seal as a registered civil engineer in the state. 
(2)  As-built plans must be submitted if significant changes were made during construction. These plans must be submitted to the ZPA or its staff at least fifteen (15) days prior to final inspection. 
(3)  The recommendation of the commission together with the engineering certification shall be submitted by the commission to the city council prior to its meeting. Acceptance of the subdivision for perpetual maintenance may be expected upon approval. It is the responsibility of the commission to submit the necessary maps to the city council for their concurrence, approval and acceptance of improvements for public and perpetual maintenance. 
(4)  Once final approval is granted, the ZPA may record the plat and the developer may begin sale of the lots in the subdivision. Lots that are not part of a formally approved plat may not be sold. A fee is required for filing and recordation. (See fee schedule, section 13-66.) 
(5)  For a period of twelve (12) months after acceptance of the work the subdivider shall maintain and keep all filled trenches, pipes, manholes, structures, paving, etc., constructed by him in good condition, making and bearing the cost to repair such defects in material or workmanship as may develop or be discovered. The subdivision subdivider shall file with the commission, a surety bond securing to the City of Crowley the satisfactory performance of this work for a period of one (1) year from the date of such bond. The amount of the bond shall be ten (10) per cent of the cost of the improvements as determined by the designated review agent. The City of Crowley's legal counsel shall approve the form of the bond. The bond shall be subject to cancellation only upon written approval of the designated review agent. 
(6)  One copy of the approved and recorded plat shall be submitted to the Crowley City Planning Commission, zoning administrator, designated review agent, code enforcement officer and to the Crowley City Council each for their files and records. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-53), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-64. - Plans. 
    This section outlines the prerequisites required for each phase in the approval of a plan. All materials submitted to the ZPA become the property of the planning commission and shall be returned to the developer only insofar as revisions or changes are requested. It is requested that tracings, reproducible or original supporting documents not be submitted until approval has been granted. At this time the original documents will be signed in order that reproductions will show approval. 
(a)  Conceptual. 
(1)  Name of proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Name of developer. 
(3)  Name of planner or planning firm. 
(4)  Location by section, township and range. 
(5)  Date, scale (maximum 1" = 800') and north arrow. 
(6)  Boundary of proposed subdivision. 
(7)  Major existing streets and roads. 
(8)  Proposed major streets and roads. 
(9)  Probable land use (single-family, multiple-family, commercial, industrial, etc.) for land within the tract. 
(10)  Important existing features, i.e. pipelines, utility rights-of-way, well locations, etc. 
(11)  MSL GRID-300 feet maximum. 
(b)  Preliminary. 
(1)  Name of proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Name of developer. 
(3)  Name of planner or planning firm. 
(4)  Location of section, township and range. 
(5)  Date, scale (minimum 1" =200') and north arrow. 
(6)  Proposed street names, lot and block numbers. 
(7)  Alignments of existing streets, rights-of-way, easements and servitudes which join or cross the proposed subdivision. 
(8)  Section, township, range, city limit and/or parish boundaries which abut or cross the proposed subdivision. 
(9)  Geometric layout of lots, blocks, streets, rights-of-way, easements and servitudes. 
(10)  Adjacent property owners and mailing addresses may be listed on a separate sheet, and notations should be made on plat. 
(c)  Engineering. 
(1)  Name of proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Name of developer. 
(3)  Signature of civil engineer, seal. 
(4)  Vicinity map. 
(5)  Location by section, township and range. 
(6)  Date, scale (minimum 1" = 50') north arrow. 
(7)  Proposed street names. 
(8)  Alignment with existing streets, rights-of-way, easements and servitudes. 
(9)  Section, township, range, city limits and/or parish boundaries which abut or cross the proposed subdivision. 
(10)  Description of proposed improvements, i.e. materials, typical street cross-sections, etc. 
(11)  Final alignment of streets and sewerage as built records subject to inspection by city engineer and inspector. 
(12)  Final drainage plan showing existing contours at one-foot intervals, or less, if requested by the planning commissioner engineer. 
(13)  Plans showing location of utilities, light standards and fire hydrants. 
(14)  Protective covenant, where applicable. 
(15)  Method of sewerage disposal, tie-in with existing collection systems, lagoons, lift stations, force main, etc. 
(16)  Profiles of all streets and ditches shall be submitted and where open ditches are used for drainage, a minimum size and grade of pipe to be used shall be denoted. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-54), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-65. - Standards. 
(a)  Lots. 
(1)  Minimum residential size shall conform to zoning regulations. 
(2)  Lots on major street intersections and at all acute angles intersections will be designated to provide an adequate sight flare. 
(3)  No fence, wall hedge, or shrub planting which obstructs sight lines at elevations between street level and eight (8) feet above roadways shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot with the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersections of the street lines, or in case of a rounded property corner, from the intersection of the street property lines extended. The same sight line limitations shall apply on any lot within ten (10) feet from the intersection of a street property line with the edge of driveway or alley pavement. 
(b)  Blocks. No block shall be acceptable longer that eight hundred fifty (850) linear feet between cross streets except as adjacent development of terrain may dictate or in the opinion of the planning commission, would enhance the public safety. The commission may require, where blocks exceed the maximum distance, a pedestrian crosswalk with a ten-foot minimum right-of-way where the nearest portion of the block is more than eight hundred fifty (850) feet from a public or semi-public building or facility. 
(c)  Streets 
(1)  Major streets rights-of-way shall conform to the widths designated in the major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet where subsurface drainage exists, or sixty (60) feet where open ditches are used, or an additional right-of-way where the planning commission deems necessary. 
(3)  Minor streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of forty (40) feet where subsurface drainage exists, fifty (50) feet where open ditches are used, or an additional right-of-way where the planning commission deems necessary. 
(4)  In cases where the subdivision includes or adjoins an existing major street having a width less than the minimum established herein, the commission may require the dedication of additional right-of-way widths. 
(5)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(6)  Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum turning radius of forty-seven (47) feet. 
(7)  Servitude of five (5) feet in width may be provided on each side of side or rear lot lines as may be necessary for utility purposes. 
(8)  Servitudes for subsurface drainage, sanitary sewers, and public facilities and provisions shall be made for the maintenance and operation thereof. 
a.  Storm drainage shall be located within the street right-of-way. Special servitudes may be required for interconnections or outfall purposes within the subdivision. 
b.  Publicly owned sanitary sewer lines may not be located in rear or side lot servitudes. 
c.  Light standards may be located on either side of the street right-of-way or in an easement designated for this purpose or may be located in the center of the median of the boulevard. There shall be one (1) standard at each intersection and the spacing of standards shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet and shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet except with special permission of the governing authority or their appointed representative. 
d.  Primary electric, gas, and telephone facilities may not be located in rear or side lot servitudes. 
(9)  Off-street parking shall conform to zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Drainage. Wherever drainage channels exist within a subdivision, adequate servitudes shall be dedicated on both sides of the facility for construction improvements and future maintenance. The commission shall approve the widths of servitudes. Lots sold along the servitude shall be subject to the servitude and the protective covenants shall so stipulate. 
(1)  Open ditches and channels will be designed to provide adequate runoff for the area being served. 
(2)  Subsurface drainage shall conform to Crowley's existing ordinances. 
The maximum grade will be one that will produce a velocity of eight (8) feet per second. 
The minimum grade that will be used will produce a velocity of three (3) feet per second. Minimum size pipe of twelve (12) inches will be utilized. 
The maximum length of pipe between each catch basin and/or manhole will be: 
12" and 15" 150' 18" 300' 24" and 36" 400' 42" and larger 600'  
A minimum time of five (5) minutes will be used for overland flow based on a minimum duration of five (5) minutes. 
Catch basins shall be placed at or near property lines in mid-block and at the intersection as the grade may dictate. 
(e)  Residential. 
(1)  All streets shall be hard-surfaced with adequate drainage. 
(2)  All developments within Crowley shall be constructed to the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Streets shall consist of a minimum of twenty-four-foot wide cement stabilized base ten (10) inches thick with a twenty-two-foot wide plant mix asphaltic concrete surface two (2) inches thick, and shall require soil testing by a properly qualified engineer to determine the need for lime treatment prior to soil cement treatment. 
b.  Four-foot minimum width compacted shell or gravel shoulders. 
c.  Open ditches as allowed which fit the minimum grades stated previously. 
(3)  If the developer elects to utilize curb and gutter and subsurface drainage, the following minimum requirements will apply: 
a.  Curb and gutter with subsurface drainage with hard surfacing of either Portland cement concrete pavement, six (6) inches thick with acceptable base course asphaltic concrete pavement and base course as specified in subsection (e)(2)a. above with a minimum width of twenty-seven (27) feet measured from back-to-back of curb. 
(4)  Fire hydrants shall have a minimum spacing of four hundred (400) feet with no area in the subdivision exceeding five hundred (500) feet from any fire hydrant. This spacing may be altered slightly to conform to the location of lot lines. 
(5)  Street signs shall be located eight (8) feet above the ground with a minimum sign height of four (4) inches and shall conform to the city standards. 
(f)  Commercial/Light industry. 
(1)  All streets shall be hard-surfaced with adequate drainage and conform to either of the following standards. The minimum standards shall be the option of the developer subject to approval by the Crowley Planning Commission: 
a.  Either eight-inch Portland cement concrete with acceptable base course or three-inch asphaltic concrete pavement with a stabilized base design as specified in subsection (e)(2)a. above, twenty-four (24) feet in width and open ditches with a minimum six-foot wide compacted aggregate shoulder; or 
b.  Shall consist of streets with curb and gutter and subsurface drainage and eight-inch thick Portland cement pavement or three-inch asphaltic concrete pavement with acceptable base course as specified in subsection (e)(2)a. above, thirty-two (32) feet back-to-back of curb. 
(2)  Sewerage disposal will be as required by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals or applicable federal agencies. 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading space shall be shown on the plat for every group of lots proposed or developed for commercial and industrial usage to provide a minimum of one (1) loading space for every eight hundred (800) square feet of lot area and twenty (20) per cent of the gross lot area for off street parking. Each space shall be provided on private property with individual access to the street right-of-way. 
(g)  Industrial. 
(1)  Rights-of-way in an industrial subdivision shall be a minimum width of eighty (80) feet. 
(2)  Waste disposal shall be as required by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals or applicable federal agencies. 
(3)  A bond shall be provided to assure the construction of an eight-inch water line or a certified letter shall be submitted from the appropriate utility commission stating that a suitable arrangement has been made to cover the subdivision. 
(4)  Roadways will be constructed of either Portland cement concrete pavement or asphaltic concrete pavement to the following minimum specifications: 
a.  Portland cement concrete pavement, where used, must be a minimum of eight (8) inches thick with acceptable base course twenty-eight (28) feet in width placed on a sub-grade compacted to a minimum of ninety-five (95) per cent of maximum theoretical density as specified by a properly qualified soils engineer. 
b.  Asphaltic concrete pavement where used, shall have an equivalent structural design of Portland concrete pavement as indicated in subsection (4)a. 
(5)  Shoulders of each side of the roadway shall be a minimum width of ten (10) feet with an aggregate four (4) inches thick compacted. Any of the following aggregate type surfaces may be used providing that a minimum of ninety-five (95) per cent of the maximum theoretical density of the aggregate is used. 
a.  610 limestone. 
b.  Recycled asphalt pavement. 
(6)  Off-street parking shall be as outlined in subsection (c). 
(h)  Mobile home parks. 
(1)  All streets in mobile home parks shall be hard-surfaced with adequate drainage and in basic compliance with the residential streets and sewerage requirements as outlined in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. However, should the developer elect to place curb and gutter and subsurface drainage, the minimum street width may be reduced to twenty-four (24) feet back-to-back of curb. 
(2)  Off-street parking shall be as outlined in subsection (c) herein. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-55), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-66. - Permits, fees and costs. 
    The following amounts shall be paid for the issuance of a permit, the filing of a plat, notice of publication of public hearings and filing and recording costs of plats and documents as set out herein. 
(a)  Before any proceedings may be conducted by the board or by the planning and zoning administrator, the following amounts shall be paid by the applicant: 
(1)  Preliminary plat review: $200.00 plus $5.00 per lot; $150.00 for public hearing, letters and notice. 
(2)  Final plat review: $200.00 plus $5.00 per lot. 
(3)  Recordation: $60.00 plus the actual cost of recording at the Acadia Parish clerk of court's office. 
(4)  Preliminary and final plat: $300.00 plus $5.00 per lot; $150.00 for public hearing, letters and notice; $60.00 recording. 
(5)  Construction, planning and acceptance preliminary plans streets and sewers: 
a.  Preconstruction review: $100.00 street; $100.00 sewer. 
b.  Postconstruction review: $100.00 street; $100.00 sewer. 
(6)  Recordation of acceptance: $60.00 plus actual cost of recording at the Acadia Parish clerk of court's office. 
(b)  No action shall be commenced, review undertaken or plats recorded until all fees and costs assessed herein have been fully paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-56), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-67. - Implementation. 
(a)  Administration. The Crowley City Planning Commission shall administer the provisions of these regulations. Appeals from a decision rendered by said commission shall go to the appropriate governing body and the decision of the commission may be overridden by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of said body. 
(b)  Variance. Where the commission finds that hardships may result with the strict compliance of these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
(c)  Violations. Any person having been properly notified that he is in violation of these regulations shall have such violations corrected within sixty (60) days, and each day thereafter shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating or refusing to comply with any provision of these regulations shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) (L.A. R.S. 33:101-119, et al) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-57), 3-8-05) 
Sec. 13-68. - Severance clause. 
    If any section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of these regulations shall be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, paragraph, clause, provision or portion of these regulations. 
    All former ordinances or parts of ordinances by the Crowley City Council conflicting with or inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 1(13-58), 3-8-05) 
Chapter 14 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Moving of buildings on streets, § 5-140 et seq.; corner sight visibility, § 5-162, App. A, §§ 3.1303(4), 7.102. 
State Law reference- Child restraint devices, R.S. 32:295. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - State laws adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority conferred by Louisiana Revised Statutes, Section 32:4(C) as amended, the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes, Title 32, Chapter 1, the Highway Regulatory Act, as now enacted and as hereafter amended, and all regulations of the state department of transportation and the secretary of the department of public safety, as now or hereafter adopted pursuant thereto, except for such provisions and regulations as by their nature can have no application in the city and except as now or hereafter otherwise provided in this Code or by ordinance, be and the same are hereby adopted. 
(b)  Any person violating any of said provisions or regulations shall be punished by a fine of not less than the amount shown in the below schedule as the minimum and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both within the discretion of the Court as hereinafter listed, to-wit: 
Fine Schedule 
Louisiana Revised Statute Charge (Offense) Minimum Fine LA R.S. 32:54 Overload on soil cement $110.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (01-10) 50.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (11-14) 65.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (15-19) 80.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (20 plus) 100.00 LA R.S. 32:62 
LA R.S. 32:251 
LA R.S. 32:252 
LA R.S. 32:253 Default or unsafe vehicles  75.00 
 75.00 
 75.00 
 75.00 LA R.S. 32:123 Disobeying stop sign 50.00 LA R.S. 32:231 
LA R.S. 32:232 
LA R.S. 32:233 
LA R.S. 32:234 Disobeying traffic signal (light)  50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:71 Driving left of center 50.00 LA R.S. 32:303 Driving without lights 50.00 LA R.S. 32:58 Careless operation 50.00 LA R.S. 32:123 Failure to yield 50.00 LA R.S 32:81 
LA R.S. 32:286 Following too closely  50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:72 
LA R.S. 32:73 
LA R.S. 32:74 
LA R.S. 32:75 
LA R.S. 32:76 
LA R.S. 32:77 
LA R.S. 32:125 Improper passing/lane usage  50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:101 
LA R.S. 32:102 
LA R.S. 32:122 Improper turn (left or right)  50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:101 Illegal U-turn 50.00 LA R.S. 32:143 
LA R.S. 32:143.1 
LA R.S. 32:282 Obstruction of traffic  50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:322 Failure to dim lights 50.00 LA R.S. 32:281 Improper starting/backing 50.00 LA R.S. 32:141 
LA R.S. 32:143 
LA R.S. 32:143.1 
LA R.S. 32:144 
LA R.S. 32:146 Improper parking  40.00 
 40.00 
 40.00 
 40.00 
 40.00 Failure to report an accident 100.00 LA R.S. 32:52 Expired driver's license 40.00 LA R.S. 32:52 No driver's license (never had) 100.00 LA R.S. 32:51 Expired license plate 40.00 LA R.S. 32:51 No license plate 50.00 LA R.S. 32:51 Switched license plate 150.00 LA R.S. 32:53 Expired inspection sticker 40.00 LA R.S. 32:53 No inspection sticker 60.00 LA R.S. 32:52 Permitting an unlicensed driver to drive 40.00 LA R.S. 32:191 
LA R.S. 32:191.1 
LA R.S. 32:191.2 
LA R.S. 32:191.3 No motorcycle endorsement 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:352 
LA R.S. 32:353 Improper exhaust/muffler  50.00 
 50.00 LA R.S. 32:295 Child restraint law 50.00 Hit and run 200.00 LA R.S. 32:295.1 Seat belt violation 25.00 LA R.S. 32:141 
LA R.S. 32:143 
LA R.S. 32:143.1 
LA R.S. 32:144 
LA R.S. 32:146 Handicap parking violation 250.00 
250.00 
250.00 
250.00 
250.00 LA R.S. 32:141 
LA R.S. 32:143 
LA R.S. 32:143.1 
LA R.S. 32:144 
LA R.S. 32:146 Fire zone violation 100.00 
100.00 
100.00 
100.00 
100.00 LA R.S. 32:190.1 Eye protection (motorcycle) 40.00 LA R.S. 32:58 Reckless operation 200.00 LA R.S. 32:65 Drag racing 200.00 LA R.S. 32:190 No helmet 100.00  
(Code 1965, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1381, § 25, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 14-2. - Weight limits of vehicles on city streets and prohibition of certain vehicles on city streets. 
(a)  Over 5,000 pounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or to permit the driving of any vehicle weighing more than five thousand (5,000) pounds on any of the streets of the city, save and except that it shall be lawful for any such vehicle to travel on or over any such street in the event that there is no alternate route to and from any business establishment situated in the city; in which event, such vehicle shall travel the most direct route to and from such business established so long as such vehicles are travelling on or over any such street or streets. 
(b)  Driving 18-wheelers. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or to permit the driving of a vehicle commonly known or identified as an eighteen-wheeler on any streets situated within the corporate limits of the city save and except those streets designated as state or federal highways or specifically marked as a truck route, save and except that it shall be lawful for any such vehicle to drive on any street within the city solely for the purpose of pickup and delivery from any business establishment situated in the city; in which such event, such vehicle shall travel the most direct route to and from such business establishment from any federal or state highway or designated truck route, save and except that it shall be lawful to drive the tractor portion only (meaning that the trailer portion has been completely disconnected) on any street solely for the purpose of going to or returning from the driver's official residence; in which event, such vehicles shall travel the most direct route from the driver's place of business or from the aforesaid state or federal highway or truck route. 
(c)  Parking 18-wheelers. It shall be unlawful to park vehicles commonly known or identified as eighteen-wheelers whether it is the tractor portion, trailer portion or both on any streets or other public places situated within the corporate limits of the city or on any property not designated as a commercial or business parking area providing for the parking of eighteen-wheelers, save and except that the driver of such vehicle shall be permitted to park the tractor portion only (meaning that the trailer portion has been completely disconnected) at his official residence provided it is situated completely upon the property occupied by his residence and not upon any property belonging to the city. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision or regulations herein shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 16-4; Ord. No. 1132, § 1, 3-13-90) 
Sec. 14-3. - Vehicles and livestock prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to ride, drive or operate any vehicle or horse, mule, cattle or other livestock in the following places: 
(1)  On any sidewalk, banquette, neutral ground or parkway; 
(2)  In any public park or cemetery; 
(3)  Upon the grounds of any school. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the crossing of a sidewalk on a properly constructed driveway, nor shall this section be applicable to vehicles or livestock on a roadway designed for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 8-43) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 4; prohibited acts in parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, § 7-54. 
Sec. 14-4. - Bicycles and skateboards prohibited on sidewalks in C-4 zoning area. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride a bicycle or skateboard on any sidewalk other than while crossing a sidewalk at a properly constructed driveway in the area designated C-4 Central Business District as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Crowley. 
(Code 1965, § 20-5; Ord. No. 1141, § 1, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 14-5. - Skating, toy vehicles prohibited on roadways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to skate, ride on roller skates, or on a toy wagon, tricycle, or other similar toy vehicle in the traffic roadway of any street. 
(Code 1965, § 16-6) 
Sec. 14-6. - Garage keepers to report damaged vehicles. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious accident or struck by any bullet shall report to the nearest police station within twenty-four (24) hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 16-7) 
Sec. 14-7. - Impounding vehicles. 
    Any vehicle found parked in violation of this chapter or any parking regulation, and any vehicle found in charge of, or operated by, any unlicensed person, or any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug, shall be taken in charge by a police officer of the city and impounded or stored, and all costs and charges for removing and impounding the vehicle shall be paid by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 16-8) 
Cross reference- Junk vehicles, § 9-28 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, § 14-43. 
Sec. 14-8. - Authorization for use on city streets of certain unlicensed vehicles; permitting; annual inspection. 
    The ordinance from which this section was derived is established for the purpose of authorizing and permitting the use and operation of certain unlicensed vehicles as defined herein on public roads, streets and alleyways within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley under the rules, regulations and definitions provided herein and subject to the penalties for violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 14-8.1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, to-wit: 
    Unlicensed vehicle. A golf cart or other four-wheeled vehicle operated by an electric motor or gasoline or diesel motor capable of speed of not more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour may be operated on the public streets, roadways and alleyways, except state highways, within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley by any person holding a valid driver's license issued by the State of Louisiana Department of Motor Vehicles or the corresponding agency of any state or possession of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 14-8.2. - Hours of operation; crossings. 
(a)  Such vehicles defined herein may be operated only between the hours of sunrise and sunset Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) as calculated for Crowley, Louisiana. 
(b)  Such vehicles shall be subject to and operated under the provisions of the Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 32 as amended. 
(c)  These provisions shall not apply to "authorized emergency vehicles" which shall mean a vehicle owned or leased by the Crowley Fire Department or the Crowley Police Department and so designated by the fire chief or police chief for the purposes of responding to an emergency or for official use in connection with permitted events and/or parades within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 14-8.3. - Permitting; annual inspection; requirements and fees. 
(a)  All such vehicles shall be operated on public streets, roadways and alleyways within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley except "state maintained highways" as defined by law or maintained by the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development. 
(b)  All such vehicles shall be issued an annual permit by the City of Crowley Police Department after passing physical inspection. The annual fee for permit and inspection shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) which is to be paid to the City of Crowley at the time of the inspection. 
(c)  All such vehicles shall meet the requirements for equipment operated on public roads of the State of Louisiana, including but not limited to brakes, lights, safety equipment and controls as provided in Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 32. In addition, such vehicles shall be equipped with one shield mounted rearview mirror and driver's side exterior rearview mirror capable of providing a minimum rear sight fixture to the operator of not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(d)  The owner of such vehicle shall maintain liability insurance coverage on the vehicles with a good and valid insurance carrier and provide a certificate of insurance showing valid insurance coverage on the vehicle for the purpose of public liability for the owner and any operator thereof and coverage for bodily injury to person or persons in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident and property damage coverage of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per incident. The certificate of insurance shall be carried on or in the vehicle at all times and shall be displayed to any law enforcement officer requesting same at any time. 
(e)  The permit shall include a waiver of liability by the owner of the vehicle of any claims, causes of action or right of action against the City of Crowley for bodily injury, property damage or otherwise, occurring from the use and operation of the permitted vehicle and shall include a hold harmless and indemnity clause in favor of the City of Crowley of any such claims, which hold harmless and indemnity shall include all costs thereof including but not limited to attorney's fees and other expenses. 
(f)  The owner of the vehicle shall sign an agreement and acknowledgment of the permit conditions expressly agreeing to all the terms and conditions of the permit, including but not limited to the provisions of subsection (e) above. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 14-8.4. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person operating an unpermitted vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley and found guilty of violating the provisions of the ordinance from which this section was derived, including but not limited to operating the vehicle without a permit, insurance or a valid driver's license, failing to meet the regulatory requirements for equipment or failure of equipment to operate properly shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation and subject to a jail term of not more than sixty (60) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Secs. 14-9-14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 

Sec. 14-20. - Driving while incapacitated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, drive or operate any motor vehicle while suffering from a physical disability, infirmity or affliction which renders such person unable to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner. 
(Code 1965, § 16-31) 
Sec. 14-21. - Speed limits-For motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in the City of Crowley in excess of the following speeds on any streets or portion of streets listed below: 
(1)  35 miles per hour. 
North Parkerson Avenue from the Court Circle to the north corporate limits, 
Eastern Avenue from Hutchinson Avenue to the south corporate limits, 
Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  30 miles per hour. 
On any other street, except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section; 
(3)  25 miles per hour. 
Ash Street from the intersection of Eastern Avenue to the corporate limits, Azelea Road, Avenue B from the intersection of 15th Street to West Bayou Court, West Bayou Court, West Bayou Drive, Blue Bonnet, Blue Lake Drive, Blue Rose, Broad Acres Drive, Bruner Avenue, Buck Sweeney Drive, Camelia Street, Camp Street, Canal Street, Cedar Street, Cherry Street, Clay Street, Clark Court, Cypress Drive, Avenue D from the intersection of 15th Street to Henrietta Drive, Elm Street, Avenue F from the Bayou Blanc Bridge to the corporate limits, Fairway Drive, 15th Street from the intersection of Parkerson Avenue East to the corporate limits, 4th Street and 5th Street from the intersection of Eastern Avenue East to the corporate limits, Avenue G from the intersection of Mill Street South to the corporate limits, Geesey Avenue, Glennwood Avenue, Grace Pete, Grady Poullard, Greenbriar Avenue, Gulf Rose, Avenue H from the intersection of Mill Street South to the corporate limits, Henrietta Drive, Holly Street, Hoyt Avenue, Huval Street, James Street, Jeanette Street, John F. Kennedy Drive, Judge Canan Drive, Keller Street, Avenue L from the intersection of Northern Avenue to 17th Street, Labelle, Lawson Street, Lennie Johnson, Lewis Street, Avenue M from the intersection of 4th Street to 5th Street, Avenue M from the intersection of Mear Street to the corporate limits, Magnolia Drive, May Street, Avenue N from the intersection of Mear Street to the corporate limits, Avenue O from the intersection of Mear Street to the corporate limits, Oak Street, East Park Avenue, Parkerson Avenue from the intersection of Mill Street to Pine Street, Pine Street, Pintail, Rue Aline, 17th Street from the intersection of Avenue I to the corporate limits, 16th Street, Spruce Street, Standard Mill Road, Sterling Drive, Stutes Street, Sweeney Street, Texas Street, 3rd Street from the intersection of Parkerson Avenue East to the corporate limits, Truman Street, Westwood Drive: 
Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)  15 miles per hour. 
On any street adjacent to any school, public park, public playground or hospital and for a distance of one-half block in any direction from the property line of any school, public park, public playground or hospital as posted. 
(b)  Signs shall be erected notifying the traveling public of the maximum speed limits provided for herein. 
(c)  Any person violating any of said provisions or regulations shall be punished by a fine of not less than the amount shown in the below schedule as the minimum and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both within the discretion of the court as hereinafter listed, to-wit: 
Louisiana Revised Statute Charge (Offense) Minimum Fine LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (01-10) $50.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (11-14) 65.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (15-19) 80.00 LA R.S. 32:54 Speeding (20 plus) 100.00  
(Code 1965, § 16-24; Ord. No. 1266, § 1, 4-8-03; Ord. No. 1381, § 26, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 14-22. - Same-For trucks. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except a half-ton pickup truck, in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-24) 
Sec. 14-23. - Right-of-way streets; four-way stop intersections. 
(a)  Designated. The following are hereby designated as right-of-way streets and avenues: 
(1)  All streets and avenues running east-west except at their intersections with the below-named streets; 
(2)  Avenue E from the south side of Front Street to Northern Avenue; 
(3)  Avenue F from the south corporate limits to Tenth Street, and from Twelfth Street to Northern Avenue; 
(4)  Avenue G from the south side of Front Street to Park Street; 
(5)  Avenue H from the southern corporate limits to the south side of Pine Street and from the north side of Pine Street to Second Street and from the north side of Second Street to the south side of Hutchinson Avenue and from the north side of Hutchinson Avenue to Northern Avenue; 
(6)  Eastern Avenue, except at its intersection with Northern Avenue; 
(7)  Parkerson Avenue, except at its intersection with Pine Street; 
(8)  Western Avenue, except at its intersection with Northern Avenue; 
(9)  Avenue O, from Hargrave Street to Ash Street; 
(10)  Azalea Drive or Road from the northern end thereof to the north side of Lake Drive; 
(11)  Avenue D, from the north side of Seventeenth Street to the south side of Henrietta Drive; 
(12)  Avenue B and West Bayou Drive and designated as right-of-way streets over West Bayou Court; 
(13)  Governor Edwards Drive from the south side of Fairway Drive to the north side of Henrietta Drive; 
(14)  Avenue L from the south side of Northern Avenue to Fifteenth Street; 
(15)  East Park Drive from the south side of Standard Mill Road to the north side of East Cedar Street; 
(16)  Buatt Avenue from the intersection of Northern Avenue to the north side of the intersection of 15th Street; 
(17)  South Avenue C from the south side of Mill Street to the north side of Pine Street; 
(18)  JFK Drive from the north side of Hutchinson to the dead end; 
(19)  Elm Street from the west side of Eastern Avenue to its intersection with the east side of Avenue I; and 
(20)  Avenue M at its intersection with Lawson Street. 
(b)  Duties. Vehicles traveling on right-of-way streets shall have right-of-way over all vehicles crossing or turning into right-of-way or avenue from any intersecting street or avenue, and any person driving a vehicle from any intersecting street or avenue across or into any right-of-way or avenue shall not proceed until such driver has ascertained that no vehicle is traveling the right-of-way street sufficiently near to the intersecting street or avenue to render a collision or accident probable; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply at intersections where and when traffic is being controlled by automatic signal lights, or where and when a police officer assumes direction of traffic, provided further that vehicles composing a funeral procession (or any procession authorized by permit of the city to parade), shall not be required to stop at right-of-way streets if the first and leading vehicle of the procession has complied with this section; and providing further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Four-way stop intersections. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein provided, the following described intersections shall be four-way stop intersections and each operator of a motor vehicle, upon approaching such intersection, shall bring such driver's vehicle to a complete stop and shall remain stopped until any vehicle previously stopped at the intersection has proceeded through such intersection and, thereafter, the drivers of vehicles on the intersecting streets shall, after stopping, alternate in proceeding through such intersection: 
(1)  Avenue E and First Street; 
(2)  Avenue G and Northern Avenue; 
(3)  Avenue H and Eighth Street; 
(4)  Avenue F and Pine Street; 
(5)  Avenue G and East Hutchinson Avenue; 
(6)  Avenue G and Fifth Street; 
(7)  Avenue G and Fourth Street; 
(8)  Avenue G and Third Street; 
(9)  Avenue F and Fifth Street; 
(10)  Northern Avenue and Western Avenue; 
(11)  Avenue E and Fifth Street; 
(12)  Avenue D and Fairway Drive; 
(13)  Hutchinson Avenue and Western Avenue; 
(14)  Avenue E and Hutchinson Avenue; 
(15)  Avenue F and Hutchinson Avenue; 
(16)  Avenue H and Hutchinson Avenue; 
(17)  Avenue K and Seventh Street; 
(18)  Avenue B and Seventeenth Street; 
(19)  Avenue J and First Street; 
(20)  Avenue H and Elm Street; 
(21)  Avenue N and Cedar Street; 
(22)  Third Street and Avenue N; 
(23)  Labelle and Eastpark Drive; 
(24)  Avenue D and Fourteenth Street; 
(25)  Avenue D and Fifteenth Street; 
(26)  Avenue E and Tenth Street; 
(27)  Fifteenth Street and Avenue B; 
(28)  Twelfth Street and Crawford Avenue; 
(29)  Seventh Street and Jacobs Avenue; 
(30)  Avenue N and Elm Street. 
(d)  Three-way stop intersections. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein provided, the following described intersections shall be three-way stop intersections and each operator of a motor vehicle, upon approaching such intersection, shall bring such driver's vehicle to a complete stop and shall remain stopped until any vehicle previously stopped at the intersection has proceeded through such intersection and, thereafter, the drivers of vehicles on the intersecting streets shall, after stopping, alternate in proceeding through such intersection: 
(1)  Avenue F and Twelfth Street; 
(2)  East Fifteenth Street and Avenue G; 
(3)  Western Avenue and Mill Street; 
(4)  Northern Avenue and William Egan Avenue; 
(5)  Texas Street and Huval Street; 
(6)  Texas Street and Stutes Street; 
(7)  Hockaday Street and Wright Avenue; 
(8)  Fourteenth Street and Avenue B; 
(9)  Seventh Street and Stagg Avenue; 
(10)  J.D. Miller Drive and Marcel Thomas Avenue. 
(Code 1965, § 16-25; Ord. No. 1084, § 1, 8-14-84; Ord. No. 1089, § 1, 10-9-84; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 3-12-85; Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 9-10-85; Ord. No. 1110, §§ 1, 2, 5, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 1117, §§ 1-4, 12-8-87; Ord. No. 1121, §§ 1, 2, 7-18-88; Ord. No. 1122, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 1138, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 1139, § 1, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 1148, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 1151, §§ 1, 2, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 1170, §§ 1-3, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 1177, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 1181, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 1207, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 1218, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 1222, §§ 1-4, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1233, § 1, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 1257, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 1258, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 1260, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1265, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 1329, § 1, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1363, § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 1393, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 1426, § 1, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1457, §§ 1, 2, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 1473, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 1476, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 11-8-16; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 3-1-17) 
Sec. 14-24. - Receiving, discharging passengers while stopped at traffic-control device. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle stopped in obedience to a traffic-control signal to receive or discharge a passenger. 
(Code 1965, § 16-27) 
Sec. 14-25. - "U" turns. 
    No complete turn or reversal of direction, known as a "U" turn, shall be made on a roadway other than at an intersection. Such turns are prohibited at intersections where traffic is controlled by automatic traffic-control devices or signs prohibiting such turns. 
(Code 1965, § 16-30) 
State Law reference- "U" turns on hills and curves prohibited, R.S. 32:102. 
Sec. 14-26. - Permitting clinging to vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to knowingly permit any rider on roller skates, a bicycle, toy wagon or similar contrivance to hold on to or be pulled along by said motor vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 16-32) 
Sec. 14-27. - Operator required to possess valid driver's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on any public thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has in such person's immediate possession a valid license issued to such person by this state or, if such person is a nonresident of this state, by the state of such person's residence, if one is required therein, authorizing such person to operate a vehicle of the type being operated and authorizing such person to operate a vehicle for the purpose for which it is being operated. 
(Code 1965, § 16-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 23:402. 
Sec. 14-28. - Multiple lane roadways establishment and regulations. 
(a)  The following streets are hereby designated as multiple lane streets and avenues providing for two (2) lanes of traffic in each direction: 
(1)  Parkerson Avenue from its intersection with Mill Street northerly to its intersection with the corporate limits. 
(b)  Upon all multiple lane roadways designated as such, shall be provided with proper traffic control devices erected pursuant to the manual of specifications of uniform traffic control devices the State of Louisiana, pursuant to R.S. 32:235, all vehicles operated thereon shall be subject to the provisions of the State Highway Regulatory Act and the provisions of ordinances of the City of Crowley adopted pursuant to R.S. 32:41, along with other provisions of the State Highway Regulatory Act and other laws supplemental thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 16-35; Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 14-29. - Railroads-Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, any locomotive, railroad train, or other railroad vehicle within the corporation limits of the city at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(Code 1965, § 8-37) 
Sec. 14-30. - Same-Blocking crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or the employees thereof to block, obstruct or impede the free use of any street, sidewalk or public way with any locomotive, train, cars or other apparatus for a longer continuous time than five (5) minutes. 
(Code 1965, § 8-38) 
Cross reference- Street obstructions generally, § 13-9. 
Sec. 14-31. - Same-Safety precautions at crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any railroad locomotive, railroad train, railroad car or other railroad vehicle over or across any public or private motor vehicular crossing, unprotected by a permanent flagman, automatic electric warnings or automatic electric stop gates, during any railroad car switching operations or to operate or cause to be operated any such railroad vehicle across any such motor vehicular crossing on any switch track unless or until a flagman or other crew member of such railroad vehicle enter such motor vehicular railroad crossing, flags down and stops approaching motor vehicular traffic and signals to the engineer, motorman or other person operating such railroad vehicle that such vehicles may safely enter and cross such motor vehicular crossing. 
(Code 1965, § 8-43.1) 
Sec. 14-32. - Reckless operation of a vehicle. 
(a)  Defined. Reckless operation of a vehicle is the operation of a motor vehicle, aircraft, vessel or other means of conveyance, in a criminally negligent or reckless manner. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits reckless operation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both such fine and imprisonment within the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 1, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 1381, § 27, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 14-33. - Hit-and-run driving. 
(a)  Definitions. "Hit-and-run driving" is the intentional failure of the driver of a vehicle involved in, or causing any accident, to stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, to give his identity and render reasonable aid; "to give his identity", for the purpose of this article, shall mean that the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident shall give his name, address and the license number of the vehicle, or shall report the accident to the police. 
(b)  [Penalty.] Whoever commits the crime of hit-and-run shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both such fine and imprisonment within the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1105, § 2, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 1381, § 28, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 14-34. - Exhaust assisted braking devices defined, prohibited and penalty for violation. 
(a)  Definition. A device which utilizes the power of an engine to produce a power absorbing and retarding effect to assist the slowing or braking of a vehicle (commonly known as "Jake Brakes") which increases engine noise and sound through the exhaust system while in use. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to operate or use engine-powered braking devices within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley, Louisiana. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles or equipment. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may be incarcerated for not more than thirty (30) days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 8-10-04) 
Secs. 14-35-14-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING 

Sec. 14-39. - Penalty for parking violations. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any person committing or attempting to commit any violation of the regulations governing the parking of, standing and stopping of vehicles, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than forty dollars ($40.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1965, § 16-43; Ord. No. 1189, § 1, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 1381, § 29, 3-11-08) 
Cross reference- Impounding illegally parked vehicle, § 14-7. 
Sec. 14-40. - Displaying for sale. 
    It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of offering or displaying the same for sale. 
(Code 1965, § 16-45) 
Sec. 14-41. - Parking to test, wash, grease, repair vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of testing such vehicle or repairing, washing, greasing or oiling it; provided that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the making of emergency repairs. 
(Code 1965, § 16-46) 
Sec. 14-42. - Designation of parking zones, spaces, prohibitions, violations and impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)  Designation of parking zones. The following named and described areas, streets or portions of streets shall constitute a designated parking zone as follows: 
(1)  Third street from Avenue F to Avenue G. 
(2)  Fourth Street from Avenue F to Avenue G. 
(3)  Fifth Street from Avenue F to Avenue G within the City of Crowley. 
(b)  Designation of parking spaces, parking in designated space. Individual parking spaces shall be marked parallel to the curb in the parking zones designated and described in subsection (a) hereof, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on curbing or the surface of the street in standard spaces of twenty (20) feet. At each space so marked-off it shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, car, truck, trailer or combination of motor vehicles and trailers in such a way that said vehicles shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. 
(c)  Parking prohibited during designated hours. In said parking zones no motor vehicle, car, truck, trailer or combination thereof shall park, stand or stop in said designated parking spaces from 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. 
(1)  The provisions of this subsection (c) shall be suspended during Rice Festival Weekend beginning Thursday at 5:00 p.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following Sunday. 
(d)  Violations and impounding of vehicles illegally parked. 
(1)  Any police officer and other law enforcement personnel shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this section by issuance of citations to the operator and/or owner and/or both of the motor vehicle, car, truck, trailer or combination thereof parked, standing or stopped in violation of the provisions hereof; and 
(2)  Any police officer or other law enforcement personnel shall have the power and authority to impound and cause to be towed away and stored any motor vehicle, car, truck or combination of vehicles. The cost of towing, storage and redemption of such towed vehicle shall be paid by the owner or operator of such vehicle in addition to any other penalties imposed under this article. Upon the payment of all such costs the owner shall be entitled to have the property released. 
(Ord. No. 1189, § 2, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 1192, 2-12-97) 
Sec. 14-43. - Abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or association of persons to abandon any motor vehicle on any street, alley or other public grounds of the city. 
(b)  "Abandoned" defined. Any motor vehicle remaining on any public street, alley or any other public grounds of the city, for five (5) days after notice, as hereinafter provided, shall be and constitute an abandoned motor vehicle. 
(c)  Notice to owner required. When the chief of police has reason to believe that a motor vehicle has been abandoned on a public street, alley or any other public grounds, such official shall give written notice to the owner of said vehicle that said vehicle shall be removed from the public street, alley or other public grounds, within five (5) days from service of such notice. 
(d)  Service of notice. Such notice shall be either personally served upon the owner of such motor vehicle or mailed to such owner by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall give a reasonable description of the motor vehicle, including its license number, if any, and its location and shall be dated and signed by the said official. In the event that the owner of such vehicle is unknown and the identity of such owner can not be determined by reasonable inquiry, the above-mentioned notice shall be posted on the inside of the windshield or in some other prominent place on such vehicle, and such posting shall constitute service upon the owner of such vehicle. 
(e)  Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. After the lapse of the delay hereinabove provided for, the chief of police, as the case may be, shall remove such vehicle from the public street, alley or any other public grounds of the city and shall place such vehicle in the city dump or in any other place, at the discretion of such official, wherein such vehicle shall remain for a period of thirty (30) days. If such vehicle is not claimed by the owner thereof within such thirty-day period and all costs and charges paid, the city may dispose of such vehicle at public or private sale to defray all expenses of the said city in so removing and storing said vehicle; the charge for so removing any such motor vehicle is hereby fixed at the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Code 1965, § 16-48) 
Cross reference- Junk vehicles, § 9-28 et seq.; impounding, § 14-7. 
State Law reference- Impounding vehicles authorized, R.S. 32:392; abandoned motor vehicles, etc., R.S. 33: 4876. 
Sec. 14-44. - Regulation at specific locations. 
(a)  The governing authority may from time to time designate areas in which parking is prohibited or prohibited during certain hours or limited in time or otherwise regulated or restricted. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to erect, install and maintain suitable signs or markings giving notice of such regulations and restrictions and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any such signs or markings. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on all weekdays on the south side of 9th Street and the north side of 10th Street between Avenue L and Eastern Avenue. 
(c)  No person shall park any vehicle on the south side of Hutchinson Avenue between Moore Avenue and Stagg Avenue. 
(d)  No person shall park any vehicle on either side of North Avenue G between Park Street and North Crowley Drainage Ditch. 
(e)  No person shall park any vehicle on the south side of 1st Street between Avenue C and Avenue D. 
(f)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of 13th Street from Avenue H for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
(g)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of Northern Avenue between Milton Street and Chappuis Street. 
(h)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of 10th Street from its intersection with Avenue F for a distance of forty-five (45) feet from the crosswalk. 
(i)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of West 3rd Street from its intersection with Western Avenue for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the crosswalk. 
(j)  No person shall park any vehicle on the east side of North Avenue F from its intersection with West 10th Street for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
(k)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of 13th Street east of its intersection with Avenue H for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
(l)  No person shall park any vehicle on the west side of Avenue N south of its intersection with 6th Street for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
(m)  No person shall park any vehicle on either side of Moore Avenue from its intersection with West Hutchinson Avenue to its intersection with 6th Street, on either side of 6th Street from its intersection with Moore Avenue to its intersection with Spann Avenue, on either side of Spann Avenue from its intersection with 6th Street to West Hutchinson Avenue, on either side of West Hutchinson Avenue from its intersection with Spann Avenue to its intersection with Moore Avenue. 
(n)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of 1st Street east of its intersection with Eastern Avenue to its intersection with North Avenue H. 
(o)  No person shall park any vehicle on the south side of West 15th Street east of its intersection with Chappuis Street and the intersection of Western Avenue during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(p)  No person shall park any vehicle on 12th Street east of its intersection with Avenue K to its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
(q)  No person shall park any vehicle on West Hutchinson Avenue west of its intersection with Mansfield Avenue and its intersection with Acadiana Railway Railroad right-of-way. 
(r)  No person shall park any vehicle on the east side of Avenue D south of its intersection with Mill Street and the intersection of Elm Street. 
(s)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of East Fifth Street for a distance of thirty (30) feet east of the west boundary line of Lot 10 of Block 76 of the Original City of Crowley. 
(t)  No person shall park any vehicle on the east side of Western Avenue beginning at the boundary of Lots 3 and 4 of Block 29 of the Original City of Crowley northerly to the intersection of 3rd Street. 
(u)  No person shall park any vehicle on the north side of West Mill Street from the intersection of the west right-of-way line of the extension of North Avenue C with the north right-of-way line of Mill Street to the intersection of the west right-of-way line of North Avenue E. 
(Code 1965, § 16-49; Ord. No. 1086, § 1, 8-14-84; Ord. No. 1088, §§ 1, 2, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 10-9-84; Ord. No. 1103, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 1111, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 1156, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 1162, § 1, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 1200, § 1, 4-8-97; Ord. No. 1216, § 1, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 1243, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 1417, § 1, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 1423, § 1, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 1434, § 1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1435, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 14-45. - Parking long vehicles on Parkerson Avenue. 
    Trucks over eighteen (18) feet in length are prohibited from parking on Parkerson Avenue between Front Street and the Court House Square, provided that this section shall not apply to any truck or motor vehicle for which a written permit to park parallel with the curb for a specified time, not to exceed two (2) days, has been obtained from the chief of police and the mayor. 
(Code 1965, § 16-50) 
Sec. 14-46. - Handicapped parking places for persons with mobility impairments. 
    A restricted handicapped parking area for the mobility impaired consists of the parking space and the access aisle. No person shall park or place any object in a restricted parking area set aside and identified for use only by persons with physical disabilities unless the motor vehicle is actually transporting a person eligible for the mobility impaired placard or license plate bearing the international wheelchair symbol and the vehicle has displayed therein a mobility impaired parking placard as provided in Revised Statutes, Title 47, Chapter 463.4B(1), or license plate being the international wheelchair symbol issued pursuant to Revised Statutes, Title 47, Chapter 463.4A(1), other special mobility impaired license plate, or any subsequent replacement statutes dealing with parking for mobility impaired persons or as set forth by United States Public Law 100-641. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-47. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who either: 
(1)  Parks in such a restricted area without either a handicapped license plate or placard and is not actually transporting the person eligible for the license plate or placard; or 
(2)  Effectively prevents the use of such a restricted area, access aisle, or access ramp or curb in any manner; 
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or shall be imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days, or both. On the second and subsequent offense, such person shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(b)  Unlawful use of parking card or vehicle or specially licensed vehicle. Any person who utilizes a parking card or a vehicle bearing a special license plate, or person who allows his/her parking card or vehicle or specially licensed vehicle to be used to obtain or access handicapped parking privileges or has not transported a mobility impaired person in that vehicle prior to parking the vehicle, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or shall be imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days or both. On the second and subsequent offense, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-48. - Towing of illegally parked vehicles. 
    Any vehicles illegally parked in a zone designated for handicapped parking may be towed away from such zones and placed in storage. The cost of towing, storage and redemption of such towed vehicle shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle in addition to any fines designated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-49. - Law enforcement authority to enter onto private property. 
    All law enforcement officers of the city are invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic or parking and are authorized to enter upon private property within their respective territorial jurisdictions to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-50. - Rebuttable presumption of operation. 
    When an officer issues a citation for an alleged violation of the laws governing parking in a handicapped parking space, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person/owner in whose name the vehicle is registered was the operator of the vehicle when the alleged violation was committed. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-51. - Reciprocity of out-of-state license and placards. 
    Every mobility impaired person operating or otherwise being transported by a vehicle displaying the international symbol of the handicapped or the word "handicapped" on a valid special license plate, disabled veteran plate, or other handicapped parking permit prominently displayed shall be entitled to invoke all handicapped parking privileges provided in this article, without regard to the location of the issuing authority, or the residence or domicile of the person invoking the handicapped parking privileges. "Issuing authority," as defined in this section, shall mean only the Louisiana Office of Motor Vehicles of the Department of Public Safety and Corrections or comparable state level government issuing authorities in or outside the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-52. - Theft of or criminal damage to handicapped signs. 
    Any person who commits theft (as defined in Revised Statutes 14:67) or commits an act of criminal damage to property (as defined in Revised Statutes 14:56) of a sign designating handicapped parking as defined in this article, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-53. - Fire plug zones and fire lanes designated. 
(a)  Fire plug zones. It shall be unlawful to park in any zone so marked and designated as a fire plug zone preventing access by the fire department to fire plugs on any street, alleyway or parking area throughout the city. 
(b)  Fire lanes. There shall be no parking, standing or placing of any cars, trucks, trailers, apparatus, vehicles, portable buildings, or any item deemed as an obstruction by the fire department within fifty (50) feet of any exit, entrances, sprinkler system or fire department connections, and access to utility services servicing any shopping centers, malls, bowling alleys, theaters, hospitals, churches, apartment complexes, institutions, and any location in which there is ordinarily an assemblage of more than twenty (20) persons or any other area as deemed necessary for the protection of life and property from fire or explosions. 
(1)  Fire lanes shall be designated by the fire marshal or the local authority of the City of Crowley, and there shall be no parking, standing, or placing of any cars, trucks, trailers, apparatus, vehicles, portable buildings or any item deemed an obstruction by the fire department within such designated fire lanes. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the owners and operators of facilities subject to this section to pay for and to have erected signs indicating any such areas designated as fire lanes by the department and said signs shall contain the following wording: "No Parking Fire Lane-By Order of the Fire Department-Tow Away Area." Said signs shall be white with red lettering and shall be located at a maximum of fifty (50) feet apart with signs facing in both directions. Signs indicating the amount of the fines specified in this section may be required to be placed by the department if necessary for repeated violations. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the owners and operators of any facilities subject to this section to paint lines, outlining the area designated by the fire department as fire lanes. The painting of these lanes shall be yellow in color, and the width of the stripes shall be four (4) inches wide, and total length shall be that designated as the fire lanes by the fire marshal, or the local authority. Painted lanes shall be located five (5) feet from any curb or as specified by the fire department. 
(4)  Any owner or operator who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or both. Each day's violation of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner and operator to see that the fire lane striping of the areas designated are maintained according to fire department requirements for visibility, and that signs are replaced when necessary. 
(6)  Any car, truck, trailer, vehicle or portable building found parked, standing or placed in a designated fire lane, shall be towed away and impounded by any police officer, fire inspector, or authorized representative. The owner of said car, truck, trailer, vehicle or portable building shall be responsible for all cost of impounding and storing of car, truck, trailer, vehicle or portable building. Upon the payment of such cost, the owner shall be entitled to have said property released. 
(7)  Owners and occupants of the property on which fire lanes are located are hereby charged with the responsibility of notifying the fire marshal, his local authorities, or local law enforcement officials of the existence of any vehicles parked in those lanes; and in the event that they are unable to contact the fire marshal, his local authorities, or local law enforcement officials, the owner and occupant are hereby authorized to remove any vehicle parked in those fire lanes by any reasonable means necessary and to assess the cost of removal of said vehicle until all costs incident to the removal and storage of said vehicle have been paid by owner. 
(8)  Temporary loading zones may be designated, but in no event shall an unattended vehicle be allowed to stand in a fire lane or at the entrance or exit to a shopping center. 
(9)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the violations ticket was parked, standing, or placed in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the violation ticket was at the time of such parking, standing, or placement, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence, a rebuttable prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was, in fact, the person who parked, stood or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the alleged violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1169, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-54. - Towing of vehicles parked in fire plug zones and designated fire lanes; costs to be paid by owner. 
    Any vehicle(s) illegally parked in a fire plug zone or designated fire lane preventing access to fire plugs, exits, entrances, sprinkler systems, fire department connections, utility services may be towed away from such zones and placed in storage. The costs of redemption of such towed vehicle shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1169, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-55. - Authority for law enforcement to enforce ordinance on public and private property. 
    The Crowley City Police and other law enforcement personnel shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this ordinance by issuance citations to the operator and/or owner, or both, of the vehicle or other object allegedly violating same, by arresting the operator and/or owner and charging them with the violation thereof, and by ordering the vehicle or other object towed away and stored at any time. If a vehicle is towed away and stored, the owner and/or operator shall be responsible for the payment of costs thereof, as also provided hereinabove. The Crowley City Police and other law enforcement personnel shall henceforth have full authority and power to enter upon public or private property to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, and any person preventing or obstructing them in any manner from entering or going upon public or private property, whether they be the owners or lessees thereof, shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance, and subject to the same penalties stated above, if found guilty by the proper court. If any person removes or damages signs or otherwise defaces signs or paintings in designated fire lanes or no-parking in fire lanes, such person shall also be deemed guilty of violating this ordinance and subject to the same penalties stated hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 1169, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 14-56. - Penalty for violating parking restrictions. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and who shall fail to report within twenty-four (24) hours and pay the penalty prescribed in section 14-53 hereof, shall upon conviction of any part hereof be subject to pay a fine of five dollars ($5.00), the maximum provided by law, as well as court costs and attorney's fees and all other costs necessary to enforce the collection of the five-dollar fine, provided that said court costs and attorney's fees shall not exceed a maximum of fifty dollars ($50.00). This five-dollar penalty shall be collected by civil suit to enforce same if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1169, § 1, 8-8-95) 
Chapter 15 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Scope. 
(a)  All taxicabs and other motor vehicles transporting passengers for hire on the streets of the city, as herein defined, shall be regulated by the provisions of this article, and the owner, lessee, driver or operator of any such vehicle who violates the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided herein, this chapter shall apply to every motor vehicle which transports persons for hire over or upon the streets of the city, regardless of whether said vehicles operate from a stand or headquarters located within or without the limits of the city, and shall include every motor vehicle which comes into the limits of the city from any point and picks up passengers in said city to be transported for hire to a destination, either in or out of said corporate limits. 
(Code 1965, § 22-1) 
Sec. 15-2. - Vehicles exempted. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle operating under a certificate issued by the public service commission of the state or the interstate commerce commission of the U.S., or which is controlled and regulated by either of said commissions; nor to any motor vehicle passing through the city with passengers who have been received as such outside the city limits and are being transported to a destination outside the city limits, provided that such vehicle does not take on, pick up or receive any passengers while inside the corporate limits; nor to any motor vehicle stationed or located seven (7) miles or more beyond the city limits, which transports passengers for hire into the city from a point outside the corporate limits, but does not take on or pick up or receive passengers in the corporate limits. 
(Code 1965, § 22-2) 
Sec. 15-3. - Conditions precedent to operation. 
    No one shall drive a motor vehicle covered by this chapter in the streets of the city until a written permit to drive such vehicle has been obtained from the mayor or the mayor's duly authorized representative. Before such permit can be legally granted it shall be necessary that the required occupational license be paid, the required bond or substitute therefor as provided in section 15-6 hereof, be furnished and the other provisions of this chapter be complied with, and the operator or driver of said vehicle shall fill out and file with the mayor or designated representative, a questionnaire containing such items of information as are considered desirable, and on such form as may be prescribed by the mayor and approved by the governing body. 
(Code 1965, § 22-3) 
Sec. 15-4. - Stand or headquarters required. 
    The owner or lessee of every motor vehicle covered by this chapter must have a stand or headquarters located in the city from which such person operates, whether the transportation involved is wholly or only partly within the city limits. Such stands or headquarters shall not be established upon any street of the city. The owner or lessee of any such vehicle must file with the mayor a written notice giving the location of the regular stand or headquarters from which such person intends to operate. 
(Code 1965, § 22-4) 
Sec. 15-5. - Registration of vehicles; fee; tag; sticker. 
    Every person owning, operating or controlling any motor vehicle coming under the terms of this chapter shall register each of said vehicles with the mayor. Upon the registration of such vehicle, the owner or other interested party will be issued a certificate of registration and a windshield sticker or tag of such design as is approved by the governing authority, which tag shall be attached to the lower right corner of the windshield of the vehicle in such manner that the numbers shown thereon will be discernible both during the day and at night. For such registration and the cost of tag, there shall be a charge of one dollar ($1.00). The registration fee herein provided for shall be due annually and shall be payable on or before the tenth day of January of each year. Said certificate and windshield sticker or tag shall be returned to the mayor or representative when the authority granted thereby is terminated for any reason. 
(Code 1965, § 22-5) 
Sec. 15-6. - Bond or insurance. 
(a)  No person shall carry on the business of operating motor vehicles covered by this chapter unless and until such person shall have first filed with the city clerk an indemnity bond with surety for each such vehicle used and employed in such service, said surety to be a surety company authorized to do business in the state, said bond to have a minimum coverage of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for personal injury to one (1) person, a minimum coverage of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for personal injuries in any one (1) accident and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) property damage coverage for any one (1) accident, and to contain the stipulation that any persons sustaining injury or damage to person or property as a result of negligence shall have right of action directly against the surety company issuing said bond as fully and to the same extent as if the bond were made and executed directly in favor of the claimant. Said indemnity or surety bond shall be submitted to the city clerk, who, after making a brief record of such bond, as to the amount, number of bond, its expiration date, agency issuing it, and the name of the company, shall approve same if it meets legal requirements, and the information then recorded shall be available to the public. No such motor vehicle shall be allowed to operate under coverage of such bond unless said bond be kept in full force at all times. 
(b)  In lieu of the bond required and described, every person operating any such vehicle in the city shall have the right to procure public liability and property damage insurance in an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state, affording protection to anyone damaged by the negligent operation of such vehicle to the extent hereinabove provided. In the event such insurance should be furnished in lieu of bond, the policy for such insurance shall be delivered to the city clerk and shall be approved by the clerk, and a brief record made thereof as hereinabove described. 
(c)  Each such bond or policy shall provide that it may not be cancelled until ten (10) days written notice has been given the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 22-6; Ord. No. 1311, § 1 2-9-05) 
Sec. 15-7. - Permit not transferable; persons not eligible for permit. 
    A permit to drive any such vehicle, issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not be transferable. Such permit shall not be issued to any of the following: 
(1)  Any person operating a vehicle on which the required license tax has not been paid, or the required bond filed, or the required station or stand established, or where the owner or operator has otherwise failed to comply with the terms of this chapter; 
(2)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of a house of ill fame or who is or was directly or indirectly connected therewith or interested therein; or who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime opposed to decency and morality; 
(3)  Any person who is physically handicapped to such an extent that such person's operation of a motor vehicle is dangerous to the life and safety of the public, or who suffers from any defects of sight, hearing or other infirmity which interferes with the safe and proper operation of a motor vehicle on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 22-7) 
Sec. 15-8. - Suspension, revocation of permits. 
    The mayor may revoke or suspend any permit previously issued for any of the above causes. Such permit may also be revoked or suspended for failure to maintain the bond or other security provided herein, or for using the streets of the city for stations or stands from which to operate, or for failure to comply in any respect with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 22-8) 
Sec. 15-9. - Appeals. 
    The applicant for permit or the holder of a permit which has been suspended or revoked shall be entitled to appeal from the ruling of the mayor to the governing body as a whole, and shall be entitled to be heard and to be represented by counsel of applicant's own choosing at such hearing, provided that applicant gives written notice to the mayor within ten (10) days after said permit has been revoked or suspended of the intention to appeal therefrom. 
(Code 1965, § 22-9) 
Sec. 15-10. - Unauthorized drivers. 
    The owner or person carrying on the business of operating vehicles covered by this chapter shall not permit anyone to drive such vehicle who has not obtained a permit as herein provided. 
(Code 1965, § 22-10) 
Sec. 15-11. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or lessee of vehicles covered by this chapter to maintain records which will show at all times the name of the person operating the vehicle, the license number and other identification of the vehicle being operated, the hours during which said person operated said vehicle and such further information as may be required under rules established by the mayor for the purpose of providing immediate and ready identification at any time. This provision is considered necessary in the interest of public safety and so as to furnish to the police and other enforcement officers the identity of the driver of such vehicle in cases of accidents, crimes or other instances where such knowledge is necessary or desirable to the proper enforcement of the law. 
(Code 1965, § 22-11) 
Secs. 15-12-15-15. - Reserved. 
Chapter II. - AMBULANCE SERVICES 

Sec. 15-16. - Definitions. 
    Ambulance or private ambulance. Any privately owned vehicle equipped or used for transporting by the use of one (1) or more litters the wounded, injured, sick or dead, including emergency vehicles used for such purpose. The vehicle shall provide space for a driver, two (2) attendants whose qualifications are hereinafter set forth, and a minimum of two (2) litters for patients positioned so that at least one (1) patient can be given intensive life-support during transit. 
    Driver. Any person who drives an ambulance and possesses a current certificate of qualification in multimedia or advance first aid issued by the American Red Cross and, further, that they apply for and be enrolled in a training course designated to qualify them as an emergency medical technician-ambulance, within six (6) months from the date of their employment as a driver, and has successfully completed said course within one (1) year from the date of their employment. 
    Emergency medical technician-Ambulance. Any person who has successfully completed an eighty one (81) hour basic emergency medical technician training course approved by the department of transportation and development and the department of health and human resources, and is currently certified by the State of Louisiana and the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians. 
    Emergency medical technician-Intermediate. Any person who has successfully completed an emergency medical technician intermediate training course approved by the department of transportation and development, the department of health and human resources, and the State of Louisiana, and is currently certified by the Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners and the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians. 
    Emergency patient. An individual who is ill, injured or otherwise incapacitated and is at risk of needing medical care during transportation to or from a health care facility. 
    Health officer or designated agency. The person or agency who is duly appointed or recognized by the City of Crowley to implement the standards provided herein as to the required equipment in ambulances. 
    Owner or operator. Any person who owns or controls an ambulance for the purpose of providing both emergency and nonemergency medical care and transportation. 
    Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Registered emergency medical technician-Paramedic. Any person who has successfully completed an emergency medical technician paramedic training course approved by the department of transportation and development, the department of health and human resources, and the State of Louisiana, and is currently certified by the Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners and the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-17. - Permit required by owners or operators. 
(a)  No owner or operator of an ambulance shall permit it to be used or operated upon the streets of the City of Crowley without first obtaining a permit therefor from the clerk of the City of Crowley. 
(b)  The City of Crowley is hereby given authority to promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-18. - Application for permits. 
    Applications for permits shall be made to the clerk of the City of Crowley upon forms prescribed by it and shall include: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner or operator of the ambulance. 
(b)  A description of the ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, Louisiana license number for the current year, motor and chassis numbers, and a statement regarding the length of time the vehicle has been in use. 
(c)  The location and description of the place or places from which it is intended to operate. 
(d)  Such other information as the City of Crowley shall find reasonable necessary to make a fair determination of whether the provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-19. - Qualifications for permit. 
    In determining whether a permit shall be issued, the City of Crowley shall give weight and due regard among other things to: 
(a)  The probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant, to include among other things, proof of financial responsibility and the establishment and maintenance of a bona fide office within the corporate limits from which the service is offered; and the ability of the applicant to provide both twenty-four hour emergency and nonemergency response. 
(b)  The experience that the applicant has had in rendering services in the parish, the past experience of the applicant in prompt adjustment of claims and in payment of judgments, if any, arising out of the operation of such vehicles. 
(c)  The financial ability of the applicant to respond in damages. 
(d)  That insurance as required by this article has been secured. 
(e)  The character and condition of the vehicle to be used as determined after inspection as required by this article and the ability of the applicant to have available for use and operation in the parish at least three (3) ambulances to be stationed in Acadia Parish, all of which is capable of providing advance life support and to provide a backup system consisting of additional ambulances; and the said ambulances shall meet all of the requirements of the federal specifications for ambulances pursuant to the U.S. Department of Transportation current KKK-A-1822A and appropriate amendments. 
(f)  That applicant has established a dispatch center with both UHF and VHF capabilities able to handle dispatching and coordinating of the aforementioned units with emergency communication capabilities to and from the aforementioned units and the said owner or operator shall possess current licenses necessary for UHF frequencies established by the Federal Communications Commission and commonly referred to as Med 1-10 and with a VHF Hospital Emergency Administrative Radio Frequency of 155.340 megahertz for emergency medical communications between the vehicles and hospitals. 
(g)  That all requirements of this article and all other applicable laws and ordinances have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-20. - Insurance required. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued hereunder, the applicant must file with the clerk of the City of Crowley, policies of public liability insurance issued by an insurance company qualified to do business in the State of Louisiana which shall contain the following conditions and stipulations and shall be approved as to form by the district attorney: 
(1)  The term of such insurance policies shall be for a period of not less than one (1) year. 
(2)  The insurance polices shall provide public liability insurance with bodily injury limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence (person), medical malpractice liability insurance with limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence (person) and property damage coverage with limits of five hundred thousand dollars($500,000.00). Provider must also show evidence of umbrella coverage of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). 
(3)  Such policies shall by their terms provide that it may not be canceled except after ten (10) days written notice thereof to the Acadia Parish Police Jury. 
(b)  Any owner or operator who fails to secure another policy of liability insurance prior to cancellation of an existing one shall automatically and without notice of hearing suffer suspension of his permit until such time as such insurance policy has been filed with the City of Crowley. 
(c)  Any person who operates an ambulance without having such liability insurance in force shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-21. - Inspection of ambulances. 
(a)  Before any permit shall be issued hereunder, all of the ambulances listed in the application shall provide verification that it has been inspected by an official Louisiana Motor Vehicle Inspection Station and has a current inspection sticker and shall be certified to be in proper mechanical condition. Each ambulance shall also be inspected by the health officer or the designated agency and shall be certified to be equipped in compliance with standards for ambulance equipment. 
(b)  Said inspections shall be conducted annually as required by state law. 
(c)  Any person who operates an ambulance without having obtained the mechanical inspection certificate required shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  The owner and/or operator of any ambulance service whose ambulance has a mechanical defect shall be given fifteen (15) days in which to have it repaired. After the expiration of said days, the name, registration and license number of each ambulance remaining uncertified shall be considered unsuitable for operation within the City of Crowley until the following annual inspection date. 
(e)  Each owner or operator shall pay to the City of Crowley a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) annually for each vehicle permitted; said fee to be due on the date of the initial inspection for any given year. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-22. - Driver's license required. 
(a)  No person shall drive an ambulance upon the roads of the city, and no person who owns or controls an ambulance shall permit it to be so driven unless the driver shall have then in force a driver's license issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A list of certified drivers shall be submitted to the secretary of the Acadia Parish Police Jury annually. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-23. - Qualifications for driver's license under the provisions of this article. 
(a)  Person must be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Person must have a current motor vehicle chauffeur's license issued by the State of Louisiana. 
(c)  Person must have a current certificate of qualification in multimedia or advance first aid issued by the American Red Cross and, further, that they apply for and be enrolled in a training course designated to qualify them in an emergency medical technician-ambulance, within six (6) months from the date of their employment as a driver, and has successfully completed said course within one (1) year from the date of their employment. 
(d)  Never been convicted anywhere under the laws of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, or other applicable laws of parishes and cities of the offense of murder, aggravated battery, aggravated rape, simple rape, aggravated burglary, simply burglary, aggravated kidnapping, simple kidnapping, armed robbery, simple robbery, pandering, prostitution, soliciting for prostitutes, illegal possible or sale or use of narcotics, contributing to the delinquency of a juvenile, indecent behavior with a juvenile, and has not been convicted two (2) or more times of any traffic offense during the year preceding the filing of the application. 
(e)  Never been convicted of any other felony, or of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude against the criminal laws of this state or of any other state, or of the United States within five (5) years, and has not served any part of a sentence therefor within five (5) years, before the date of the filing of said application, and they are not presently charged therewith, or with any of the felonies, offenses of misdemeanors set forth in paragraph (d) of this section, or with violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor, does not use any narcotic drugs, and is not suffering from any disease or infirmity which might make them an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(g)  [Be] knowledgeable of traffic laws of the State of Louisiana, familiar with the geography of the city, and is physically able to operate motor vehicles. 
(h)  The owner or operator shall provide a copy of the driver's traffic and police record which shall be attached to the registration and kept on file in the office of the City of Crowley. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-24. - Certification of physician. 
    Each certified driver shall be required to obtain a certificate from a reputable physician certifying that he has examined the applicant within ninety (90) days and in his opinion the applicant is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors, does not use any narcotic drugs, and is not suffering from any disease or infirmity which might make them an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-25. - Denial, suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Every owner or operator and driver located under this article shall comply with all parish, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the suspension or revocation of the permit or license. 
(b)  The City of Crowley may deny any applicant's permit or license whenever in the exercise of its reasonable and sound discretion, and after notice and affording the applicant a hearing thereon, it shall determine that said applicant is not a fit and proper person to have such permit or license. The applicant may appeal within ten (10) days from such denial to the City of Crowley for a hearing on said denial for the City of Crowley to determine if such denial is justified. 
(c)  The City of Crowley is hereby given authority to suspend any permit or license issued under this article for failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of this article, such suspension to last for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. The City of Crowley is also given authority to revoke any permit or license for failure to comply with the provisions of this article; however, the permit or license may not be revoked unless the holder has received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in their behalf. 
(d)  Whenever a person who shall have been issued a permit or license under this article shall be charged in any court with a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or with any felony, or with violation of this article, the City of Crowley is hereby given authority to suspend the permit or license pending final disposition of the charges against them, and to revoke same upon conviction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-26. - Unlicensed drivers. 
    If any person not licensed under this article is found driving any ambulance, the City of Crowley may immediately take the necessary action to revoke the permit held by the owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-27. - Emergency medical technicians (ambulance). 
(a)  No ambulance shall transport an emergency patient in the City of Crowley unless it is an advanced life support ambulance capable of providing advance life support services and whose crew shall consist of at least one (1) nationally registered paramedic and one (1) driver. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted to serve as an emergency medical technician who does not hold a current certificate of registration from the Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners and the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians or a registered nurse with advance cardiac life support certifications (ACLS). 
(c)  Any new employee who does not possess the above noted certificates of qualification hereby required may be temporarily employed, but must obtain said certificates within ninety (90) days after employment. Such employee shall not be permitted to serve upon any ambulance except in company with an emergency medical technician-ambulance who is fully qualified under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 15-28. - Standards for ambulance equipment. 
(a)  Required equipment in each ambulance shall include, at all times when the ambulance is in use as such, equipment adequate in the judgment of the health officer or designated agency, for dressing wounds, splinting fractures, controlling hemorrhages, and providing oxygen. 
(b)  The health officer or designated agency is authorized to promulgate regulations to implement the standards provided herein as to required equipment in ambulances. In determining the adequacy of equipment, the health officer or designated agency shall take into consideration the current list of minimal equipment for ambulances adopted by the American College of Surgeons or its duly authorized Committee of Trauma. Each licensee of an ambulance shall comply with such reasonable regulations hereunder as may be promulgated by the health officer or designated agency and shall maintain in each such ambulance, at all times when it is in the use as such, all such equipment as may be prescribed by the health officer or designated agency hereunder. 
(c)  In addition to any equipment required by the health officer or designated agency, no ambulance shall be operated unless it has the following equipment on board. 
(1)  All such required equipment as listed in the U.S. Department of Transportation current KKK-A-1822A and appropriate amendments. 
(2)  All such required equipment as listed in the current American College of Surgeons bulletin. 
(3)  Extrication equipment shall normally be carried on the ambulance unless a rescue vehicle appropriately equipped and staffed routinely responds to an emergency requiring such equipment. 
(4)  Special emergency radio. In addition to standard radio communication equipment for communication between vehicle and base station, all ambulances shall be equipped with UHF frequencies established by the Federal Communications Commission and commonly referred to as Med 1-10 and a high-bank VHF radio for use on the megahertz (H.E.A.R. Network), for emergency medical communication between the vehicles and hospitals. 
(5)  Oxygen inhalation equipment. Two (2) oxygen supplies, one (1) which is portable and the other installed in the ambulance. 
(6)  Suction equipment for the aspiration of secretion. One (1) suction unit which is portable and one (1) suction unit installed in the ambulance. 
(7)  Airways. Esophageal obturator airway, and oral pharyngeal airway. 
(8)  Wound dressings. Supplies shall be carried for the dressing of open wounds, and for padding and application of splints. 
(9)  Splints for upper and lower extremities. 
(10)  Emergency childbirth kit. 
(11)  Additional medical items required are military antishock trousers (MAST), snake bite kit, disaster bags, intravenous fluids necessary to replace blood loss or as a lifeline for medications. 
(12)  Radio. Two-way radio is mandatory for direct voice dispatching, routing, notification of emergency departments and direction and assistance from physicians, and for cross communication of liaison with fire, police and civil defense authorities and other ambulance units; regardless of the location of the basic radio equipment, it must be adaptable for use by both the driver and the medical technician in the patient area with volume control in the interests of the patient; portable radios shall be provided for communication between personnel working at a distance from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Chapter 16 - STORMWATER CODE 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater Code of the City of Crowley, Louisiana" and may be cited and referred to herein by section and may be generally referred to by the name "Stormwater Code." 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and objectives of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the City of Crowley. 
(2)  To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial, residential and construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural waters affected by the City of Crowley. 
(3)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other contaminants into the storm sewers and natural waters of the City of Crowley. 
(4)  To encourage the recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products. 
(5)  To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the City of Crowley. 
(6)  To enable the City of Crowley to comply with federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-3. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the city inspector shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city inspector may be delegated to other city personnel by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-4-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 16-31. - Abbreviations. 
    BMP-Best management practices 
    BTEX-Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene 
    CFR-Code of Federal Regulations 
    COC-City of Crowley 
    EPA-U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
    HHW-Household hazardous waste 
    mg/l-Milligram per liter 
    MS4-Municipal separate storm sewer system 
    NOI-Notice of intent 
    NOT-Notice of termination 
    NPDES-National Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
    ppb-Parts per billion 
    PST-Petroleum storage tank 
    RST-Registered storage tank 
    RPE-Registered professional engineer 
    RQ-Reportable quantity 
    SWPPP-Stormwater pollution prevention plan 
    TPH-Total petroleum hydrocarbon 
    USC-United States Code 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-32. - Definitions. 
    Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from cultivated crops, pastures, and other nonpoint source of agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR section 122.3 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR section 122.24. 
    Back washing. The rinsing and/or cleaning of cartridge or sand filters. 
    Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMP's also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff. 
    Cellar dirt. Construction site waste materials such as natural rock and soil overburden. 
    City . City of Crowley, Louisiana. 
    City engineer. The person appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen to the position of city engineer or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    City inspector. The person appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen to the position of city inspector or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Commencement of construction. The disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating activities or other construction activities. 
    Commercial . Pertaining to any business, trade, industry or other activity engaged in for profit. 
    Compliance officer. The compliance officer is city inspector or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Contaminated . Pertaining to containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Contamination . Pertaining to the presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4, waters of the state or waters of the United States of any substance which may be deleterious to the public health and/or quality of the water. 
    Cosmetic cleaning. Pertaining to cleaning done for cosmetic purposes. It does not include industrial cleaning, cleaning associated with manufacturing activities, hazardous or toxic waste cleaning or any cleaning otherwise regulated under federal, state or local laws. 
    Director of public works. The person appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen to the position of director of public works or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Director of wastewater. The person appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen to the position of director of wastewater or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Discharge . Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States. 
    Discharger . Any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including but without limitation any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    Domestic sewage. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial sites and institutions that is free from industrial waste. 
    Environmental protection agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency. 
    Extremely hazardous substance. Any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR Part 355, emergency planning and notification. 
    Facility . Any building, structure, installation, process or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
    Final stabilization. Stabilization of [at] least seventy (70) percent of the site as defined in part IX of the general permit. 
    Fire code. The "Fire Prevention and Protection Code" Chapter 8 of the City Code. 
    Fire protection water. Any water and any substance or materials contained therein used by any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire. 
    Garbage . Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Grading permit. Permit to commence grading or other land disturbance activity prior to obtaining a building permit. 
    Harmful quantity. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state. 
    Hazardous household waste (HHW). Any material generated in a household by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR Part 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 302. 
    Hazardous substance. Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302. 
    Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
    Industrial waste. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, production, trade or business. 
    Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning. Any power washing, steam cleaning and other mobile cosmetic cleaning operation, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes. 
    Motor vehicle fuel. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle. 
    Municipal landfill or landfill. An area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well or a pile. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains owned and operated by the city and designated or used for collecting or conveying stormwater and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional or recreational activities and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and other solid waste other than industrial waste. 
    NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or industrial general permit. The industrial general permit issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in Volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41304 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto. 
    NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites or construction general permit. The construction general permit issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in Volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto. 
    NPDES permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis. 
    Nonpoint source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a "point source." 
    Notice of intent (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit. 
    Notice of termination (NOT). The notice of termination that is required by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit. 
    Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to synthetic, animal, vegetable, petroleum, fuel oil, and pressure, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with waste. 
    Operator . The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the following two criteria: (a) have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and (b) have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions. 
    Owner . The person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Person . Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local entities. 
    Petroleum product. A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil and #1 and #2 diesel. 
    Petroleum storage tank (PST). Any one or combination of above ground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes. 
    Point source. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
    Pollutant . Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated pasture land or farm land. 
    Pollution . The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological quality of or the contamination of any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation or property or to the public health, safety or welfare or impairs the usefulness of public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Registered landscape architect (RLA). A person who has been duly licensed and registered to practice landscape architecture. 
    Registered professional engineer (RPE). A person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board of registration for professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Louisiana. 
    Release . Any spill, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States. 
    Reportable quantity (RQ). For any "hazardous substance," the quantity established and listed in Table 302; for any "extremely hazardous substances," the quantity established in 40 CFR Part 302; for any "extremely hazardous substance," the quantity established in 40 CFR Part 355 and listed in Appendix A thereto. 
    Rubbish . Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of (a) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials; and (b) noncombustible waste materials including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewer or sewer . The system of pipes, conduits and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Septic tank waste. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
    Service station. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
    Sewage or sanitary sewage. The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
    Site . The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from community and institutional activities. 
    State . State of Louisiana. 
    Stormwater . Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity. The discharge from any conveyance(s) which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14) and which is not excluded from EPA's definition of the same term. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan required by either the construction general permit or the industrial general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the facility. 
    Uncontaminated . Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Used oil (or used motor oil). Any oil that has been refined from crude oil, animal or vegetable matter or a synthetic oil that as a result of use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
    Water in the state (or water). Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural of artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
    Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed acceptable and achievable by the state. 
    Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow tide; all interstate waters including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirement of the federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetland . An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
    Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, tree limbs, branches and brush that result from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-33-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16-51. - General provisions. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by and in full compliance with an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4); 
(2)  A discharge or flow resulting from the fire fighting by the fire department; 
(3)  A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials; 
(4)  Agricultural water runoff; 
(5)  A discharge or flow from water line flushing but not including a discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless it contains no harmful quantities of chlorine or any other chemical used in the line disinfection; 
(6)  A discharge or flow from lawn watering, landscape irrigation or other irrigation water; 
(7)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring; 
(8)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater; 
(9)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 CFR 35.2005(2) to the MS4); 
(10)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, or footing drain; 
(11)  A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is not mixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emission filter, or any other source of pollutant; 
(12)  A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container; 
(13)  A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing; 
(14)  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(15)  A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(16)  Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant. 
(c)  No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if the discharge or flow in question has been determined by the compliance officer to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger and the discharge has occurred more than ten (10) days beyond such notice. The correctness of the compliance officer's determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-52. - Specific prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in section 16-51. 
(b)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(c)  No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
(1)  Any used or unused cooking oil, motor oil, hydraulic oil, transmission oil, brake fluid, antifreeze or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
(2)  Any industrial waste; 
(3)  Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste; 
(4)  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(5)  Any garbage, rubbish or yard waste; 
(6)  Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from cleaning or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning or maintenance of any business, commercial, industrial or public service vehicle, including trucks, buses, tractors, trailers, farm, construction, industrial or heavy equipment by a business, commercial, industrial or public entity; 
(7)  Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(8)  Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug or carpet cleaning; 
(9)  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emission scrubber, emission filter or the blowdown from a boiler; 
(10)  Any runoff or wash down from any animal pen, kennel or fowl or livestock containment areas; 
(11)  Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(12)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or material; 
(13)  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
(14)  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wreckage; 
(15)  Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog the MS4; 
(16)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contamination by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined or treated wastewater from the remediation of such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: 
a.  Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; 
b.  No discharge containing harmful quantity of any pollutant; 
c.  No discharge containing more than fifty (50) parts per billion of benzene, five hundred (500) parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX); or fifteen (15) mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH). 
(17)  The following nonstormwater sources may be discharged from the MS4 provided that they have not been determined by the city to be substantial sources of pollutants to the MS4. The operator must utilize best management practices to limit discharge of the following nonstormwater sources: 
a.  Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
b.  Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant or any other cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
c.  Any ready mixed concrete, concrete, mortar, ceramic or asphalt base material or hydro mulch material and/or any wastewater from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying such material. 
(d)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial to the MS4 or allow such a connection to continue. 
(f)  No person shall cause or allow any pavement wash water from a retail, commercial, manufacturing or industrial facility to be discharged into a MS4 unless such wastewater has passed through a properly functioning and maintained grease, oil and sand interceptor before discharging into the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-53. - New and used oil regulation. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Discharge new or used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, surface water, groundwater or water course; 
(2)  Knowingly mix or comingle new or used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of new or used oil on land or in a landfill; 
(3)  Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-54. - Swimming pool regulation. 
(a)  Requirements for two (2) types of discharges: 
(1)  Filter back washing: 
a.  Backwash water may be disposed of and filters may be rinsed on the pool/spa owner's property. This shall be done in an area that will fully absorb the water and contain all runoff. 
b.  Water from back washing in a pool or spa containing chlorine <1 mg/l, total suspended solids <mg/l, pH in the range of 7 to 8, no harmful quantities of muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the water, free of color, algae, and other contaminants may be discharged off the owner's property to the MS4 into subsurface drainage. 
(2)  The following restrictions apply to backwash water discharges discharge activities: 
a.  Discharges may not be drained onto a neighbor's property or across a sidewalk; 
b.  Discharge water may not cause erosion or transport sediment; 
c.  Discharges may not be drained into unpaved alleys; 
d.  Discharges may not cause an accumulation of water along the curb line gutter of a paved street; 
e.  Backwash water discharge unable to meet the restrictions outlined above must be discharged to the sanitary sewer system with approval from the director of wastewater and the city inspector. 
(b)  Swimming pool/spa draining: 
(1)  Water from draining a pool or spa containing chlorine <1 mg/l, total suspended solids <45 mg/l, pH in the range of 7 to 8, no harmful quantities of muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the water, free of color, algae and other contaminants may be discharged off the owner's property to the MS4 into sub surface drainage. 
(2)  The following restrictions apply to swimming pool and spa discharge activities: 
a.  Discharges may not be drained onto a neighbor's property or across a sidewalk; 
b.  Discharge water may not cause erosion or transport sediment; 
c.  Discharges may not be drained into unpaved alleys; 
d.  Discharges may not cause an accumulation of water along the curb line gutter of a paved street; 
e.  Swimming pools or spas water discharge unable to meet the restrictions outlined above must be discharged to the sanitary sewer system in the event no subsurface drainage is available. To discharge to the sanitary sewer prior approval from the director of wastewater and the city inspector must be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-55. - Discharge from solid and liquid waste containers/receptacles (dumpster areas). 
    For all new construction of commercial facilities requiring suitable cleaning and supplies such as high pressure pumps, hot water, steam and detergents necessary for the effective cleaning of equipment and receptacles of solid waste collection must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Liquid waste generated by cleaning operations cannot be discharged into the MS4 without a valid NPDES permit from the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ). 
(2)  Liquid waste generated by cleaning operations not meeting criteria in subsection (1) above, must be discharged to the sanitary sewer. Stormwater runoff must be prevented from entering the sanitary sewer by means approved by the compliance officer or designated representative of the City of Crowley. 
(3)  Discharge entering the sanitary sewer must meet local discharge limits found in the city wastewater collection ordinance. Discharges unable to meet these discharge limits must be pretreated on site to reduce pollutant concentration prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer and the owner or operator must comply with all regulations, permitting requirements, reporting, fees, assessments and surcharges applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-56-16-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 16-71. - General requirements. 
    The operator shall certify all state requirements have been met by signing a certification statement as part of the grading application and/or building permit application. Refer to current specific NPDES permit for site applicability and NOI requirements. 
(1)  All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce the discharge to the MS4 and to waters of the United States of sediment, silt, earth, soil and other material associated with the clearing, grading, excavation and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. Such best management practices may include but not be limited to the follow measures: 
a.  Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include but are not limited to: temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation and other appropriate measures; 
b.  Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible; 
c.  Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the site; 
d.  Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, sand, concrete, and mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States; 
e.  Identify and implement best management practices and measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction and to assure prompt cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal and local requirements; 
f.  Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including but not limited to covering waste materials and minimizing ground contract with hazardous chemicals, pollutants, trash and debris; 
g.  Identify and immediately implement best management practices for timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures in good and effective operating condition; 
h.  Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural measures may include, but not be limited to the following: Stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions; other velocity dissipation devices, infiltration of runoff on site; and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not responsible for maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated. 
(2)  Personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site (meeting criteria of current NPDES permit) that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site in accordance with the current NPDES permit or SWPP plan. All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspections, best management practices shall be revised as appropriate and as soon as is practical. 
(3)  The city may require any plans and specification that are prepared for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe the best management practices required by subsection (1)(a) above that will be implemented at the construction site. The city may deny approval of any building permit, site development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy on the grounds that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon the site inspection by the compliance officer are determined not to effectively control and/or reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil and other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation and other construction activities to the maximum extent practical. 
(4)  Any owner of a site of construction activity whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the requirements in this section. 
(5)  Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing best management practices control measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure if such failure causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(6)  Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (2), the site description and/or the pollution prevention measures shall be revised as appropriate but in no case later than one calendar day following the inspection. Such modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within one calendar day following the inspection. 
(7)  Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner or the duly authorized representative thereof, shall submit written certification to the city that the site has been finally stabilized. The city may withhold an occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the site until certification of final stabilization has been filed and the city has determined following any appropriate inspection that final stabilization has in fact occurred and that any and all required permanent structural controls have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-72. - Site applicability. 
    Construction activity, including clearing, grading and excavation activities, which result in the disturbance of one or more acres of total land area shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. This also applies to building construction (including residential) on lots less than one acre. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-73-16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GRADING PERMIT 

Sec. 16-91. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to regulate grading property within the incorporated area of the City of Crowley to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare; to avoid pollution of watercourses with nutrients, sediments or other earthen materials generated on or caused by surface runoff on or across the permit area; and to ensure that the intended user of a graded site is consistent with applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-92. - Exemptions. 
    The following described activities shall not require a grading permit in order to perform clearing, excavation or related earthwork: 
(1)  If building permit is obtained, no grading permit is required. 
(2)  Utility or public works improvements do not require a grading permit. 
(3)  Excavation in connection with a building, swimming pool, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. 
(4)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
(5)  Septic repair and/or alteration. 
(6)  Cemetery graves. 
(7)  Temporary stockpiling or storing of materials provided that such operations do not affect adjacent properties and all drainage and erosion control requirements. 
(8)  Accepted agricultural practices such as plowing, cultivation, construction of agricultural structures, nursery operations, tree cutting, logging operations leaving the stump and root mat intact, and cultivated sod operation. 
(9)  Minor landscaping and sprinkler installation. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-93. - Permitting procedures. 
    Unless otherwise stated no person(s) shall perform any clearing, excavation or earthwork within the City of Crowley without first having obtained a grading permit or building permit from the planning department. 
    The grading permit is applicable but is not limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Excavating, cutting, filling, grading, draining or paving of lots, parcels or other areas. 
(2)  Altering, rerouting, deepening, widening obstructing or changing in any way an existing drainage system or feature. 
(3)  Development for: residential, commercial, institutions, industrial, utility or other activities. 
(4)  Commencing any other development or excavation which may: significantly increase or decrease the rate and/or quantity of surface water runoff; degrade the quality of water; adversely affect any sinkhole, water course or water body. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-94. - Responsibility not waived. 
    The grading permit exceptions listed in section 16-92 do not relieve the owner, developer, contractor or other legal representative of the responsibility of installing and properly maintaining the proper erosion/sedimentation control measures or other liability resulting from such activities. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-95. - Site plan and/or conceptual grading plan requirements. 
(a)  An approved site sketch is required to obtain a grading permit. The site sketch shall contain in addition to such basic information as owner name and address, date, tax map and parcel number the following: 
(1)  The actual shape, location and dimension of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)  The shape, size and location of all existing and proposed buildings or other structures; 
(3)  The location and approximate dimension of all points of access to a public street or road; 
(4)  The location of all driveways and entrances; 
(5)  Locations of areas subject to flooding, if applicable. 
(b)  An approved site plan is required to obtain a grading permit. The site plan shall contain, as a minimum, the following items or information, as applicable. 
(1)  Total land area; 
(2)  Existing and proposed topography of existing land and impervious areas shown; 
(3)  Elevations of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, utilities, sanitary and stormwater sewers and exiting buildings and structures; 
(4)  All existing and proposed impervious area; 
(5)  Natural or artificial watercourses; 
(6)  Limits of floodplains, if applicable; 
(7)  All existing and proposed slopes, terraces or retaining walls; 
(8)  All existing and proposed stormwater drainage structures or features; 
(9)  All stormwater structures/features immediately upstream and downstream of the site; 
(10)  Erosion and siltation control plans; 
(11)  Drainage calculations when required; 
(12)  Drainage easement when required. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-96. - Plan submittal, review and approval process for grading permits. 
    If site, drainage, grading and erosion plans for the purpose of obtaining a grading permit are required, they shall be submitted to the planning department. They are to be submitted no less than ten (10) days prior to the intended date to begin site alterations. The issuance of all other permits is based upon approval of submitted plans. 
    The grading permit is valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Extensions will be considered based on circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-97. - Grading permit fees. 
    The fee for the grading permit is intended to assist the City of Crowley in recovering some of the expenses associated with the permitting process. These costs consist primarily of administration, inspection and enforcement activities and shall be approved and set by the city council. 
    The fee schedule for grading permits is as follows: 
Grading/excavation/earthworks projects: 
Areas less than or equal to one acre: $50.00. 
Areas greater than one acre, for each additional acre or fraction thereof: $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-98. - Erosion and sedimentation control. 
    Developers and/or properly owners shall use appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures to ensure that erosion or adverse conditions caused by erosion or sedimentation, is eliminated or held to an acceptable minimum and does not cross to an adjourning property, right-of-way or stream. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-99-16-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 16-121. - Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any person discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter and with state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirements. Dischargers shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the city, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports and other documents related to compliance with this chapter and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
(1)  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification city personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing his/her responsibilities. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operation. 
(3)  The city may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
(4)  The city may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy and certified prior to installation and calibrated and recertified annually. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-122-16-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-141. - Notice of noncompliance. 
    The director of planning and development or his designee shall deliver to the owner, contractor and/or representative of any premises or to any person responsible for an illicit connection, prohibited discharge, maintenance of a threatened discharge, failure to implement BMPs in accordance with this chapter or any other violation of this chapter a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with section 16-143. 
    The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision of this chapter which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions, including the recovery of any costs incurred by the city. 
    The notice of noncompliance shall identify a compliance date that must be met. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-142. - Cease and desist orders. 
    The director of planning and development may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with section 16-143. A cease and desist order may direct the owner, contractor and/or representative responsible of this chapter, to take any of the following action: 
(1)  Immediately discontinue any prohibited discharge to the city's stormwater conveyance system; 
(2)  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter; 
(3)  Clean up the area affected by the violation; 
(4)  The director of planning and development may direct by a cease and desist order that any person immediately cease any activity which may lead to a violation of receiving water limitations; 
(5)  The director of planning and development may terminate the building permit for the site. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-143. - Delivery of notice. 
    Any notice of noncompliance, cease and desist order or other enforcement order pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in section 16-145. 
(2)  The notice shall state that the recipient or the property owner, or both, may be liable for all enforcement costs incurred by the city in correcting the violation. 
(3)  Delivery shall be deemed complete upon either personal delivery to the recipient or deposit in the U.S. mail, certified mail return receipt requested, proper postage prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-144. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine imposed by the director of planning and development according to the following schedule: 
First offense: $250.00 per day per offense. 
Second offense: $500.00 per day per offense. 
Third offense and thereafter: $1,000.00 per day per offense. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 16-145. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Initiating an appeal. An appeal may be initiated by filing a petition with the director of planning and development once information attempts to resolve the customer's compliant have failed. The following information shall be contained in the petition: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the interested party filing the appeal and the name of the owner and/or customer if the appeal is being filed by an interested party other than the owner and/or customer. 
(2)  The property address and a facility contact person if different from the owner. 
(3)  The decision, enforcement action or other action being appealed and the decision of the action. 
(4)  An indication of the appellant's status as an interested party. 
(5)  A statement giving specific reason why the appellant believes the decision of the director of planning and development is incorrect or does not comply with the rules and regulations found in this chapter. 
(6)  New or different documents, drawings, plans or other material appellant believes supports the case. 
(b)  Hearing . The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requested the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
(2)  Take the evidence. 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearings, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
    At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
    After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the violation, following a specified time period, that corrective action be completed, and/or penalties be paid. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
    A party or person aggrieved by the city council decision shall the right of judicial review of such determination in Fifteenth Judicial Court. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-146-16-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITIZEN PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 16-171. - Citizen reports of violations. 
(a)  All citizens are encouraged to report to the city any spills, releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone discharging pollutants into the MS4 or waters of the United States and any other violation of this chapter of which they become aware. 
(b)  Calls received by the first call system will be referred to the compliance officer. All citizen reports received by telephone, in writing and in person will be kept on file for a period of three (3) years. When necessary, complaints will be referred to the department of environmental quality, department of health and hospital or other appropriate local, state or federal agency. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 16-172-16-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16-191. - Charges and fees. 
    Customers shall be charged a fee of two dollars and thirty cents ($2.30) each month for reimbursement of the costs of constructing, operating and maintaining the city's MS4 and for reimbursement of costs of implementing a "stormwater management program" as required by EPA and the state, and those other cost of implementing this chapter, which costs may include although are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by discharges. 
(2)  Fees for spills and release reports and responding to spills and releases of oil, hazardous and extremely hazardous substances and other pollutants. 
(3)  Fees for the discharges of stormwater into the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(4)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(5)  The two dollar and thirty cent ($2.30) fee for customers shall be assessed to each commercial or residential property individually for each meter. The director of finance may apply the fee to structures individually if multiple structures use one meter. The fee is limited to one assessment per structure. 
(Ord. No. 1460, § 1, 11-12-13) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A contains the zoning ordinance, Ord. No. 1059, enacted Feb. 10, 1981, as amended. Amendatory ordinances are cited in parentheses following the section or subsection amended; lack of a history note indicates the section is derived unamended from Ord. No. 1059. Section numbers and captions have been inserted in brackets where missing. 
Cross reference- Municipal planning commission, § 2-11 et seq.; proximity of alcoholic beverage establishments to schools, churches, playgrounds, libraries, § 3-2; buildings, Ch, 6; flood hazard prevention, § 51-110 et seq.; use of barbed wire in certain zones, § 7-50. 

ARTICLE I. - STATEMENT OF PURPOSES 

Sec. 1.1. - Statement of authority and intent. 
    In accordance with the provisions of sections 4721 through 4729, Title 33, Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, it is the intent of this ordinance, with the accompanying map, to provide for the harmonious development of the City of Crowley in accordance with the comprehensive plan heretofore made and adopted by the Crowley Planning Commission, to lessen congestion in the public streets, secure safety from fire, provide adequate light and air, avoid undue concentration of population, promote health and the general welfare and conserve the value of buildings by encouraging the most appropriate use of the land for particular purposes, all to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity. 
Sec. 1.2. - Area of jurisdiction. 
    This ordinance shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley as such corporate limits may exist in the future. 
Sec. 1.3. - Annexed territory. 
    Territory hereafter annexed to the City of Crowley shall be in the R-1 district until and unless changed in accordance with the amendment procedure set forth herein. 
Sec. 1.4. - Application of district regulations. 
(1.401) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. Within each district, the regulations set by this ordinance shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. 
(1.402) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(1)  To exceed the height; 
(2)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(3)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
(4)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; 
nor in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(1.403) No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of any other yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
(1.404) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in size of area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
(1.405) Regulations of land under water: All lands within the city which are under water and are not shown as included with any district shall be subject to all the regulations of the district adjacent to the water area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line. 
(1.406) Location of streets and public ways: Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the governing body of the city, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall automatically extend to the center of same, and all area included therein shall then become subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Certain words and terms are defined as follows. 
(2.101) The term "commission" means the planning commission of Crowley, Louisiana, which shall act as a zoning commission at such times as this ordinance shall go into effect. 
(2.102) "City governing body" shall mean the city council of Crowley, Louisiana. 
Sec. 2.2. - Specific words used in this regulation. 
(2.201)  Accessory building and use: Structures and uses (such as private garages and sheds) customarily incidental to and on the same lot with a permitted use. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the main use of the premises. 
(2.202)  Alley: A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
(2.203)  Block: A tract of land bounded by dedicated streets. 
(2.204)  Building: Means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes of a building. 
(2.205)  Carport: Means a shelter for one or more vehicles which is not fully enclosed by walls and one or more doors. 
(2.206)  Car wash: Means a lot on which motor vehicles are washed or waxed, either by the patron or by others, using machinery specifically designed for the purposes. 
(2.207)  Church: Means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship which is used only for such purposes and those accessory activates as are customarily associated therewith. 
(2.208)  Clinic: Means a place where medical or dental care is furnished to persons on an out-patient basis by four (4) or more doctors or dentists. 
(2.209)  Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle bearing a commercial license plate, any vehicle designed to carry more than eight (8) passengers; any motor-driven truck. 
(2.210)  Dance hall: A café, restaurant or other business or commercial place where dancing is done to music. 
(2.211)  Dwelling unit: One or more rooms in the same structure, connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping unit for permanent residential occupancy and with facilities for sleeping and cooking. 
(2.212)  Dwelling, single-family: A detached building containing one dwelling unit and used exclusively by one family. 
(2.213)  Dwelling, two-family: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units and used by two (2) families living independently of each other. The terms includes duplex. 
(2.214)  Dwelling, multiple family: A detached building containing three (3) or more dwelling units and used by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. The term includes apartment house. 
(2.215)  Family: One or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities, or a group of not more than four (4) persons living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities on a nonprofit, cost-sharing basis. Domestic servants residing on the premises shall be considered a part of the family. 
(2.216)  Garage: A fully enclosed building for the storage of motor vehicles, not including buildings in which fuel is sold or repairs or other services are performed. 
(2.217)  Garage apartment: A living unit for not more than one family erected above a garage; however, for the purpose of this ordinance, similar construction above a garage used for any accessory use will be considered the equivalent of a garage apartment. 
(2.218)  Height of building: The vertical distance from the grade to: 
(a)  The highest point on a flat roof; 
(b)  The deck line of a mansard roof; or 
(c)  The mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
(2.219)  Home occupation: A use conducted incidental to a permitted use provided that such occupations are conducted in the main building meeting the following conditions: 
(a)  Only one nonilluminated sign no larger than one square foot in area be used; 
(b)  Nothing shall be done to make the building appear in any way anything but a dwelling; 
(c)  Not more than two (2) assistants or employees shall be employed from outside the resident family; 
(d)  Mechanical equipment used shall be only that normally used in or found in a single-family dwelling; and 
(e)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total living area of a home may be used for that home occupation. 
(2.220)  Hotel: A structure designed, used or offered for residential occupancy for any period less than one month, including tourist homes and motels but not including hospitals or nursing homes. 
(2.221)  Junkyard: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron, automobiles, vehicles, equipment, machinery and other metals, paper, rags, cloth, plastic, rubber tires, glass and bottles. 
(2.222)  Lot: A parcel of land occupied by or which may hereafter be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces and parking spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage on an officially approved street or place. 
(2.223)  Lot line: The liens bounding a lot as defined herein: 
(a)  Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, "front lot line" shall mean that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and in the application for a zoning compliance permit. 
(b)  Rear lot line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line not less than ten (10) feet long farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(c)  Side lot line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side line separating a lot from another lot or lots in an interior side lot line. 
(2.224)  Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of court of Acadia Parish; or a parcel of land which became legally established and defined by deed on or before the date of adoption of this ordinance. 
(2.225)  Main building: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located. 
(2.225.1)  Medical treatment facilities: A building wherein medical practitioners and medical specialties or sub-specialties, including physicians, surgeons, psychiatrists, dentists, physiotherapists and practitioners in other medical specialties and sub-specialties provide outpatient treatment or services to person in the usual course of their professional occupation by not more than three (3) practitioners of the medical, dental, specialty or sub-specialty, and providing that such additional medical personnel, i.e., registered nurse, licensed practical nurse and other customarily required for the particular performance of such services, shall not exceed a total of three (3) persons. 
(2.226)  Manufactured home and manufactured housing: A factory-built, residential dwelling unit constructed to standards and codes, as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., as amended. Further, the terms "manufactured home" and "manufactured housing" may be used interchangeably and apply to structures bearing the permanent affixed seal of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(2.227)  Mobile home: A factory-built, residential dwelling unit built to voluntary standards prior to the passage of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. This term includes and is interchangeable with the term "house trailer", but does not include the term "manufactured home" as only manufactured homes are built to federal construction standards. 
(2.227.1)  Mobile home park: Two (2) or more mobile homes located on the same tract of land occupying such spaces as required by this ordinance. 
(2.228)  Nonconforming use: A land lawfully used, and/or structure legally existing and/or used at the time of adoption of this ordinance, or any amendment thereto, which does not conform with the height, lot area, yard requirements, or use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2.229)  Parking space: One automobile parking space shall be an area not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet and the access to the parking space from a public street or alley shall be provided in addition to the space necessary for the parking. 
(2.230)  Seal or label: The permanently affixed device or insignia issued by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) that is displayed on the exterior of a manufactured home, certifying that the home was constructed to standards and codes, as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(2.231)  Setback: The minimum distance away from a property line where buildings may be constructed, a building line, usually a line parallel to the front property line. 
(2.232)  Town house: Two (2) or more attached living units with common or party side walls between units, designated so that each unit may be sold independently as a lot with its own yards and parking spaces. 
(2.233)  Trailer: Any factory built or assembled unit, structure or structures equipped with the necessary connections and made so as to be readily moveable over roads and highways as a unit or units and is designed for occupancy with or without a permanent foundation. It may consist of two (2) or more units which can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity or may consist of two (2) or more unites separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. 
(2.234)  Variance: A modification from the provisions of this regulation by the board of aldermen in cases when enforcement of its provisions would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(2.235) Yard: The area between any lot line and the setback required therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 2, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 1391, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-09; Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 11-9-10) 
ARTICLE III. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS ADOPTED 

[Sec. 3.0. - Scope.] 
    Districts are shown on the official zoning map. Within the districts established by this ordinance, the following regulations shall apply. 
Sec. 3.1. - General provisions. 
(A)  Creation of districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Crowley is divided into the following districts: 
R-1 - Residential District 
R-2 - Residential District 
R-3 - Residential District 
R-4 - Multi-Family Residential District 
M-1 - Medical Services District 
C-1 - Transitional Business District 
C-2 - Neighborhood Business District 
C-3-R - Highway Commercial District - Restricted 
C-3 - Highway Commercial District 
C-4 - Central Business District 
I-1 - Light Industrial District 
I-2 - Heavy Industrial District 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, these districts shall be ranked with respect to degree of restriction in descending order of restrictions, as follows: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, M-1, C-1, C-2, C-3-R, C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2. 
(B)  Zoning map. The zoning districts and the boundaries thereof are shown on the attached "Zoning Map of the City of Crowley" which map is hereby made a part of this ordinance, [by reference] signed by the mayor and city clerk. 
(C)  District boundaries. Except where specifically shown by dimensions or otherwise on the zoning map, the boundaries of districts are lot or property lines, the center lines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, railway right-of-way lines, natural boundary lines such as water courses, and the municipal corporate limit lines as they may exist from time to time. Questions concerning the exact location of any district boundary shall be decided by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(D)  Utility lines. Water, electric transmission, sanitary sewer, telephone and telegraph, stormwater drainage, and natural gas lines, regardless of any other provision or regulation appearing in this ordinance, shall not be deemed and shall not constitute "uses requiring planning approval" or "special exception uses" in any district insofar as their placement, erection, or construction on dedicated streets, alleys and public ways is concerned, but on such streets, alleys and public ways, they shall constitute uses by right and no permit, license or other document of approval for such uses shall be required under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1342, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 3.2. - R-1 Residential district. 
    Within all R-1 Residential districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.201)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds, and community buildings owned or operated by the municipality, parish, state, or federal agencies. 
(3)  Public libraries or museums. 
(4)  Public schools, both elementary and high, or private schools having a curriculum essentially the same as ordinarily offered in a public elementary school or public high school, and private or public nursery schools or kindergartens. 
(5)  Private recreational uses. 
(6)  Private gardens and nurseries for the propagation and cultivation of plants only when said plants, flowers, or produce are not offered for sale. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, when located on the same lot and not involved in the conduct of a business. 
(8)  Bulletin boards for churches, temples, institutions, or public buildings only, and signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, pertaining to the rental, lease, or sale of a building or land; provided however, that no more than one sign of the above character shall be permitted on any lot. 
(9)  The renting of one room for the accommodation of not more than two (2) persons providing the room is not equipped with cooking facilities and provided further that no boarding arrangements are made. 
(3.202)  Uses permitted as exception by board of adjustment. 
(1)  Private utilities and railroad. 
(2)  Temporary commercial amusement or recreational developments. 
(3)  Radio and television broadcasting towers. 
(3.203)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  All uses not specifically permitted herein. 
(3.204)  Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.205)  Area regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
Front yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
Side yard: 
(1)  Minimum dimension: Ten (10) feet. 
(2)  On corner lots, the side yard on that side abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
Rear yard: Twenty (20) per cent of lot depth, not required to exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
Lot area. The minimum lot area requirements are as follows: 
Minimum required lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Minimum required lot area per family: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(3.206) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.207) Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.3. - R-2 Residential district. 
    Within all R-2 Residential districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.301) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in R-1 Residential district. 
(3.302) Uses permitted as exception by board of adjustment. 
(1)  Cemetery. 
(2)  Private club not conducted for profit. 
(3)  Philanthropic use. 
(4)  Municipal, parish, state and federal uses. 
(3.303) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  All uses not permitted herein. 
(3.304) Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.305) Area regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
Front yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
Side yard: 
(1)  Minimum dimension: Five (5) feet. 
(2)  On corner lots, the side yard on that side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than eight (8) feet. 
Rear yard: Twenty (20) per cent of lot depth, not required to exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
Lot area: 
Minimum required lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
Minimum required lot area per family: Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: Fifty (50) feet. 
(3.306) Parking regulations. See Article VI. 
(3.307) Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.4. - R-3 Residential district. 
    Within all R-3 Residential districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.401) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in R-2 Residential district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings, duplexes. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above listed uses including the leasing of rooms by the family resident on the premises, provided that the area rented or leased does not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the total floor area in any of the dwelling units, and providing no arrangements are made for boarding. 
(3.402) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  All uses not permitted herein. 
(3.403) Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.404) Area regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
Front yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
Side yards: 
(1)  Minimum dimension: Five (5) feet. 
(2)  On corner lots, the side yard on that side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than six (6) feet. 
Rear yard: Twenty (20) per cent of lot depth, not required to exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
Lot area: 
Minimum required lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
Minimum required lot area per family: Twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
Minimum lot width at building line: Fifty (50) feet. 
(3.405) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.406) Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.5. - R-4 Multi-Family Residential district. 
    Within all R-4 Residential districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.501) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in R-3 Residential district. 
(2)  Three-family and four-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units. 
(3)  Boarding and lodging houses. 
(4)  Condominiums and townhouses. 
(5)  Storage garages. 
(3.502) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  All uses not permitted herein. 
(3.503) Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.504) Area regulations. Each yard shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths or widths: 
Front yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
Side yard: Five (5) feet per side. 
Rear yard: Twenty (20) per cent of lot depth, not required to exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
Open yard: For multi-family residences, condominiums, and townhouses, open yard space must equal twenty (20) per cent of lot area with remaining eighty (80) per cent reserved for buildings and parking. 
Minimum lot area: 
Number of Families Area Per Family
(square feet) 1 ..... 3,500 2 ..... 1,750 3 ..... 1,200 4 ..... 1,000 5-11 .....   800 12-16 .....   700 17-40 .....   600 Over 40 .....   500  
(3.505) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.506) Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 1, 3-29-84) 
Sec. 3.6. - M-1 Medical Service district. 
    Within all M-1 Medical Service districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.601) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-4 Residential district. 
(2)  Clinics, hospitals, retirement and nursing homes. 
(3)  Offices of physicians, surgeons, dentists, psychiatrists, physiotherapists and practitioners in related specialties. 
(4)  Parking lots and parking garages, pharmacies, drug stores, restaurants, flower shops and retail shops dispensing ocular or surgical supplies, provided such shops or stores be operated incidental to, and in the same building with professional offices as described above. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot. 
(3.602) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  All uses not specifically permitted herein. 
(3.603) Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.604) Area regulations. 
Front yard: Five (5) feet. 
Side yard: Other than for corner lots, there will be no side yard requirements provided the buildings are of fireproof construction; otherwise a five-foot minimum side yard is required. 
Rear yard: Not required except for dwellings, same as R-3. 
Minimum lot width: Same as R-4 for dwellings. 
(3.605) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.606) Limitation on signs. See Article VII. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 11-8-88) 
Sec. 3.7. - C-1 Transitional Business district. 
    Within all C-1 Transitional Business districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.701) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Business and professional offices. 
(2)  Antique shops. 
(3)  Single-family dwellings as permitted in the R-2 Residential district. 
(4)  Floral shops. 
(5)  Gift and craft shops. 
(6)  Interior decorating shops. 
(7)  Studios for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts, photography, music, drama, and dance. 
(8)  Church, including resident of priest or minister. 
(3.702) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Any use not specifically permitted herein. 
(2)  Freestanding signs and billboards. 
(3.703) Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.704) Area regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less than the following depths and widths: 
Front yards: Fifteen (15) feet. 
Side yards: 
(1)  Minimum dimension: Five (5) feet. 
(2)  On corner lots, the side yard on that side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than six (6) feet. 
Rear yards: Twenty (20) per cent of lot depth, not required to exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3.705) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.706) Limitation on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.8. - C-2 Neighborhood Business district. 
    Within all C-2 Neighborhood Business districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.801) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Retail stores. 
(2)  Business and professional shops. 
(3)  Personal service shops. 
(4)  Restaurants. 
(5)  Studios. 
(6)  Fix-it shops. 
(7)  Laundromats. 
(8)  Similar establishments for the convenience of neighboring residents. 
(9)  Branch banks. 
(10)  Any use permitted in the R-4 Residential district. 
(3.802) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Drive-ins which dispense food or drinks. 
(2)  Freestanding signs and billboards. 
(3)  Any use not specifically permitted herein. 
(3.803) Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(3.804) Area regulations. 
Yards: 
(1)  Front, side, and rear yards: Not required except were a lot is used for a dwelling or in part for a dwelling and it shall be the same as the R-4 Residential district. When a side yard is provided, it shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
(2)  Whenever a C-2 Commercial district abuts on a residential district, the requirements on that district shall apply for the C-1 district for the side on which the abutment occurs only. 
Building site area: There is no minimum building site area required. 
(3.805)  Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.806)  Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.9. - C-3 highway commercial districts. 
(A)  C-3-R Highway Commercial. Within all "C-3-R Highway Commercial District - Restricted" as shown on the official zoning map, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(3.901)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-1 and C-2 Districts. 
(2)  Bus depots. 
(3)  Drive-in theaters. 
(4)  Dry cleaners. 
(5)  Wholesales and warehouses. 
(6)  Contractor's office and storage yard. 
(7)  Lumber yards. 
(8)  Animal clinics and animal hospitals. 
(9)  New and used car sales lots. 
(10)  Funeral homes. 
(11)  Hotels and motels. 
(12)  Banks. 
(13)  Amusement centers. 
(14)  Restaurants. 
(15)  Medical treatment facilities for outpatient services, including surgical, oncology, physical therapy and other medical specialties and subspecialties. 
(3.902)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Any use not permitted herein. 
(3.903)  Height regulations. 
(1)  No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(3.904)  Area regulations. 
Yards: 
(1)  Front, rear and side yards: Not required except where a lot is used for a dwelling or in part for a dwelling and it shall be the same as for R-4 Residential Districts. When a side yard is provided, but not required, and said side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
(2)  Whenever a C-3-R Commercial District abuts on a residential district, which requires front, side and rear yards, these requirements shall apply for the C-3-R district for the side on which the abutment occurs only. 
(3.905)  Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.906)  Limitation on signs. See Article VII. 
(B)  C-3 Highway Commercial District. Within all "C-3 Highway Commercial Districts", as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.921)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-3-R Highway Commercial Districts - Restricted. 
(2)  Motor truck terminals. 
(3)  Auto repair shops. 
(4)  Barrooms, nightclubs and lounges. 
(3.922)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Any use not permitted herein. 
(3.923)  Height regulations. 
(1)  No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(3.924)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Front, rear and side yards: Not required except where a lot is used for a dwelling or in part for a dwelling and it shall be the same as for R-4 Residential districts. When a side yard is provided, but not required, said side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
(2)  Whenever a C-3 Commercial district abuts on a residential district, which requires front, side and rear yards, these requirements shall apply for the C-3 district for the side on which the abutment occurs only. 
(3.925)  Area regulations for property currently used for mobile homes or trailer parks. When used for mobile homes or trailer spaces currently in use, the owner of the property must maintain the design of the park and all improvements thereon. The following regulations shall apply: 
Yards: 
(1)  Front yard: Mobile homes, trailers and structures shall be set back from the front lines of the part a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Side yard: There shall be two (2) side yards, one on each side of the park having a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of fifteen (15) feet at the rear of the park. 
Lot area per unit: 
(1)  Unit spaces shall be a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet and a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet at the parking line of each space. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of two (2) rental units per mobile home park. 
(3)  Mobile homes and trailers shall be parked not less than fifteen (15) feet apart in all directions when used as living units and this shall include exterior storage units or wings. 
(3.926)  Prohibition for expansion of property currently used for mobile homes or trailers parks and applicability of area regulations for property currently used for same. 
(1)  No additional property may be acquired or incorporated as part of property currently used as a mobile home or trailer park. 
(2)  No owner of a mobile home or trailer park may construct additional spaces for units on property currently used as a mobile home or trailer park unless said spaces comply with the area regulations for yards and lot area specified in Section 3.925 herein. 
(3.927)  Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain upon any property owned or controlled by him a mobile home park without having registered the mobile home park with the city inspector's office. Mobile home parks are to be registered each year by December 31. Each mobile home park shall be inspected by the city inspector or his authorized designee. 
(3.928)  Maintenance of mobile homes. 
(1)  Skirting requirements. All mobile/manufactured homes placed in the City of Crowley shall be required to have a manufacturer approved, vented skirting, completely enclosing the area between the bottom of the mobile home and the natural ground. The skirting material must be pre-approved by the city inspector at the time the moving permit is issued and shall be installed within thirty (30) days of placement. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) a day not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be charged after the thirtieth day period if not in compliance. 
(2)  A mobile home being located in the City of Crowley may not be older than ten (10) years in age and must possess the seal or label issued by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 1342, § 2, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1415, § 3,4, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 3.10. - C-4 Central Business district. 
    Within all C-4 Central Business districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.1001)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in C-3 Highway Commercial district. 
(2)  All offices, both public and private. 
(3)  Retail and wholesale uses not specifically prohibited. 
(4)  Places of amusement. 
(5)  Funeral homes. 
(6)  Radio and television studios. 
(3.1002)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use not specifically permitted herein. 
(3.1003)  Height regulations. 
(1)  No building shall exceed sixty (60) feet in height. 
(3.1004) Area regulations. 
Yards: 
(1)  Front, side, and rear yards: No yards are required in the C-4 Central Business district. However, where a side yard is provided, but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
(2)  Whenever a C-4 Central Business district abuts on a residential district, which requires front, side and rear yards, these requirements shall apply for the C-4 district for the side on which the abutment occurs only. 
Building site area: 
(1)  There is no building site area required. 
(3.1005) Parking requirements. No off-street parking spaces and lots are required in the C-4 Central Business district. See Article VI for off-street loading requirements. 
(3.1006) Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.11. - I-1 Light Industrial district. 
    Within all I-1 Light Industrial districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.1101) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in C-4 Central Business district. 
(2)  Machine shop. 
(3)  Food processing. 
(4)  Millwork and furniture manufacturing. 
(5)  Bulk storage of petroleum products not in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) gallons. 
(6)  Lumber and building material storage yards. 
(7)  Sheet metal and welding shops. 
(8)  Tire recapping. 
(3.1102) Prohibited uses. Heavy manufacturing uses such as the manufacturing of alcohol, ammonia, brick, cement or concrete, chemicals, fertilizer, lamp black, lime, oil-cloth, paint, petroleum products, plastics, products from fish or animal refuse, soap, bulk storage of petroleum products; junk yard or processing of junk or scrap metal or automobile wrecking; railroad repair shops and railroad marshaling yards; any other use that will be injurious, hazardous, noxious, or offensive to an extent equal to or greater than those enumerated. 
(3.1103) Height regulations. No limit except when a building abuts on a residential district, in which case it shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the residential district unless it is set back from all yard lines (abutting residential areas) by one foot for each foot of additional height in excess of the height so permitted. 
(3.1104) Area regulations. 
Yard: 
(1)  Front, side yard, rear yard: Not required except where a lot is used for a dwelling or in part for a dwelling and it shall be the same as for R-4 Residential district. When a side yard is provided, said side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
(2)  Whenever an I-1 district abuts on a residential district which requires front, side and rear yards, these requirements shall apply for an I-1 district for the side on which the abutment occurs only. 
(3.1105) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.1106) Limitations on signs. See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.12. - I-2 Heavy Industrial district. 
    Within all I-2 Heavy Industrial districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(3.1201) Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use in an I-1 Light Industrial district. 
(2)  Equipment and services of all type. 
(3)  Bulk storage of petroleum products not in excess of three hundred thousand (300,000) gallons. 
(4)  Concrete and concrete products manufacturing. 
(5)  Junk yards or processing of junk or scrap metal or automobile wrecking. 
(6)  Boat building. 
(7)  Metal fabrication. 
(8)  Food processing. 
(9)  Gravel terminal. 
(3.1202) Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Dwellings, except living quarters for watchmen and caretakers. 
(2)  Schools offering general education courses. 
(3)  Churches. 
(4)  Any use injurious, hazardous, noxious, or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of odor, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, glare, light, noise or vibration. 
(3.1203) Height regulations. No limit except where the property abuts on a residential district, in which case no building shall exceed the maximum height permitted in the residential district unless it is set back from all yard lines by one foot for each foot of additional height in excess of the height so permitted. 
(3.1204) Area regulations. 
Yard: 
(1)  Whenever an I-1 Industrial district abuts on a residential district which requires front, side and rear yards, these requirements shall apply for the entire block in which abutment occurs. 
(3.1205) Parking requirements. See Article VI. 
(3.1206) Limitations on signs: See Article VII. 
Sec. 3.13. - Supplementary district regulations. 
(3.1301)  Uses. 
(1)  Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period the construction is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. No permit is required. 
(2)  Fences may be erected along the boundaries of a lot or yard area subject to the requirements of the building code; one segment of a fence may be erected in a required side yard. 
(3)  Power, heating, or refrigerating plants, apparatus, or machinery which are accessory to permitted used shall be permitted only if placed and operated so as to comply with existing ordinances and not cause serious annoyance or injury to occupants of adjoining premises. 
(4)  Existing railroads and utilities may continue to be operated and maintained in dwelling and commercial districts, but no new railroad or utility structure other than the usual poles, transformers and other similar appurtenances, wires, underground utilities, electric substations and gas pressure regulating and metering stations shall be established except when so authorized by the board of zoning adjustment. 
(3.1302)  Area. 
(1)  Where a lot has an area or frontage less than the minimum requirements for the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record in separate ownership from adjacent property at the time of passage of this ordinance, such lot may be used only for single-family residential purposes or for any nonresidential purposes permitted in the district in which the property is located. 
(2)  More than one main institutional, public or semipublic, commercial or industrial building may be built on a lot provided it is located within the buildable area of the lot. 
(3.1303)  Yards. 
(1)  Where a lot in a commercial or industrial district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided along such abutting lines a yard equal in width or depth to that required in the residential district. 
(2)  Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersection streets is zoned partly as residential and partly as commercial or industrial, the front yard depth in the commercial or industrial district shall be equal to the required front yard depth of the residential district. 
(3)  On every corner lot there shall be provided on the side street a side yard equal in depth to one-half the required front yard depth on said side street. The front yard requirements of a residential district shall prevail over that of a commercial or industrial use. 
(4)  On a corner lot in any district, no fence, wall, hedge, or other structure or planting more than three (3) feet in height shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at points which are thirty (30) feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines. 
(5)  Covered, but unenclosed, areas may project into required yards not more than ten (10) feet and shall not be considered in determining yard sizes or lot coverage; provided however, that such area shall not be closer than four (4) feet to any lot line, except front yards. 
(6)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky except ordinary projections not over eighteen (18) inches, except that a roof, gutter, or eaves may project to the extent of four (4) feet, providing at least three (3) feet remains open to the sky. 
(7)  If forty (40) per cent or more of the frontage on the same side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is improved with buildings that have observed front yards less than that required, no building need be set back from the street more than the average front yard depth of such buildings. 
(8)  Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than five (5) feet. 
(9)  Bay windows may project into any required yard not more than two (2) feet. 
(10)  Buildings housing animals and the storage of odor-producing substances shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any lot line. 
(11)  The building are of accessory buildings shall not be greater than forty (40) per cent of the required rear yard area. 
(12)  Accessory buildings shall not be built less than three (3) feet from any lot line. 
(13)  Accessory buildings may be built in the required side yards, providing such buildings are not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line. 
(3.1304)  Fences, walls and hedges. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the rear yard or side yards from the building setback line to the rear shall be over eight (8) feet in height and for front yard and side yards from the building setback line to the front yard lot line and along the front yard lot line shall not be over three (3) feet in height, unless landscape plans are filed for which permission may be granted by the mayor and board of aldermen when the neighborhood will be improved by such an exception. The height of fences, walls and hedges shall be measured vertically from ground level in the adjacent yard to determine the maximum height. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crowley, a permit fee for all fences to be constructed shall be forty dollars ($40.00) plus an additional fee of two dollars ($2.00) for the cost of investigation of complaints. 
(3.1305)  Manufactured homes, mobiles homes and trailer homes. Manufactured homes, mobile homes and trailer homes occupied by the owner and situated on a lot owned by said owner solely for residential purposes may be situated in residential, commercial or industrial zones or districts, provided that the following requirements are complied with: 
(1)  Such manufactured home, mobile home or trailer home shall occupy a parcel of ground containing not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, which parcel shall not be occupied by or contain any other manufactured home, mobile home, trailer home, residence or other building other than outhouses and garages for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of such parcel. 
(2)  All owners of property abutting on said parcel and on any adjoining parcel or parcels of land owned by the owner of the parcel to be occupied have consented in writing to such occupancy. 
(3)  All owners of property situated on opposite side of any public street or way directly opposite of said parcel and fifty (50) feet on each side of the extension of the boundary line of such parcel across such public street or way have consented in writing to such occupancy, and if the owner of such parcel owns property abutting thereon and extending to a street or way other than that on which such parcel abuts, the owners of all property between the extension of the boundary lines of such parcel across such street or way have consented in writing to such occupancy. 
(4)  Seventy (70) per cent of all property owners, including those described in paragraphs (2) and (3) above, owning property within three hundred (300) feet of such parcel have consented in writing to such occupancy. 
(5)  The ownership of the property described in paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) above has been certified by the tax assessor of Acadia Parish, Louisiana or both. 
(6)  By motion, the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Crowley has authorized such occupancy. 
(3.1350)  Definitions. 
(a)  Approved fence materials means materials normally manufactured for, used as, and recognized as, fencing materials such as: wrought iron or other decorative metals suitable for the construction of fences, fired masonry, concrete, stone, chain link, metal tubing, wood planks, and vinyl or fiberglass composite manufactured specifically as fencing materials. Fence materials must also be materials approved for exterior use and are weather and decay-resistant. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the Crowley Planning Commission and Crowley City Council finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(b)  City means the City of Crowley. 
(c)  Code means the Code of Civil and Criminal Ordinances of the City of Crowley, Louisiana. 
(d)  Corner lot means a lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets. 
(e)  Dilapidated fence means a fence which is decayed, deteriorated, or fallen into partial ruin. 
(f)  Zoning planning administrator means the City of Crowley zoning planning administrator and his or her designee. 
(g)  Easement means a right created by grant, reservation, agreement, prescription, or necessary implication, which one has in the land of another. It is either for the benefit of appurtenant land such as for the right to cross, or egress, such as a public utility easement, or in specific, such as an exclusive utility easement. An easement may or may not have descriptive bounds. 
(h)  Fence means any wall or structure more than twelve (12) inches in height erected or maintained for the purpose of enclosing, partitioning, screening, restricting access to or decorating the enclosed lot, parcel, building or structure, or divides any yard. 
(i)  Fence contractor means a person who, for remuneration, erects, maintains, constructs, or reconstructs a fence on the premises of another. It does not mean the owner who owns or leases the premises on which the fence is located. 
(j)  Fence contracting means engaging in the business of erecting, maintaining, constructing, or reconstructing fences. 
(k)  Fence structure means any part of a fence including the base, footings, supporting columns, braces, structural members, or any other of its appendages. 
(l)  Front yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel to it at the building line. 
(m)  Game court means a structure having a playing surface, paved or unpaved, with or without enclosing fences, designed to be used for playing or practicing tennis, badminton, volley ball, paddle tennis handball, baseball, batting, handball, racquet ball, squash, basketball, or similar games. 
(n)  Interior lot means a lot situated in a block with frontage on only one (1) street, and specifically not a corner lot. 
(o)  Interior lot line means a side yard lot line that is adjacent to a corner lot or an interior lot's side yard line. 
(p)  Outside storage means the storage of commodities, goods and/or refuse outside of an enclosed building. 
(q)  Public right-of-way means a strip of land which is used as a roadbed for a street, alley or highway intended for use by the public at large, or land set aside as an easement or in fee, either by agreement or condemnation. 
(r)  Rear yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel to it at the building line. 
(s)  Registered when used with or in reference to the words "fence contractor" means a person or firm registered with the city to engage in the business of fence contracting. 
(t)  Residential district means a district zoned for residential use in the City of Crowley comprehensive zoning ordinance excluding multifamily. 
(u)  Retaining wall means a wall designed to bear against soil or other material and resists lateral and other forces from the material held in place. 
(v)  Reverse frontage corner lot means a corner lot where the rear lot line is adjacent to a side lot line of an adjoining lot or across an alley from such side lot line. 
(w)  Screening fence or blind fence means a fence that screens from view the interior of a property so that the visibility through the fence is prevented from the exterior side of the fence standing three (3) feet from it at ground level. 
(x)  Screening wall means a wall or architectural extension that may be part of the structure or a stand-alone feature that screens from view the interior of a property so that visibility through the wall shall be prevented from the exterior side of the wall or architectural extension. 
(y)  Setback means the distance from the property line or the right-of-way line of all streets adjacent to the premises on which a fence is located to the part of the fence closest to the property line or right-of-way line. 
(z)  Side yard means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, and between the building line and the side lot line. 
(aa)  Street means public street and private street. 
(bb)  Through lots or double lots means a lot situated on a block with frontage on two (2) streets, and specifically not a corner lot. 
(cc)  Vision or visibility triangle means that an imaginary area is created by measuring along two (2) intersecting property lines. The vision triangle is determined by measuring back from the intersection point of the two (2) property lines parallel to the intersecting streets a distance of thirty-five (35) feet, and drawing an imaginary line across these two (2) points. 
(dd)  Yard means an open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures. 
(3.1351)  Permits. 
(a)  Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, repair, replace, or cause to be constructed, repaired or replaced, a fence or any part of a fence in the city without first obtaining a fence permit from the zoning planning administrator. 
(b)  Unlawful securing of permits. It is unlawful for any firm or corporation who is not registered by the state as a fence contractor to secure a permit by this chapter. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to this subsection that the fence work is being done by a property owner on a property legally owned or leased by that owner or lessee. 
(c)  Approved plans. The zoning planning administrator shall review the application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit. When the zoning planning administrator issues a permit where the plans are required, the zoning planning administrator shall endorse in writing the plans and specification "Approved." Such reviewed plans and specifications shall not by changed, modified or altered by any person without authorization from the zoning planning administrator, and a person shall so work regulated by this chapter in accordance with the approved plans. 
(d)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended, abandoned or lacks the required, by the inspections department, inspections for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. The zoning planning administrator may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No applications shall be extended more than once. Changes, alterations, or adjustments in the permit or in the work authorized by the issuance of the permit, after it has been issued shall not extend the original expiration date established upon the original issuance of the permit. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation. The zoning planning administrator may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter when the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information, or in violation of any applicable law. 
(f)  Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations is not a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other city ordinance. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or any other city ordinance are not valid. 
(g)  Construction documents. Construction documents and other data shall be submitted in one (1) or more sets, as required by the zoning planning administrator, with each application for a permit. When required by the zoning planning administrator, the applicant shall also provide additional information as required by the building code. Where special conditions exist, the zoning planning administrator is authorized to require additional construction documents. 
(h)  Availability of plans. One (1) set of approved plans, specifications, and a copy of the permit shall be made available, by the applicant, for inspection of the work authorized by the permit. The applicant shall keep the said set of approved plans, specifications and permit on the work site during the construction process. 
(i)  Other laws. The owner or the owner's authorized agent who applies for a permit to construct a fence must comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the building code. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(3.1352)  Application. 
(a)  Applicant authorization. Any person making application for a fence permit shall complete a permit application, provided by the zoning planning administrator, showing the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, phone number and, if the applicant represents a corporation, the name, address, and phone number of the registered agent of the corporation; 
(2)  Name of the owner of the property; 
(3)  Local address where the fence is proposed to be erected; 
(4)  Type of fence construction; 
(5)  Height of fence; 
(6)  Diagram showing proposed location of the fence and listing relevant dimensions between the fence and other structures on the lot and the location of property lines; 
(7)  Approximate value of the proposed fence; 
(8)  The fence contractor's registration number; and 
(9)  The applicant's authorized signature. 
(b)  Expiration of plan review. Application for which no permit is issued within ninety (90) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the zoning planning administrator. The zoning planning administrator may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No applications shall be extended more than once. 
(3.1353)  Additional fees and charges. 
(a)  Investigation . When any work is commenced for which a permit is required by ordinance, building code or otherwise without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation fee equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances shall be paid, regardless whether a permit is issued or denied. The imposition of an investigation fee shall be in addition to any other charges and fees, including permit fees, inspection fees, reinspection fees or otherwise provided for and shall not be construed or be applied as a variance or other special exemption. 
(b)  Reinspection fee. Reinspection fees are set forth by the building code. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fence permit fees are set forth by the building code. 
(3.1354)  Encroachment on public property. No person shall construct a fence, guy wire, brace or any fence post upon or protruding over the public right-of-way or property that the city or the general public has dominion and control over, owns or has an easement over, under, around or through. 
(3.1355)  Fence not to create a traffic hazard. It is unlawful to erect, maintain, suffer or permit any fence on any corner lot in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. Failure of the owner, agent or occupant to remove such obstruction within ten (10) days after receipt of notice to do so is a violation of this chapter. 
(3.1356)  Construction within easements. 
(a)  Permissions to build a fence upon a utility easement does not remove the obligation of the owner of the fence to remove the fence upon demand of the utility company. The owner of the fence shall remove and rebuild the fence at the owner's expense. 
(b)  The owner of a fence shall be responsible for the design, construction and maintenance of the fence and shall be so as not to interfere with utility lines or normal drainage. 
(c)  Permission to build a fence upon a utility easement must be granted by the planning commission. 
(d)  Where a fence is to be placed in an easement containing underground utilities the owner or occupant shall sign a release indemnifying the city from any damages for removal of the fence and damage to the fence as a result of the need to repair or replace said utilities. 
(3.1357)  Relocation or construction of private fences related to public improvement projects. 
(a)  Fences relocated or constructed due to construction of a public improvement project (e.g. road widening project) may be located as close as practical on or inside the new property line and must comply with the installation standards required by the zoning planning administrator. This section does not permit any obstruction which may create traffic or other safety hazard. The owner of the fence shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A permit is not required for the relocation or construction of fence relocated or constructed to accommodate a public improvement project, unless the relocation or construction is performed by the property owner or his or her representatives. 
(3.1358)  Height limitation-Rear yard. It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain, suffer, or permit a fence in any rear yard or along any rear yard lot which fence exceeds eight (8) feet in height measured from the finished grade at any point eighteen (18) inches or less either side of the fence. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense to this section that the fence is a screening fence or wall used to screen trash dumpsters in a nonresidential zoning district and does not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to this section that the vertical support posts and gates do not extend more than six (6) inches above the top of the fence. 
(3.1359)  Height limitation-Side yard. It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain, suffer, or permit a fence in any side yard or along any side yard lot line which fence exceeds eight (8) feet in height measured from the finished grade at any point eighteen (18) inches or less from either side of the fence. It is an affirmative defense to this section that the vertical support posts and gates do not exceed more than six (6) inches above the top of the fence. 
(3.1360)  Construction in front yards. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain, suffer or permit a fence in the required front yard building setback area. 
(1)  The fence is forty-eight (48) inches or less in height measured from the finished grade at any point eighteen (18) inches or less from either side of the fence. 
(2)  In the case of a corner lot and when the fence is located in a vision triangle, the fence is thirty-six (36) inches or less in height measured from the finished grade at any point eighteen (18) inches or less from either side of the fence, and the fence allows at least fifty (50) per cent through vision, with a triangular area formed by the intersection of the adjacent street right-of-way lines and a point on each such right-of-way line thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection. 
(3)  That the vertical support posts and gates do not exceed more than four (4) inches above the top of the fence intersection. 
(3.1361)  Construction on reverse frontage lots. 
(a)  On all reverse frontage lots located on property zoned or used for residential purposes, it is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, suffer or permit a fence within the required side yard area that is adjacent to a front yard area at a distance closer than fifteen (15) feet from and perpendicular to the side property line. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to subsection (a) above that: 
(1)  The fence is forty-eight (48) inches or less in height measured from the finished gate at any point eighteen (18) inches or less from the side of the fence. 
(2)  In the case of a corner lot and when the fence is located in a vision triangle, the fence is thirty-six (36) inches or less in height measured from the finished grade at any point eighteen (18) inches or less from either side of the fence, and the fence allows at least fifty (50) per cent through vision, within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the adjacent street right-of-way lines and a point on each such right-of-way line thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection. 
(3)  That the vertical support posts and gates do not extend more than four (4) inches above the top of the fence. 
(c)  The owner of property adjoining a reverse frontage lot may have a fence that meets the requirements in subsection (a) above at the adjoining property line. 
(d)  A person may construct a fence at the property line on property zoned for nonresidential and not abutting a residential zoned property, if the person constructs the fence to provide an adequate visibility setback in accordance with the applicable sections of the comprehensive zoning ordinances of the City of Crowley, Louisiana, and to otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter. If a property zoned nonresidential abuts a property zoned residential, the property zoned nonresidential must comply with the residential requirements of this section. 
(3.1362)  Use of barbed wire or electrically charged fences. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or permit a fence that is electrically charged in any manner. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or permit a fence that has barbed wire in or on it. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or permit a fence that has concertina wire in or on it. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or permit a fence that has razor wire in or on it. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or permit a fence that [has] in it or on it, barbs, projections, broken glass, or anything reasonably capable of causing harm to persons or animals. 
(3.1363)  Inspection. 
(a)  General. A fence permit applicant shall make all construction or work for which a permit is required accessible and exposed for inspection until approved by the code enforcement officer. Approval as a result of an inspection is not an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other city ordinances. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other city ordinances are not valid. The permit applicant shall ensure the work remains accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the zoning planning administrator not the city is liable for expense entailed in removing or replacing of any material to allow inspection. The zoning planning administrator may require the applicant to submit a survey of the lot, showing the final fence location to verify that the fence is located in accordance with the approved plans. 
(b)  Inspection requests. The person authorized to do work approved by a permit must notify the zoning planning administrator that such work is ready for inspection. The zoning planning administrator may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one (1) working day before such inspection is desired. 
(3.1364)  Conflicts between this chapter and zoning regulations. In all cases of conflict between this chapter and the zoning regulations of the city, concerning construction and maintenance of fences, this chapter shall prevail. In all cases of conflict between this chapter and specific ordinance, project plan or special fence project plan designating specific fencing stipulations, the ordinance, project plan or special fence project plan shall prevail. 
(3.1365)  Fence construction and materials. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  No person shall construct a fence that is not able to structurally support fencing materials as required in the building code. 
(2)  A person building a fence to enclose an area shall provide a gate or other opening in the fence of at least three (3) feet in width. 
(3)  A person building a fence shall comply with the requirements of the building code and all other city ordinances with regard to construction, materials, and workmanship. 
(4)  A person constructing a masonry fence or masonry retaining wall exceeding four (4) feet in height shall do so only in compliance with a design submitted by a registered engineer or registered architect. 
(5)  A person constructing a fence shall build it of rigid construction with acceptable materials approved by the building code. 
(6)  A person constructing a masonry fence (including concrete block) shall make the exterior surfaces free from sharp projections. 
(7)  A person constructing metal or masonry fences shall, to preserve the exterior finish, apply a stain, pigment, paint or other exterior surface treatment that is specifically manufactured for the purpose of preserving a specific metal or masonry material. 
(8)  A person applying a stain, pigment, paint or other surface treatment to a wooden fence shall use materials and finishes specifically manufactured for the purpose of preserving a specific wooden material. 
(9)  No person shall construct a wall or fence that exceeds two (2) feet in thickness, unless approved by the zoning planning administrator. Cavities or spaces within a wall or fence shall not be used for the support, storage, shelter, or enclosure of animals or personal property. 
(10)  A person constructing a fence shall use only approved materials and construction methods that ensure uniform construction throughout. Once the person has established a pattern of materials and construction method he or she shall carry it out throughout the entire length of the section from corner post to corner post. 
(11)  A person constructing or maintaining a fence or wall enclosure around a swimming pool shall comply with the minimum requirements of the building code and the swimming pool ordinance. 
(12)  A person constructing a fence with boards shall use species such as cedar, redwood or other durable decay-resistant composition. 
(13)  A person constructing a fence shall install the finished sides of all fences constructed adjacent to any arterial street or collector facing toward the right-of-way. 
(14)  A person constructing an electric fence for the purpose of providing additional protection for commercial property shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
(1)  May be constructed only in districts zoned C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1 and/or I-2. 
(2)  The electric security fence and any wires emitting an electric charge shall be enclosed within a wall, solid barrier or a primary non-electric perimeter barrier made of solid wood, plastic, composite material or chain-link metal. The perimeter barrier (fence) shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high. 
(3)  The maximum height of the top wire of the electric security fence shall be ten (10) feet above grade. The lowest wire shall be a minimum of six (6) inches above grade. The minimum distance between the electric fence and the primary barrier (fence) shall be one-half foot (six (6) inches). 
(4)  The electric security fence shall consist of a complete system designed and manufactured in accordance with International Electrotechnical Commission for electric fencing IEC 60335-2-76 or EN 61011-1. 
(5)  The system shall be installed by a qualified technician in accordance with the specifications and standards set forth in IEC 60335-2-76 or EN 61011-1. The system shall receive at least one annual maintenance and service inspection by a qualified technician who shall provide the owner with a certified report of maintenance and proper operation of the system. Prior to installing and operating the system, the owner shall obtain a permit from the office of the city inspector upon the payment of a fee according to the schedule provided in the building code. The permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. Thereafter, the owner shall file a certificate of annual inspection and maintenance report by a qualified technician and pay an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) on or before the thirty-first day of January of each succeeding year. 
(6)  The electric security fence shall be continuously monitored (twenty-four (24) hours per day) by a professional security monitoring service capable of detecting interference with the system, whether from intruders or otherwise, and capable of reaching a designated individual(s) twenty-four (24) hours by telephone or other electronic means who are capable of disarming the system. 
(7)  Warning signs (including symbol for electrical danger) must be displayed every twenty-five (25) feet clearly identifying the fence as an electric security fence. 
(b)  Prohibited fence materials. 
(1)  No person shall use rope, string, wire products, including but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, unapproved corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, or fiberglass panels in any fence or any other material that is not manufactured specifically as fencing material. The zoning planning administrator may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material. 
(2)  No person shall construct a fence of used, damaged or unsafe material. 
(3)  No person shall weave or use slats of any material including but not limited to metal, fiberglass or bamboo through a chain link fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed in this chapter. 
(4)  Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless it can be determined by the zoning planning administrator that they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials. 
(3.1366)  Maintenance and standard of fences. 
(a)  A fence or fences shall be maintained by the owner of the property in compliance with the requirements of this chapter including but not limited to the following maintenance standards: 
(1)  A fence more than four (4) feet in height shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. A fence four (4) feet or less in height shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
(2)  The owner shall replace broken, damaged, removed or missing parts of a fence within ten (10) days of the day the owner received notice from the zoning planning administrator, with the same material or material with comparable composition, color, size, shape and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. The zoning planning administrator may, upon written notice from the owner that unusual circumstances prevent the timely repair of a fence, extend the replacement time as required. The zoning planning administrator shall not extend the replacement time longer than reasonably necessary. The owner requesting a replacement time extension shall provide the zoning planning administrator a written scope and schedule detailing materials and estimated time period of the completed replacement for approval. No person shall use materials not specifically manufactured as fencing materials such as plywood, corrugated steel panels or fiberglass as fencing materials. 
(3)  A fence not required by a specific order of the city council, the zoning ordinances of the city or required to enclose a swimming pool or spa may be completely removed within the ten (10) day period rather than replaced. 
(4)  A fence shall be maintained in sound structural condition. 
(5)  Property owners shall maintain fences, including those existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, at all times in a state of good repair, safe and secure condition, with all braces, bolts, nails, supporting frame and fastenings free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, rust or loosening, and able to withstand at all times the wind pressure for which they were designed. 
(6)  Property owners shall regularly paint fence supports, gates, structural members and exterior surfaces that are covered with paint to prevent rusting, peeling or blistering surfaces. 
(7)  Property owners shall not maintain graffiti, writings and other symbols on a fence except for those which are permitted as signs or which pertain to the address or occupancy of a property. 
(8)  Existing fences that were constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter that were constructed with materials not currently permitted by this chapter may be maintained as long as no part of the fence is or becomes unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance. If the code enforcement officer determines the existing fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, the fence must be repaired with materials approved by this chapter or removed. The repairs must be made in complete sections extending a minimum of support post to support post. If the code enforcement officer determines the extent of repair on any existing fence (materials in noncompliance) is in excess of fifty (50) per cent of the linear length of the total fence or more than a combined one hundred (100) linear feet then the entire fence must be replaced with materials approved by this chapter. 
(9)  The construction of a fence or wall on the property line shall not preclude the property owner's responsibility to maintain and keep the area defined between the property line to the back of curb or edge of the pavement free and clear of debris and high weeds. 
(3.1367)  Contractor's registration required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of fence contracting without a valid contractor's registration. 
(b)  To register as a fence contractor, the applicant shall complete in writing the required forms furnished for that purpose and file them with the city clerk's office. 
(c)  A person wanting to obtain or renew a fence contractor's registration shall pay a registration fee. 
(d)  Any person making application for a fence contractor's registration shall sign an application for the same. 
(e)  Every contractor registration provided for in this code shall expire one (1) year following the date of its issuance and shall be renewed by the building official upon application and upon the payment to the City of Crowley of the required renewal fee. 
(3.1368)  Contractor's license; revocation. 
(a)  The Crowley City Council may revoke or suspend a sign contractor's registration for the following reasons: 
(1)  The registrant persistently violates the requirements of this code. 
(2)  The registrant fails to finalize permits by obtaining the required approved inspections. 
(3)  The registrant has been found by the Crowley City Council to have been grossly negligent in the performance of the work. 
(b)  A contractor whose registration has been revoked or suspended may be reinstated by the city council only if the contractor corrects all violations and pays all applicable fees. 
(3.1369)  Variance procedures. 
(a)  A person may obtain a variance to this chapter only through the special fence project plan procedure of the comprehensive zoning ordinances, site plan zoning or a development plan. 
(b)  A variance to the provisions of this chapter may be granted in the following areas: 
(1)  Height regulations; 
(2)  Area regulations; 
(3)  Setback regulations; and 
(4)  Material regulations. 
(c)  A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss. In order to grant a variance to the provisions of this chapter it must be determined that: 
(1)  The requested variance does not violate the intent of this chapter; 
(2)  The requested variance will not adversely affect surrounding properties; 
(3)  The requested variance will not adversely affect public safety; and 
(4)  Special conditions exist which are unique to this applicant or property. 
(d)  An applicant is not eligible for a fence variance if the fence was installed prior to obtaining a fence permit or if the applicant failed to maintain a valid fence permit. The applicant shall remove a fence installed without a permit or bring it into compliance with this chapter before the zoning planning administrator can accept a fence variance application. 
(3.1370)  Penalties. Violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1306, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-05; Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 1391, § 3, 2-9-09; Ord. No. 1415, § 2, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 1449, § 1, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 4-14-15) 
Sec. 3.14. - Special gateway overlay districts. 
(3.1401)  Intent and purpose . The purpose of the special overlay districts established in the following sections is to protect and enhance certain specific lands, uses and structures which, by virtue of their type or location, have characteristics which are distinct from lands and structures outside such overlay districts. It is the intent of the City of Crowley to permit, insofar as possible, those uses and structures, which would otherwise be permitted, provided that reasonable and necessary conditions are met which insure the protection and enhancement of said lands, uses and structures. 
(3.1402)  General . 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all lands, uses and structures in areas approved by the City of Crowley within the special overlay districts. Such lands, uses and structures are also subject to the provisions of their underlying zoning designation; provided, however, that where the provisions of this section are more restructure than the provisions of the underlying zoning designation, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(2)  The special overlay districts established in this section generally operate by establishing performance standards to effectuate the purposes of the districts. Except as otherwise provide, they do not supersede the regulations of the underlying districts. 
(3)  Land lying within special overlay districts shall remain part of the underlying zoning districts established by other provisions of this article and may in addition lie in one or more overlay districts in accordance with the designation of each. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specified in this Code creating the special overlaying districts, when any zoning lot or use is partially located within a special overlay district, the remainder of the zoning lot or use shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(3.1403)  Creation of Special Overlay Districts . 
(1)  Amendments to this section shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of the zoning and planning ordinance upon the recommendation of the City of Crowley or the City of Crowley Planning and Zoning Committee. 
(2)  Every recommendation for creation of a special overlay district or addition of land thereto shall address the following, as applicable: 
(A)  A statement of purpose and intent shall specify the nature of the special and substantial public interest involved and objectives to be promoted by creation of the special overlay districts and imposition of the regulations proposed therefore. 
(B)  Proposed district boundaries shall be depicted on one or more maps that shall also display all other zoning districts applicable to the property proposed for inclusion in the district. 
(C)  Regulations proposed to promote the special purposes of the districts. 
(3)  Regulations proposed with any special overlay district shall be designed to reasonably promote the purposes of the district and may require or address any of the following, in addition to or in lieu of other regulations affecting property within the district: 
(A)  Submission of specifically detailed site plans, building plans, elevations and maps showing the relation of proposed development to surrounding or otherwise affected property in terms of location, scale or intensity, character and continuity; 
(B)  Protection of features designated as being of special concern within the district; 
(C)  Mixtures or limitations of permitted uses; 
(D)  Special performance standards and development regulations; 
(E)  Other matters as appropriate to promote the special public interests of the district. 
(3.1404)  Mapping of special overlay districts . 
(1)  Upon approval of a special overlay district, by adoption of an ordinance by the City of Crowley, a map of the district boundaries shall be incorporated into the zoning maps of the city. The following are hereby created as special overlay districts at the four (4) principal directional entrances into the City of Crowley which are incorporated in the overlay of the zoning map of the City of Crowley and are defined by the following boundaries, to-wit: 
(A)  District I (North). Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Parkerson Avenue with the centerline of Tenth (10th Street thence easterly along the centerline of Tenth (10th Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue G; thence northerly along the centerline of Avenue G to its intersection with the centerline of the North Crowley Ditch; thence easterly along the centerline of the North Crowley Ditch to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue I; thence northerly along the centerline of Avenue I to its intersection with the centerline of Stutes Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Stutes Street to its intersection with the east boundary line of Holly Street; thence northerly along the east boundary line of Holly Street to intersection with the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111/Oddfellows Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111/Oddfellows Road to its intersection with the west boundary line of Clark Place Subdivision extended to the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111/Oddfellows Road; thence northerly along the west boundary line of Clark Place Subdivision extended to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 10; thence easterly along the south right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 10 to its intersection with the boundary line of the Wal-Mart property; thence southwesterly along the boundary line of the Wal-Mart property to the boundary line of Clark Place Subdivision Extension #2; thence southerly along the boundary line of Clark Place Subdivision Extension #2 to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Koch-Gateway Pipeline; thence easterly along the south right-of-way line of Koch-Gateway Pipeline to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of Green Briar Avenue; thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of Green Briar Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111; thence easterly along the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111 to its intersection with the corporate boundary; thence following the corporate boundary northerly and easterly along the property of Joel Guichard; thence northerly along the corporate boundary line along the Julia John Trust property to its intersection with the Interstate 10 right-of-way line and the corporate boundary; thence following the Interstate 10 right-of-way line and the corporate boundary easterly to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Caffery Road; thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of Caffery Road to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of Interstate 10 and corporate boundary; thence westerly and following the meanders of the Interstate 10 right-of-way line and Louisiana Highway 1111 right-of-way line and corporate boundary line to its intersection with the north corporate boundary line on Louisiana Highway 1111/Tower Road; thence westerly along the corporate boundary line, following the meanders of the corporate boundary generally westerly and northerly to its intersection with the centerline of Bayou Plaquemine Brulee; thence westerly along the centerline of Bayou Plaquemine Brulee to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Louisiana Highway 13; thence southerly along the west right-of-way line of Louisiana Highway 13 and thence following the meanders of the corporate boundary generally southerly and westerly to its intersection with the north boundary line of the Braxton I. Moody property; thence easterly and southerly along the north boundary line of the Braxton I. Moody property to its intersection with the centerline of Sherwood Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Sherwood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Guidry Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Guidry Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Pinewood Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Pinewood Drive to its intersection with the east property line of Lot K; thence southerly along the east property line of Lot K to its intersection with the centerline of Forrest Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Forrest Drive to its intersection with the west boundary line of Lot 3 of Block 1 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line; thence southerly along the west boundary line of Lot 3 of Block 1 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line to its intersection with south property line of Lot 3 of Block 1 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line; thence easterly along the south property line of Lots 1, 2 and 3 of Block 1 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line to its intersection with the east property line of Lot 22 of Block 1 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line; thence southerly along the east property line of Lot 22 of Block of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line to its intersection with the centerline of Marie Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Marie Street to its intersection with the east property line of Lot 7 of Block 2 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line; thence southerly along the east property line of Lot 7 of Block 2 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line to its intersection with the centerline of Block 2 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line; thence westerly along the centerline of Block 2 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line to its intersection with the east property line of Lot 19 of Block 2 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line; thence southerly along the east property line of Lot 19 of Block 2 of the Ina McBride Subdivision and the corporate limit line to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of Louisiana Highway 100/Egan Road and the corporate limits; thence westerly along the north right-of-way line of Louisiana Highway 100/Egan Road to its intersection with the centerline of Bayou Plaquemine Brulee; thence southerly along the centerline of Bayou Plaquemine Brulee to its intersection with the south right-of-way line of Interstate 10 and the corporate boundary; thence easterly along the south right-of-way line of Interstate 10 and the corporate boundary to a point where the corporate boundary turns south thence following southerly along the corporate boundary to a point where the corporate boundary intersects with the south property line of Lot 6 of Lawrence Acres Subdivision extended to the corporate boundary and running thence east along the south property line of Lot 6 of the Lawrence Acres Subdivision extended to the southeast corner of Lot 6 of Lawrence Acres Subdivision extended; thence southerly along the rear lot line of Lots 5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 16, 17, 20 and 21 of the Lawrence Acres Subdivision to its intersection with the centerline of Lake Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Lake Drive to its intersection with the northwest corner of Lot 1 of Crestwood Subdivision; thence southeasterly along the C-3 Highway Commercial District line to its intersection with the centerline of Fairway Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Fairway Drive to its intersection with the north boundary line of E.L. Habetz Investments, LLC and the C-3 Highway Commercial District line; thence westerly along the north boundary line of E.L. Habetz Investments, LLC and the C-3 Commercial District line to its intersection with the centerline of Park Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Park Street to its intersection with the east property line of Lot 25 of Park Addition; thence southerly along the east property line of Lot 25 of Park Addition to its intersection with the south property line of Park Addition; thence westerly along the south property line of Park Addition to its intersection with the east boundary of Beauvoir Subdivision; thence southerly along the east boundary of Beauvoir Subdivision to its intersection with the centerline of the North Crowley Ditch; thence easterly along the centerline of the North Crowley Ditch to its intersection with the west boundary line of North Avenue F; thence southerly along the west boundary line of North Avenue F to its intersection with the centerline of Twelfth (12th) Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Twelfth (12th) Street to its intersection with the centerline of Parkerson Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Parkerson Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Tenth (10th) Street, the point of beginning. 
(B)  District II (East). Commencing at the revised point of beginning of the City of Crowley corporate limits thence northerly to its intersection with the centerline of US Highway 90; thence westerly along the centerline of US Highway 90 to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue O; thence northerly along the centerline of Avenue O to its intersection with the centerline of Eighth (8th) Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Eighth (8th) Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue P; thence northerly along the centerline of Avenue P to its intersection with the centerline of Hockaday Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Hockaday Street to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of US Highway 90; thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of US Highway 90 to its intersection with the centerline of Northern Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Northern Avenue to its intersection with the original corporate limits of the City of Crowley; thence northwesterly along the original corporate limits of the City of Crowley to the northeast corner of Lot 7; thence westerly along the original corporate limits of the City of Crowley to its intersection with the original northeast corner of the City of Crowley; thence westerly along the original corporate limits of the City of Crowley to its intersection with the east property line of the Bicentennial Park; thence northerly along the east property line of the Bicentennial Park to its intersection with the south boundary line of the old LI&M Co canal; thence easterly along the northern boundary line of the Bicentennial Park to its intersection with the eastern boundary line of Holly Street; thence northerly along the eastern boundary line of Holly Street to its intersection with the centerline of Louisiana Highway 11111/Oddfellows Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111/Oddfellows Road to its intersection with the east boundary line of the Walgreen property and corporate limits; thence southerly, westerly and northerly following the corporate limit line around the Walgreens property to the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111; thence westerly along the centerline of Louisiana Highway 1111 to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Louisiana Highway 1111 Spur; thence southerly along the west right-of-way line of the Louisiana Highway 1111 Spur to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of Seventeenth (17th) Street; thence easterly along the north boundary line of Seventeenth (17th) Street to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of US Highway 90; thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of US Highway 90 to its intersection with the north boundary line of the Bayou Village Nursing Home Partnership LLC property Tract "A"; thence following the meanders of the north boundary line around the Bayou Village Nursing Home Partnership LLC property Tract "A" to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of US Highway 90; thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of US Highway 90 to the revised point of beginning of the City of Crowley corporate limits. 
(C)  District III (West). Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of First (1st) Street with the centerline of Avenue E; thence northerly along the centerline of Avenue E to its intersection with the centerline of Third (3rd) Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Third (3rd) Street to its intersection with the corporate boundary; thence southerly along the corporate boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Second (2nd) Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Second (2nd) Street to its intersection with the centerline of Western Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Western Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of First (1st Street; thence easterly along the centerline of First (1st Street to the point of beginning. 
(D)  District IV (South). Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Hargrave Street with the west boundary line of Eastern Avenue; thence southerly along the west boundary line of Eastern Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Clay Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Clay Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue K; thence southerly along the centerline of Avenue K to its intersection with the centerline of Cedar Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Cedar Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue K; thence southerly along the centerline of Avenue K to its intersection with the centerline of Elm Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Elm Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue K; thence southerly along the centerline of Avenue K to its intersection with the centerline of Bayou Blanc; thence easterly and northeasterly along the centerline of Bayou Blanc to its intersection with the corporate boundary; thence southerly following the corporate boundary to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of Lovell Street and the corporate limits; thence easterly along the north right-of-way line of Lovell Street and the corporate limits to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Hunter Drive and the corporate limits; thence northerly and easterly along the west and north right-of-way line of Hunter Drive and the corporate limits to its intersection with the west boundary line of King Acres Subdivision and the corporate limits; thence northerly along the west boundary line of King Acres Subdivision and the corporate limits to its intersection with the north boundary of Lot 3 of the Devin Keith Ardoin property and the corporate limits; thence westerly along the north boundary of the Devin Keith Ardoin property and the corporate limits to its intersection with the corporate boundary line; thence northerly along the corporate limits line to its intersection with the centerline of Bayou Blanc and the corporate limits; thence easterly along the centerline of Bayou Blanc and the corporate limits to its intersection with the centerline of Avenue M; thence northerly along the centerline of Avenue M to its intersection with the centerline of Hargrave Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Hargrave Street to the point of beginning. 
(3.1405)  Applicability . 
(1)  The Overlay District regulations shall apply to all buildings or structures, except for individual single family detached dwellings, constructed, reconstructed or established after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(2)  An Overlay District is comprised of both zoning and development considerations that cannot be separated; consequently, the Zoning Commission and Board of Zoning Adjustment will address zoning matters within the Overlay Districts and the Planning Commission will address development matters within the Overlay Districts. 
(3.1406)  Definitions . 
(1)  Overlay District . A set of regulations incorporated into the Zoning Ordinance and the City of Crowley Subdivision Regulations that apply to a specific geographic area in addition to the underlying zoning and development regulations 
(2)  Buffer . A landscaped area intended to separate and partially screen the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 
(3)  Cross access, cross access easement . A service drive providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system. 
(4)  Monument sign . An independent sign affixed to the ground and supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base. A monument sign is not a pole sign. 
(5)  Out parcel . A parcel of land abutting and external to the larger, main parcel which is under separate ownership and has roadway frontage. 
(6)  Pole sign . A pole sign is one that is attached to a pole or poles erected directly into the ground. 
(3.1407)  Prohibited uses . The following uses are expressly prohibited in the Overlay Districts: 
(1)  Nightclubs, bars and lounges. 
(2)  Pawn shops. 
(3)  Used automobile, boat, trailer and/or truck sales unless adjacent to and part of a new vehicle dealership. 
(4)  Vehicle repair or vehicle service uses. 
(5)  Car washes. 
(6)  Display or sale lots for the sale of manufactured and/or moveable homes or commercial building. 
(7)  Mobile home parks. 
(8)  Travel trailer/RV parks. 
(3.1408)  Submittal requirements. In order to ensure compliance with this ordinance, planning commission approval of the proposed site plan shall be required concurrent with subdivision approval. In addition to the plat submittal requirements, the following minimum information shall be submitted to the planning, zoning and codes departments in the form of a site plan (twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches minimum size): 
(1)  The title of the project and the names of the project planner and developer. 
(2)  All existing and/or proposed physical feature such as streets, buildings, water courses, easements, parking spaces, service bays and loading areas, sidewalks and signs. 
(3)  Parking layout indicating the number and location of proposed parking spaces, the locations of ingress/egress, access streets and pedestrian and vehicular ways and a circulation element indicating the movement of pedestrians, goods and vehicles. 
(4)  A landscape plan of the site showing the type, size and number of plants, locations of trees to be preserved, the locations and dimensions of proposed planting beds, barrier curbs, site triangles, fences, buffers and screening, elevations of all fences and type of material to be used and total square footage of landscaping. 
(5)  Tabulation of maximum square footage of each use. 
(6)  The proposed heights and setbacks of any building or structure. 
(7)  Fascia treatment of the buildings or structures, including elevations and types of materials. 
(8)  The location, dimensions, area, type of materials and elevations of all signs and supporting structures. 
(9)  Location of trash disposal system and details of screening, including type, height and elevation of dumpster and fence. 
(10)  Lighting plans of the site showing location, number, type, height and materials of fixtures. 
(11)  Color rendering, color elevation, drawing and/or color photographs of any proposed building. 
(3.1409)  Access management . 
(1)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established wherever feasible overlay district and building sites shall incorporate the following: 
(A)  An access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated or shared parking areas wherever feasible. 
(B)  Stu-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties must be tied in to provide cross access via a service drive. 
(2)  Adjacent commercial or office properties and compatible major traffic generators (i.e., shopping plazas, office parks, apartments, etc.) shall provide a cross access drive to allow circulation between sites. This requirement shall also apply to a new building site that abuts an existing developed property, unless it is shown to be clearly impractical. Property owners shall record a cross access easement through a note on the plat or by recordation of a separate document in the records of the Acadia Parish Clerk of Court. 
(3)  Property owners who provide for joint and cross access may be granted a temporary driveway permit when necessary to provide reasonable access until such time as the joint use driveway and cross access drives are provided with adjacent properties. This is conditional upon the owner signing an agreement to close and eliminate any pre-existing driveways that were provided for access in the interim after construction of the joint use driveway. 
(4)  Direct driveway access to individual one and two-family dwellings shall be avoided. All other reasonable access alternatives shall be investigated by the review agent of the City of Crowley before direct residential driveway access is permitted. 
(5)  When a residential subdivision is proposed, it shall be designed to provide access to individual lots that abut only form a frontage road or interior local road. A buffer may be required by the planning commission at the rear of the residential lots to shield residents from traffic. The buffer shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet deep and shall be planted in a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs-minimum of eighteen (18) inches height at the time of planting, spaced no more than three feet on center. Where possible, the hedge shall not be planted in an easement. 
(6)  In the interest of promoting joint access and cross access plans, development sites under the same ownership or consolidated for the purposes of development and comprised of more than one building site, shall be considered unified parcels for the purposes of compliance with the access management requirements. This shall also apply to phased development plans. The following requirements shall apply: 
(A)  The number of connections permitted shall be the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to the overall site and not the maximum available for that frontage. 
(B)  Access to out parcels shall be internalized using a shared circulation system and designed to avoid excessive movement across parking aisles or queuing across surrounding parking and driving aisles. 
(7)  Where abutting properties are in different ownership and not part of an overall development plan, only the building site under consideration for development approval shall be subject to the requirements of this section. Abutting properties shall be required to provide for cross access at the time these properties are proposed for development. 
(8)  Construction of driveways along turn lanes and tapers is prohibited unless no other access to the property is available. In this instance, the driveway may be restricted to certain turning movements. In addition, the lane shall be extended a minimum of fifty (50) feet in advance of the driveway. No driveway shall be permitted within the transition area of any separate right turn or deceleration lane. 
(9)  Driveways within one hundred (100) feet of a median opening shall be consolidated wherever feasible to coordinate access at the median opening. 
(10)  Driveways shall be designed with adequate on-site storage for entering and exiting vehicles to reduce unsafe conflicts and to prevent traffic from stopping in the driveway and queuing across parking lot access aisles. 
(11)  As a condition of plat approval for new developments, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to provide a deceleration lane for any driveway if the right turn ingress volume exceeds one hundred (100) vehicles per hour or the parking area exceeds 200 parking spaces. Such calculation shall be made by the director of traffic and transportation or his designee, unless a traffic study is provided by the applicant or required by the commission. The design of such deceleration lane shall conform to the dimensions authorized by the director of traffic and transportation or his designee. 
(12)  A continuous deceleration lane may be required as a condition of a driveway permit or plat approval when two or more deceleration lanes are planned and their proximity necessitates that they be combined for proper traffic flow and safety. The transition taper for a continuous deceleration lane shall not extend into or beyond a public street intersection. 
(13)  The planning commission may require as a condition of plat approval the construction of a left turn deceleration lane and storage bay at existing median opening(s) when the proposed driveway will be served by such median opening and no left turn lane exists in the median. The design and construction of the deceleration lane and storage bay must be approved by the department of traffic and transportation. 
(14)  The applicant may be responsible for the design, adjustment of utilities and construction costs of any auxiliary lane and street widening required as a condition of plat approval by the planning commission. 
(3.1410)  Signalized intersections . 
(1)  As a condition of plat approval, the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a signal warrant analysis when signalization is requested or expected at the driveway intersection. When signal warrants are met and an overall public benefit is shown, the planning commission may require as a condition of plat approval that the applicant pay the traffic signal installation costs necessary to serve the subject driveway. The applicant may also be required to construct on-site and off-site improvements necessary to provide proper alignment, adequate signal capacity, smooth traffic flow and safety for the public street/driveway intersection. 
(2)  A traffic signal maintenance/access servitude must be provided to allow installation and/or maintenance of the sign detectors placed in the driveway/roadway surface. 
(3)  If a driveway is permitted and installed at an existing signalized intersection, the applicant shall pay any cost necessary to modify the existing signal and intersection to accommodate the new driveway. 
(3.1411)  Special driveway designs . The planning commission may require internal driveway improvements, turning movement prohibitions, auxiliary lanes and traffic control devices to address safety and/or capacity problems within the property that may have a detrimental effect on the adjacent public street system. Property owners will be required to install and maintain these improvements at their cost. 
(3.1412)  Accessory storage areas, including trash holding receptacles . 
(1)  Storage and accessory facilities must be attached to the primary building and constructed of the same materials as the building. No freestanding structures will be permitted. 
(2)  Refuse must be kept in a dumpster. Dumpsters may not be located in building setback areas, landscape strips or buffer areas. 
(3)  If, due to the absences of screening, the dumpster would be clearly visible off-site, an enclosure around the dumpster(s) shall be constructed of the same material as the building it serves. In addition, it must be surrounded on three sides by an evergreen hedge that will mature at a height of at least eight (8) feet. If the dumpster is located adjacent to the building, it shall be surrounded on two (2) sides by an evergreen hedge. 
(3.1413)  Architecture . All buildings on the same site shall be architecturally unified, meaning that each building on the site shall relate in architectural style, color scheme and building materials. Variances of architectural requirements may be granted by the planning commission at the time of site plan approval. 
(3.1414)  Building materials . 
(1)  Corrugated metal siding, aluminum siding or vinyl siding is prohibited. 
(2)  No exposed metal wall panels are allowed on the exterior walls. 
(3)  A pitched roof, such as a hip or gable, must be provided, except when the footprint of the building is eight thousand (8,000) square feet or larger. The roof will have a minimum six on 12 pitch. 
(4)  Building and roof colors shall consist of natural earth tones, white, black or shares of gray. Primary colors or other bright colors shall be limited to trim and signage. 
(5)  In the case where a canopy is constructed, its columns shall be finished with either brick or masonry that is consistent with the principal building material. 
(6)  For developments larger than eight thousand (8,000) square feet, the following architectural requirements shall apply: 
(A)  Facades greater than one hundred (100) feet in length measured horizontally shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three (3) percent of the length of the facade and extending at least twenty (20) percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet. 
(B)  Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three of the following elements: color change; texture change; and expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than twenty-four (24) inches in width. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet, either horizontally or vertically. 
(C)  Rooflines must incorporate a change in elevation at the roofline no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the height of the wall for no less than twenty (20) percent of the length of the wall. 
(3.1415)  Height . In addition to a required buffer, any portion of a non-residential structure that exceeds twenty-eight (28) feet in height above the grade of an adjacent residentially zoned property shall be setback from the abutting property line or lines at least one additional foot for every one foot of height above twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(3.1416)  Driveways . Decorative devices shall be used near driveway entrances in lieu of street bollards. Bollards may be used to protect fuel pump islands. 
(3.1417)  Mechanical equipment . 
(1)  Mechanical equipment must be screened according to the following standards: 
(A)  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened by a parapet wall or similar structural feature that is an integral part of the building's architectural design. The parapet wall or similar structure feature shall be of a height equal to or greater than the height of the mechanical equipment being screened. 
(B)  Wall-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view by structural features that are compatible with the architecture of the subject building. 
(C)  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view by a decorative wall that is compatible with the architecture and landscaping of the development site. the wall shall be of a height equal to or greater than the height of the mechanical equipment being screened. 
(2)  Mechanical equipment that is not screened in compliance with these standards shall have the opportunity for alternative compliance as approved by the director of planning, zoning and codes. Alternative screening methods may include, but shall not be limited to, increased setbacks, increased landscaping, grouping the equipment on a specific portion of a site and painting or otherwise camouflaging the equipment. 
(3.1418)  Parking . 
(1)  The parking area in front of the building shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the required parking. The remaining required off street parking must be placed to the rear or side of the building. 
(2)  Shared parking areas are encouraged. Joint use of up to thirty-five (35) percent of required parking spaces may be permitted for two (2) or more uses provided that the applicant for the development can demonstrate that the uses will not substantially overlap in hours of operation. 
(3)  If it is not practical to place parking in the rear or side of the buildings, one or a combination of the following shall be provided: 
(A)  A 3.5-foot berm along the frontage of the parking area plated in turf grass or low growing ground cover. 
(B)  Continuous evergreen shrubs planted to form a hedge, minimum eighteen (18) inches height at the time of planting, spaced no more than three (3) feet on center. 
(4)  All parking lots must have a concrete or asphalt curb and gutter cross section with subsurface drainage. 
(5)  The maximum parking for retail developments larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross building area shall not exceed five (5) spaces per thousand square feet of building. 
(3.1419)  Drainage . 
(1)  All developments must comply with the City of Crowley Flood Protection Ordinance. 
(2)  All development must comply with regulations established by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) and the United States Army Corp of Engineers for development within a flood plain. 
(3)  Post-development run-off may not exceed pre-development run-off. 
(4)  Drainage impact analyses and construction plans must be submitted to and approved by the department of public works engineering division prior to issuance of any building permits. 
(3.1420)  Communication towers and antenna standards . 
(1)  All communication towers shall be camouflaged or disguised to look like natural trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, flagpoles or other similar alternative designs to conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
(2)  All antennas that are located on rooftops or atop other structures must adhere to the following aesthetic criteria: 
(A)  No rooftop dish antenna may exceed four (4) feet in diameter. 
(B)  Antennas placed on rooftops shall be setback from the roof edge a minimum of one foot per foot of antenna height. 
(3)  Setbacks from residential zoning districts. Towers shall be setback from residential zoning districts a minimum of one foot per foot of tower height. Communication tower setback shall be measured from the base of the tower. 
(4)  Landscaping. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower compound. The use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for, or in supplement toward, meeting landscaping requirements. Landscape buffers shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the tower compound. 
(A)  A row of Class B evergreen trees a minimum of eight (8) feet tall (planted height) and a maximum of ten (10) feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence; and 
(B)  A continuous hedge at least thirty (30) inches high at planting and capable of growing to at least thirty-six (36) inches in height within eighteen (18) months shall be planted in front of the tree line referenced above. 
(3.1421)  Landscaping standards . 
(1)  Landscape strips and islands. 
(A)  Street frontage: For property within this overlay district, a landscape strip a minimum of thirty (30) feet in depth must be provided along each property line abutting Interstate 10. A landscape strip averaging thirty (30) feet in depth must be provided along any other public or private street. 
(B)  Where interior landscape islands are provided, the minimum area of the island shall be three hundred twenty-four (324) square feet with minimum interior width of eighteen (18) feet. 
(C)  Planting standards. 
(1)  A minimum of one Class A tree with upright growth habits or three Class B trees shall be provided per fifty (50) linear feet of landscape strip of fraction thereof measured at the property line. Class A trees shall not be planted in utility easements. 
(2)  Fifty (50) percent of required trees must be evergreen and may be located anywhere within their respective landscape strip provided that the minimum spacing for Class A trees is thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Fifty (50) percent of the required trees must be Class A trees with upright growth habits. 
(4)  In addition to required trees, the street planting area shall be planted with shrubs and ground cover plantings to the extent that twenty (20) percent of the area is planted with vegetation other than turf grass. 
(2)  Buffers . Where a sight proof fence is required, a thirty-foot planted buffer must also be provided as follows: 
(A)  A minimum of fifteen (15) feet of this strip may not be located in an easement. 
(B)  Three Class B evergreen trees shall be provided per fifty (50) linear feet of landscape strip or fraction thereof measured at the property line. 
(C)  Natural vegetative features and existing trees shall be incorporated into the site design if practical. 
(3.1422)  Lighting standards . 
(1)  General. 
(A)  All lighting shall be directed downward and shielded so that the light source is not visible form off-site. 
(B)  The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited. 
(2)  Parking lot lighting. 
(A)  Parking lot lighting poles shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(B)  Pole lighting shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to a property line. 
(C)  The minimum area for a landscape island with pole lighting shall be six hundred (600) square feet. 
(3.1423)  Sign standards . 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
(A)  Height. 
(1)  An integrated business center or an individual business site that is located within five hundred (500) feet of the Interstate 10 right-of-way may erect a monument sign that shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height above ground elevation grade. 
Exception: A pole sign with a maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet above ground elevation grade is allowed on property adjacent to the right-of-way of Interstate Highway 10. 
(2)  An individual business site located farther than five hundred (500) feet from the Interstate 10 right-of-way or an out parcel in any location shall be limited to monument type signs with a maximum height of ten (10) feet and a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(B)  One multi-tenant sign is allowed per street frontage. Integrated business centers fronting on more than one street may have one sign constructed on the corner of two (2) intersecting streets outside the sight triangle; or tow signs, each fronting on a street in such a manner that each sign will advertise on different streets. Businesses that advertise on a multi-tenant sign may not construct an individual freestanding sign. 
(C)  Lighted signs shall be internally lit-no external lighting allowed. 
(D)  Signs must be architecturally related to the buildings they serve. 
(E)  Each lot shall have a maximum of one sign per street frontage. 
(F)  Signs shall display only the name, address and trademark or registered logo. Fuel pricing signs may display only the price and name, trademark or registered logo of the product. 
(G)  Signs may not flash, blink or fluctuate or be animated. 
(H)  Church identification signs shall display only the church name, service hours and church related events. 
(I)  Windblown devices. Use of windblown or inflatable devices of any type is prohibited, including the production of smoke, bubbles, sound or other substances. 
(2)  Building signs. 
(A)  Signs shall not project higher than the top of the building or wall on which it is located unless specifically approved by the planning commission at the time of site plan approval. 
(B)  Signs affixed to canopies shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 12-13-16) 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMISSION FOR ADDITIONAL HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 4.1. - General. 
    By motion, the mayor and board of aldermen may authorize such uses as, but not limited to, beauty parlors, barber shops, nursery schools, kindergartens, day care centers, art studios and schools, craft schools, photographers' studios, music instruction in groups, dancing schools, and small repair shops to operate as home occupations, provided the following provisions are complied with: 
(4.101) Written consent must be obtained from all owners of property abutting the petitioner's property; 
(4.102) Written consent must be obtained from all owners of property situated on the opposite side of any public street or way directly opposite side of any public street or way directly opposite petitioner's property and fifty (50) feet on each side of the extension of the boundary line of such property across such public street or way; 
(4.103) Written consent must be obtained from seventy-five (75) per cent of all property owners including those described in paragraphs (1) and (2) above owning property within three hundred (300) feet of petitioner's property. 
Sec. 4.2. - Procedure. 
(4.201) Application shall be made to the planning commission stating the proposed use and stating reasons for same; 
(4.202) The planning commission shall review the application, determine whether or not the use would be a permitted use and advise applicant of its decision; 
(4.203) The planning commission determines that the use would be remissible hereunder, a petition form shall be furnished to the applicant to secure the required consent by property owner signatures; 
(4.204) The planning commission shall verify that the petition meets the requirements hereof and make its recommendation to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
Sec. 4.3. - Policies. 
(4.301) Applicant must submit to the planning commission the petition of consent within sixty (60) days from the date of approval of application unless an extension of time is granted by the planning commission; 
(4.302) Should the mayor and board of aldermen grant the permission requested, actual operations must begin within six (6) months of the date of such permission; 
(4.303) If application is not approved or if property owner consent is not obtained or if the mayor and board of aldermen denies permission, then resubmission of application cannot be made within six (6) months of the applicable date. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 5.1. - Intent. 
    Any building, structure, or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance may be continued as a nonconforming use even though such building, structure, or use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance for the use district in which it is located. Similarly, whenever a use district shall be change thereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued. 
Sec. 5.2. - Nonconforming uses. 
(5.201) A nonconforming use may be extended on the original parcel of land on which it is situated at the time of passage of this ordinance, but may be extended into any required parking area unless other parking area is substituted therefore, nor into a minimum side yard and rear yard of five (5) feet from any interior boundary line of the said parcel of land. 
(5.202) No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use. 
(5.203) Nothing in this ordinance shall be taken to prevent the restoration or replacement of a building wholly or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God or the public enemy provided such reconstruction or restoration shall commence within one year of such destruction and be completed within two (2) years. 
(5.204) Any nonconforming structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority may be restored to a safe condition. 
(5.205) Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification. 
(5.206) Whenever a building or land use in whole or in part for nonconforming purpose becomes and remains vacant for a continuous period of one year, or when the operations normally carried on in such building or on such land have been discontinued for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be re-established, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Leasing the premises, commencement of repairs, reconstruction or replacement in the event of casualty loss and remodeling operations shall interrupt such one year period. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - General requirements. 
    Off-street parking facilities for one-family and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building to be served. The location of off-street parking facilities for other uses shall not be more than three hundred (300) feet distance measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway; provided, however, that the zoning classification for such land is the same or less restrictive than the classification of the lot upon which the main use is located. 
    Such parking space to be used in conjunction with the principal use shall be reserved as such through an encumbrance of the title of the property to be designated as a required parking space, such encumbrance to be valid for the total period of the use or uses for which the parking is needed are in existence. 
(6.101) Parking requirements for two (2) or more uses of the same or different type may be satisfied by the allocation of a common or collective parking facility. Such facility shall not be less than the same requirements for the individual uses computed separately. 
(6.102) Area reserved for off-street parking or loading in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified except where equivalent off-street parking or loading space is provided elsewhere. 
(6.103) For uses not mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for a similar use specifically mentioned in this section shall apply. 
(6.104) No parking space will be permitted on corner lots within thirty (30) feet of the intersection with said thirty (30) feet to be measured from the property corner along the front and side property lines. This requirement shall not be applied to boulevards or one-way streets. 
(6.105) No parking space may be permitted closer to the roadway edge or curb than ten (10) feet. 
(6.106) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this section for approved home occupations. 
(6.107) Whenever the parking lot adjoins vacant or developed property residentially zoned, a continuous fence not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) feet in height, constructed of permanent durable type material shall be constructed by the owner of the parking lot between the parking lot and the residentially zoned area. 
(6.108) Existing buildings not complying with off-street parking or loading requirements may be remodeled, repaired and structurally altered but any enlargement must provide the parking spaces as required by the enlargement. 
Sec. 6.2. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on any lot or plot which any of the following uses are hereafter established or extended such space shall be provided with vehicular access to street or alley and shall be deemed to be required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not hereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. When a use is increased in capacity by the addition of dwelling rooms, guest rooms, floor area or seats, the minimum off-street parking shall be provided for such increase. Except where required in connection with dwellings, such parking spaces shall be hard surface with a minimum of four (4) inches of gravel, shell or similar all weather surface, and such access shall be similarly surfaced. Building and land uses established after the adoption of this ordinance shall be provided with such off-street automobile storage or standing space as follows: 
Use Parking Space Required Single-family dwelling 2 space per dwelling unit Two-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit Multifamily dwelling and apartments 2 spaces per dwelling unit Hotels and motels 1 space for each guest bedroom, plus 1 additional space for each 4 employees Boarding and lodging homes 1 space for each 3 bedrooms, plus 1 additional space for resident manager Clinics 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Clubs and lodges 1 space on the site for each 250 square feet of gross floor area Hospitals 1 space for each bed, plus 1 space for each staff doctor, plus one space for each 2 employees including nurses Medical treatment facility 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor space Nursing and convalescent homes and institutions 1 space for each 8 beds Churches, temples and other places of worship For new church at new or existing sites, 1 parking space on the lot for each 6 seats in the main auditorium, or each 64 square feet where there are no seats except where there are off-street parking facilities adjacent and available to the church use, this requirement may be reduced to 1 space for each 8 seats. For existing churches where additional seating facilities are being provided in the main auditorium or assembly room, 1 parking space on the lot for each 8 additional seats or each additional 64 square feet where there are no seats. Mortuaries and funeral parlors 1 parking space for each 150 feet for gross floor space Theaters, auditorium, sport arenas, and places of public assembly 1 space for each 4 seats or each 32 square feet of gross assembly area, where there are no seats Skating rink, dance hall, exhibit hall, gym Space equal to 2 times the gross floor area Bowling alleys 2 spaces per alley Schools, public and private Elementary: 2 spaces per classroom, laboratory or manual training shop; junior high: 3 spaces per classroom, laboratory or manual training shop; senior high: 6 spaces per classroom, laboratory or manual training shop; colleges, universities, trade, industrial and business schools: 8 spaces per classrooms, laboratory or other teaching rooms Business and professional offices 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor space Bars, night clubs 1 space of each 100 square feet of gross floor area devoted to patron use, plus one space for each 4 employees Automobile repair shop 1 space per each 200 square feet of floor space of gross floor space General business, retail, commercial,and personal service establishments but not including supermarket 1 space for each 250 square feet of groww floor area Supermarkets 1 space for each 180 square feet of gross floor area Roadside stands 5 spaces for each such establishment Commercial, manufacturing, and industrial establishments not catering to retail trade 1 space for each 4 employees on the largest work shift, plus 1 space for each company vehicle operating from the premises Libraries, museum, art galleries 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Restaurants 1 space for each 4 seats Warehouses and distribution establishments containing up to and including 10,000 square feet of gross floor area 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area Warehouse and distribution establishments containing more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area 25 parking spaces, plus one  
(Ord. No. 1204, § 3, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 6.3. - Off-street loading space requirements. 
    Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building or use having seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of floor area or more, shall have at least one permanently maintained off-street loading space for each seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of floor area or portion thereof. Each space shall have the minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet and shall be provided within the same building or upon the same lot it is intended to serve. In no case shall any required loading space be part of an area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this ordinance. This provision does not apply to commercial or industrial uses or buildings that do not necessitate the use of trucks or other vehicles for delivery or disposition of goods to and from the building. 
Sec. 6.4. - Off-street drive-in/drive-thru driveway vehicle space requirements. 
(a)  Every establishment having or utilizing drive-in/drive-thru driveways for the sale, pickup or delivery of goods and services on any lot or plat of land providing vehicular access from streets or alleyways shall provide sufficient storage capacity for the retention of automobiles of one hundred (100) feet, in a single file line from the property line to the first service window, access or service point from the flow of traffic. 
(b)  Such driveways shall be hard-surface (concrete, blacktop or other similar all-weather surface) from the edge of the roadway or curb for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet or to the property line, whichever is greater. 
(c)  In no case shall any of the required drive-in/drive-thru space be part of an area used to satisfy the off-street parking regulations and requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to commercial or industrial buildings utilizing driveways for delivery of goods and merchandise to the establishment or the disposition of goods or merchandise from the buildings by commercial trucks. 
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 11-12-2014) 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF SIGNS 

Sec. 7.1. - General restrictions. 
    All signs hereafter erected on any lot in any district, except official traffic and street signs, shall conform to the provisions of this article. Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, the following regulations shall apply to signs in all districts: 
(7.101) No sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape and no sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(7.102) No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where, by reason of position it may interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic sign lines or traffic-control devices. If located within direct line of vision of a traffic-control device, no flashing or intermittent red, green or amber illumination shall be used. 
(7.103) Any sign affixes flat against the wall of a building and not more than fifteen (15) inches in thickness shall not be deemed a projecting sign. Projecting signs may extend not more than forty-eight (48) inches beyond the building line, or over public property, in no event closer than two (2) feet to the curb line, and shall be at least ten (10) feet above the finished grade of the sidewalk. Wall signs shall not extend more than fifteen (15) inches over public property; however, lighting devices may extend not more than six (6) feet over public property provided the lowest part of such device is at least fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade. 
(7.104) The illumination of any sign within fifty (50) feet of and facing a residential zone lot line shall be diffused or indirect and designed to prevent direct rays of light from shining into adjoining residential districts and in no event shall flashing or intermittent illumination be permitted where the sign faces directly into and is nearer than three hundred (300) feet to dwellings in a residential district. 
(7.105) Directional or informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature not exceeding six (6) square feet in area may be permitted in any district on approval of the zoning administrator. Any illumination shall be nonflashing, uncolored and confined to the face of the sign. No advertising matter whatsoever shall be permitted on signs of this type. 
(7.106) Temporary signs indicating an event of public interest such as a state or local fair, local or general election, cattle or horse show, etc., may be erected on a thirty (30) day nonrenewable permit in any zone on approval of the zoning administrator. 
(7.107) Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a building or premises, or endangers the public safety, the zoning administrator shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises of which the sign is located that such sign be made safe or removed within ten (10) days. 
(7.108) Any business or outdoor advertising sign legally existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance and which does not conform to these provisions shall not be altered, or changed in over-all dimensions, except to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. If damaged to an extent in excess of one-half of its current replacement value, it shall not be rebuilt, provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs, repainting or posting of such signs or structures. 
(7.109) Unless otherwise provided in these regulations, all signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the building code for the City of Crowley and a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for nonelectric signs shall be charged. 
(7.110) To provide reasonable flexibility in these regulations, the board of zoning adjustment may approve an application for a business sign or advertising structure which may not conform with the provisions of the district in which it is to be located, where the location, size or addition would not be inconsistent with the character of the area or neighborhood in which such sign or structure is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 2, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 7.2. - Signs in R Residential districts. 
    In residential districts no sign shall be permitted except the following: 
(7.201) A sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, giving the name and/or address only of the land or building on which displayed or the owner or lessee thereof. 
(7.202) A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a building or property, provided such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area and is unilluminated. 
(7.203) Temporary signs, for one year, advertising a new subdivision development of five (5) lots or more, provided such signs do not exceed sixty (60) square feet in surface area, are not more than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than two (2) feet above ground, advertise only the development in which they are located and are erected only at dedicated street entrances. 
(7.204) One unilluminated sign identifying an engineer, architect or contractor engaged in the construction of a building, provided such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area, is no more than fifteen (15) feet or less than two (2) feet above ground and is removed within thirty (30) days following occupancy of the building. 
(7.205) One identification sign not to exceed thirty (30) square feet in area, for the following uses: Church, school, hospital, library, farm, park, clinic or similar uses. Such sign shall be solely for the purpose of displaying the name of the institution and its activities or services. It may be illuminated but not flashing. 
(7.206) Directional signs not to exceed two (2) square feet in surface area for the following uses: Church, school, hospital, library, sanitarium, clinic or similar use provided that each shall be limited to one such sign per major thoroughfare approach. No such sign shall be permitted on minor residential streets. 
(7.207) One name plate sign for a dwelling group of four (4) or more units not exceeding five (5) square feet in surface area. Such signs may indicate the names and addresses of the buildings or it may be a directory for occupants. 
Sec. 7.3. - Signs in M-1 Medical Service districts. 
(7.301) All signs permitted in R districts. 
Sec. 7.4. - Signs in C-2 Neighborhood Commercial districts. 
    In the districts signs are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(7.401) All signs permitted in the R, M-1 and C-1 districts. 
(7.402) The total area of all business signs on a building or lot shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet or the sum of three (3) square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage, whichever is the greater. No single business sign surface may exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area, nor shall two (2) or more smaller signs be so arranged and integrated as to create a surface area in excess of three hundred (300) square feet. 
(7.403) Advertising sign structures shall be limited to not more than one structure for a lot of one hundred (100) foot frontage or less, and to one additional structure for each one hundred (100) feet of additional lot frontage. Such structure may contain not more than two (2) signs per facing nor exceed fifty-five (55) feet in length and no advertising sign may exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. No advertising sign shall be erected within fifty (50) feet of an adjoining residence district if designed to face into such district. 
(7.404) Coordinated shopping centers. Each coordinated shopping center may have one incidental or freestanding identification sign for each street frontage, set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front property line and announcing only the name of the shopping center and business located therein, and the hours of business. 
Sec. 7.5. - Signs in C-3 Highway Commercial districts and C-4 Central Business districts. 
    In the C-3 and C-4 districts signs are permitted with following regulations: 
(7.501) All signs permitted in the R and M-1 districts. 
(7.502) The total surface area of a business sign or signs on a lot shall not exceed six (6) square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage. 
(7.503) Advertising sign structures shall be limited to no more than one structure for a lot of fifty (50) foot frontage or less, and to one additional structure for each fifty (50) feet of additional lot frontage. Such structure may contain not more than two (2) signs per facing, nor exceed fifty-five (55) foot length. No advertising sign may be erected within fifty (50) feet of an adjoining residence district if designed to face into such district. 
(7.504) Coordinated shopping center. Each coordinated shopping center may have one incidental or freestanding identification sign for each street frontage, set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front property line and announcing only the name of the shopping center and business located therein, and the hours of business. 
Sec. 7.6. - Signs in I-1 and I-2 Industrial districts. 
    In the I-1 and I-2 districts signs are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(7.601) All signs permitted in the R and M-1 districts. 
(7.602) The total surface area of a business sign or signs on a building or lot shall not exceed ten (10) square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage. 
(7.603) Advertising sign structures shall be permitted subject to the general restrictions section [section 7.1] of this article. 
Sec. 7.7. - Off-premises signs and permitting. 
    Off-premises signs shall be regulated pursuant to this section as follows: 
(7.701)  Permitted locations. Off-premises signs are prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Crowley except in all areas zoned commercial or industrial, adjacent to Interstate 10 within the corporate limits, and within the control area. The control area of Interstate 10 shall be three hundred (300) feet from the center of the median. 
(7.702)  Erection of signs. Off-premises signs shall be ground mounted only by means of a single steel support post. Signs may be erected double decked or stacked, back to back, or "v" type with not more than two (2) displays on each side. Signs may not be erected side by side. 
(7.703)  Set-back requirements. All off-premises signs shall be setback a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the front and rear property lines and shall be setback a minimum distance of five (5) feet from all side property lines. 
(7.704)  Measurements. All measurements for off-premises signs shall be measured from the closest outermost extremity of the sign and not from the base structure unless the base structure is the outermost extremity which is closest. 
(7.705)  Minimum distance between signs. No off-premises sign shall be located closer than one thousand (1000) feet from another off-premises sign, measured along front property lines on the same side of the street, corners included. 
(7.706)  Construction requirements. All off-premises signs shall be constructed to meet one hundred (100) m.p.h. wind load, as certified on engineering drawing, by a certified and licensed engineer of the State of Louisiana. Note: Engineering drawing shall be supplied to the City of Crowley Building Inspector, prior to the permit being issued. 
(7.707)  Prohibited off-premises outdoor advertising signs. The following is a list of all prohibited types of off-premises signs: 
(1)  Any sign or billboard which contains, as part of the message, mirror like surfaces. 
(2)  Any sign or billboard which emits smoke, vapor, particles or odor. 
(3)  Any sign or billboard which is illuminated and said illumination directs in any directions which can be deemed dangerous or annoying by the public or traffic flowing on Interstate 10. 
(4)  Signs which are obsolete, including billboards which have been blank for six (6) months, structures not meeting construction standards, and signs which have been erected without a permit. 
(7.708)  Permit process. All applicants for an off-premises sign shall submit a plat of survey indicating exact location of the sign, property lines, distance from property lines, size of the sign, all measurements of the sign (height, length, square footage per face), any easements, right-of-ways, utility lines, coulees, and any other pertinent information. 
(7.709)  Permit fees. All applicants shall pay a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) construction/inspection fee to the City of Crowley, at the time that said application is made. Additionally, applicant shall be assessed a fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of anticipated construction cost, at the time that said permit is approved and issued. 
(Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 12-14-99) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8.1. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to enforce this ordinance. The board of aldermen shall appoint a zoning administrator who may hold other municipal office in the city. It shall also be the duty of all officers and employees of the City of Crowley, Louisiana, and especially of all members of the police department to assist the zoning administrator by reporting to him upon new construction, alterations, relocations, repairs or land uses, or upon seeming violations. Appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator may be made to the board of zoning adjustment as provided in Article IV of this ordinance. 
Sec. 8.2. - Building permits. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, altered, repaired or relocated until a permit therefor has been issued by the zoning administrator. The application for and issuance of such permits shall not be issued until application for a certificate of zoning compliance has been made and approved. 
Sec. 8.3. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
    No change in the use or occupancy of land or of a existing building shall be made, nor shall any new building be used or changed in use, until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the zoning administrator, stating that the proposed use of the building or land complies with the provisions of this ordinance. The issuance of such a certificate shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
(8.301) Applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made coincident with the application for a building permit. After determining that the proposed erection, alteration, repair, relocation or change in use is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, each such application shall be approved by the zoning administrator and shall be countersigned by the director of the planning commission. 
(8.302) All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, height and location of the building or buildings to be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered or relocated, the size and location of any buildings on the lot and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. All required parking areas and access driveways must be shown and the individual car stalls clearly indicated. A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator. 
(8.303) When making application for a certificate of zoning compliance, the following investigation and compliance fees shall be paid: 
(1)  Accessory buildings, home occupations and signs ..... $ 3.00 
(2)  Dwellings, semipublic buildings and business, commercial or industrial uses not involving erection, alteration, repair or relocation ..... 5.00 
(3)  Business, commercial or industrial uses involving erection, alteration, repair or relocation ..... 10.00 
(8.304) A final certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued by the zoning administrator within ten (10) days after the completed work shall have been inspected and approved as complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(8.305) The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates and copies shall be furnished upon payment of one dollar ($1.00) each, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
ARTICLE IX. - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Board of appeals and adjustment, R.S. 33:4727. 

Sec. 9.1. - Creation and appointment. 
    A board of zoning adjustment is hereby created and established. The word "board" when used in this article shall be construed to mean the board of zoning adjustment. The board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with the consent of the board of aldermen. Each member of the board shall be a freeholder of the City of Crowley and a qualified voter of said city and no elected or appointed public official shall be eligible to serve on such board so long as he holds other public office. The membership of the first board shall serve respectively, one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, and one for five (5) years. Thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each. All members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
Sec. 9.2. - Organization. 
    The board shall elect its own chairman, who shall serve for one year. The director of the planning commission shall also serve as the secretary of the board of zoning adjustment, but shall not be considered as a voting member of the board. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a true and correct record of all proceedings of the board. 
Sec. 9.3. - Records. 
    The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes of the board shall show the vote of each member upon each question, or, if failing to vote, indicating that fact. All minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be public record. Certified copies of all decisions of the board shall be furnished to the zoning administrator and the planning commission. 
Sec. 9.4. - General procedure. 
    The board shall adopt rules of procedure not in conflict with any state act or City of Crowley, Louisiana, ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other items as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. All testimony presented at a public hearing, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a recorder. In exercising its powers and duties, the board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under such ordinance, or to effect any variance of such ordinance. 
Sec. 9.5. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the board may be taken by any party aggrieved, or by any officer, department, commission, board, bureau or other agency of the City of Crowley, Louisiana, affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days time, by filing with the zoning administrator and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board of zoning adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of zoning adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown. The board of zoning adjustment shall fix a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the interested parties and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
Sec. 9.6. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of zoning adjustment shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty: 
(9.601) To hear and decide appeals involving the interpretation of any provisions of this ordinance or where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(9.602) In hearing and deciding appeals, the board shall have the power to grant exceptions in the following instances: 
(1)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single or joint ownership of record at the time such line is adopted, permit the less restricted portion of such lot to extend not more than thirty (30) feet into the more restricted portion, provided the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district. 
(2)  Interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of the plan, as shown upon the zoning district map, where the district boundaries are uncertain, or where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the district map. 
(3)  Permit the erection and use of a building or the use of land for railroads or public utility purposes. 
(4)  Permit unenclosed roadside stands for the sale of products raised on the premises, commercial amusements or recreational developments for temporary or seasonal periods, not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(5)  Permit temporary buildings, that are used in conjunction with construction work only, in any district during the period that construction work is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. 
(6)  Permit land in the R-2 Single-Family Residential and in the R-3 Two-Family Residential districts within three hundred (300) feet of a use permitted in an R-4 Multiple-Family Residential district, C-2 Neighborhood Shopping district, M-1 Medical Service district and for nonconforming uses, to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with the permitted use but only when there is positive assurance that such land will be used for such purpose during the existence of the permitted use. 
(7)  Permit land in the R-4 Multiple-Family district within three hundred (300) feet of a use permitted in R-4 Multiple-Family Residential district, M-1 Medical Service district and C-2 Neighborhood Shopping districts and for nonconforming uses to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with the permitted uses, but only when there is positive assurance that such land will be used for such purpose during the existence of the permitted use. 
(8)  Permit the development of airports and the erection of commercial radio and television broadcasting towers in any district except residential districts and permit the erection of private radio towers in any district. 
No exception shall be granted by the board of zoning adjustment unless it finds that the use for which such exception is sought will not, in the circumstances of the particular case and under any conditions that the board considers to be necessary or desirable, be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(9.603) To vary or adopt the strict application of the yard requirements or height restrictions, and parking or sign regulations in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow, or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions, whereby such strict application would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land in accordance with the use regulations of this ordinance, to waive or reduce the parking requirements whenever the use of a building or land is so extraordinary as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking facilities, or whenever it can be shown that provision of required off-street parking space within three hundred (300) feet of the main building is not feasible and would impose an unreasonable hardship as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience, to approve an application for a business sign or advertising structure which may not conform with the provisions of the district in which it is to be located, where the location, size or addition would not be inconsistent with the character of the area or neighborhood in which such sign or structure is to be located. In granting any variance the board of zoning adjustment shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. 
No variance shall be granted by the board of zoning adjustment unless it finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions fully described in the findings, applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or buildings in the neighborhood, and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building. 
(2)  That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings, the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance as granted by the board is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose. 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(9.604) The following additional requirements, procedures and general instructions for application for zoning adjustments, including a variance, conditional use or appeals from the restrictions or limitations of the ordinance, shall be followed and all applicants shall use the application form and provide the documentation certification attached. Applicants may be the owner or the owner's designated representative provided specific written authorization is attached to the application. 
(1)  Nature of appeal/adjustment/variance/conditional use. In describing the exact nature and type of appeal, adjustment, variance or conditional use being requested, the applicant must clearly indicate the specific requirements that are being requested and/or the administrative decision or interpretation that is being appealed. The applicant should describe the particular provisions of this ordinance or other laws that prevent the proposed use or construction and how the literal interpretation of the provisions of the zoning ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance. Any person shall make application through the office of the zoning administration. 
(2)  Supporting information. The applicant must provide a site plan as a part of the application. The site plan shall be drawn to a scale and fifteen (15) copies provided. The site plan must accurately show north arrow, vicinity map, streets, sidewalks, property lines, location of utilities, natural features, easements, the location of existing and proposed construction, open yard areas, curbs, fences, walks, driveways, parking (with each space clearly delineated), entrances and exits, signs and any other information the zoning administration may deem appropriate to present to the board of zoning adjustment. 
Upon request, fifteen (15) copies of elevations of the proposed development must be provided. 
(3)  Notification. In applying for a variance, the applicant shall supply the names and addresses typed on gum-backed labels of owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of the property where the variance is being sought. 
(4)  Fee. A filing fee of one hundred fifty and no/100 ($150.00) dollars must accompany every application. 
(5)  Attendance. No action will be taken on any application unless the applicant or authorized agent is present at the meeting to answer any questions that may be raised at the meeting. 
(6)  Application form and certification and agreement. The application form and certification agreement are on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1336, § 1, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 9.7. - Court review. 
    Any person, or any officer, department, commission, board, bureau, or any other agency of the City of Crowley, Louisiana, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning adjustment, may present to the district court of the Parish of Acadia, within thirty (30) days after filing of the decision in the office of the board, a petition for a writ of certiorari asking for such relief and under such rules and regulations as are provided for such matters in appropriate legislation of the State of Louisiana. 
ARTICLE X. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 10.1. - Violation. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, structurally altered, or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, any proper officials of the City of Crowley, Louisiana, or their duly authorized representatives, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, structural alteration, maintenance, use, or other violations, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
Sec. 10.2. - Penalties. 
    Each day that any violation of any provision of this ordinance continues or exists, shall constitute a separate offense and a misdemeanor. The violation of any provision hereof shall be punished by fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five (5) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
ARTICLE XI. - AMENDMENTS AND PETITIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Initiation of amendments. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change the regulations, restrictions, or boundaries herein or subsequently established. Such amendment, supplement, or change may be initiated: 
(1)  By action of the mayor and board of aldermen itself by introduction of an ordinance or by adoption of a motion. 
(2)  By recommendation of the planning commission. 
(3)  By petition of property owners. 
Sec. 11.2. - Petitions. 
    Petitions by property owners for the amendment, supplementation or change of the zoning ordinance shall be filed with the mayor and board of aldermen through the planning commission. In filing such petitions, the following rules shall apply: 
(11.201) No petition for a change in the classification of property shall be filed unless such petition is duly signed by the owners or authorized agents of not less than fifty (50) per cent of the area of land for which a change of classification is requested; provided, however, that where any lot located in the aforesaid area is owned in indivisum, all co-owners must sign the petition for that lot to be included in the fifty (50) per cent area provision. 
(11.202) Each petition for a change in the classification of property shall conform to such standards and requirements as the planning commission shall adopt. 
(11.203) For each petition for a change in the classification of property or a portion thereof for which a change of classification is requested, regardless of the number of acres or size of the parcel, the fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Under no conditions or circumstances shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of said request to be adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen. The petitioner or property owner shall also pay the direct cost of recording and transcribing the hearing to writing of all testimony given at the public hearing held by the zoning commission. 
(11.204) Whenever a petition is filed requesting a change or amendment to this ordinance, and said petition has been finally acted upon by the mayor and board of aldermen, or when said petition has received no action on the part of the mayor and board of aldermen within ninety (90) days from the date of submission of the report of the planning commission, or when said petition has been officially advertised for public hearing, but has subsequently been withdrawn either before or after said public hearing has been held, then the mayor and board of aldermen shall not consider any further petition requesting or proposing such change or amendment for the same property within one year from the date of the mayor and board of aldermen's final legal action on said petition or from the expiration of the aforesaid ninety (90) day period in case action has not been taken by the mayor and board of aldermen, or from the date of withdrawal of said petition; provided, however, that said petition has been officially advertised. This provision shall not apply in cases where the mayor and board of aldermen wish to consider a petition involving a comprehensive zoning revision of an area larger than twenty (20) acres. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 3, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 11.3. - Amendment procedures. 
    No amendment, supplement or change of the zoning ordinance or zoning district map shall become effective unless and until: 
(11.301) There shall have been held a public hearing in relation thereto before the planning commission at which parties in interest and citizens shall have had an opportunity to be fully heard. 
(11.302) Notice of the proposed change and of the time and place of the hearing shall have been published in accordance with Louisiana Revised Statutes, section 33:4726, or any statute amendatory thereof. 
(11.303) After the public hearing as provided above, the planning commission shall have submitted its report and recommendations upon the proposed change and amendment to the mayor and board of aldermen. The mayor and board of aldermen shall not take official action upon the change and amendment until the report of the planning commission has been received; provided, however, that if the report has not been filed within forty-five (45) days after the date of the public hearing, the mayor and board of aldermen may then take official action upon the change or amendment. 
(11.304) A final yea or nay vote shall have been taken on the proposal by the mayor and board of aldermen within ninety (90) days from date of receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission or from the lapse of forty-five (45) days from the date of the public hearing, whichever is longer. 
(11.305) The provisions of this section do not apply in cases where there is a proposal to enact an entire new ordinance to change the test as a whole, or to change all of the zoning district map, or both, in which event the procedure set out in the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, sections 33:4721 through 33:4730 shall be followed. 
Sec. 11.4. - [Variance applications.] 
    All applications for all variances, including trailer petitions and request for home occupancies, shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and for requests for conditional use(s) permits or zoning variances an additional one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 4, 12-13-11) 
ARTICLE XII. - INTERPRETATION 

[Sec. 12.1. - Rules.] 
    In interpreting and applying the provision of this ordinance, these shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance, nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
ARTICLE XIII. - VALIDITY 

[Sec. 13.1. - Severability.] 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or application of this ordinance shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance, which shall continue in full force and effect. 
ARTICLE XIV. - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 

[Sec. 14.1. - Scope.] 
    All zoning ordinances or parts of zoning ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed; provided, however, that all suits of law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of any zoning ordinance heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this ordinance, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this ordinance had not been adopted, and any and all violations of existing zoning ordinances, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted and nothing in this ordinance shall be so construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending, and/or which may have heretofore been instituted or prosecuted. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1965 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1965 Code as supplemented through March 29, 1984, which are included herein. Sections of the 1965 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1-4 1-4 1-9 1-9 2-1-2-4 2-2-2-5 2-13 12-2 2-15 12-7 2-16-2-19 12-3-12-6 2-20 12-8 2-21 12-9 2-22 12-1 2-23 2-5 2-25 12-10 2-25.1 12-11 2-26, 2-27 2-9, 2-10 2-26.1 12-12 2-61 2-12 2-62-2-64 2-13-2-16 2-76 2-11 3-1, 3-10 3-20 3-2 3-27 3-3, 3-4 3-21 3-5 3-22 3-5, 3-6 3-23 3-7 3-26 3-8 3-24 3-9 3-25 3-12, 3-13 3-3, 3-4 3-15 3-6 3-16 3-7 3-18 3-5 3-28-3-30 3-28-3-30 4-1 11-8 4-3 11-9 4-4 11-10 5-1 4-1 5-2 4-7 5-3 4-9 5-4 4-10 5-5 4-17 5-6 4-18 5-7 4-20 5-8 4-8 5-9 4-12 5-10 4-13 5-11 4-14 5-12 4-4 5-13 4-15 5-15 4-16 5-16 4-5 5-17 4-6 5-18 4-19 5-19 4-11 5-21 4-2 5-23 4-3 6-1 5-2 6-3 5-3 6-4 5-1 6-16 5-4 6-27-6-29 5-140-5-142 6-30 5-144 6-31-6-32 5-145-5-146 6-33 5-143 7-1 6-1 7-2 6-2 7-3 6-5 7-4 6-3 7-5 6-4 7-6-7-22 12-20-12-36 8-4 7-4 8-16(a) 7-20 8-16 7-21 8-17 7-50 8-18 7-23 3/8 8-19 7-24 8-20 7-25 8-20.1 7-30 8-21-8-23 7-31-7-33 8-24(A)(D) 7-34 8-25 9-20 8-26 8-3 8-27 8-4 8-28-8-31 7-35-7-38 8-32 9-2 8-33 7-39 8-34 9-21 8-35 7-40 8-36 13-11 8-37 14-29 8-38 14-30 8-39 7-41 8-43 14-3 8-43.1 14-31 8-44 7-43 8-44.1-8-44.5 7-45-7-50 8-45 7-44 8-46-8-49 7-51-7-54 8-50 7-22 8-51-8-54 7-26-7-29 9-8 2-6 10-1 5-27 10-2 5-31 10-3 5-28 10-5 5-30 10-7 5-29 10-20-10-22 5-20 10-23, 10-24, 10-25 5-22 10-26 5-23 10-27 5-26 10-28 5-21 10-29 5-25 10-30 5-24 10-43-10-45 5-40-5-42 10-46 5-44 10-48 5-45 10-49 5-46 10-50 5-43 10-51 5-47 10-53-10-55 5-48-5-50 11-1 8-1 11-2 8-2 11-15 8-5 11-26-11-30 8-20-8-24 11-29 8-25 11-31 8-26 11-32 8-27 12-1 10-70 12-2 10-75 12-4 10-73 12-5 10-71 12-8 10-72 12-9, 12-10 9-22 12-11 9-23 12-12 9-24 12-13 10-74 12-23-12-25 9-25-9-27 12-27 9-28 12-28 9-29 12-29, 12-30 9-30 12-31 9-31 12-32, 12-33 9-32 13-2 5-103 13-10-13-13 5-87-5-90 14-1 9-1 14-2 9-8 14-12-14-16 9-3-9-7 15-1 5-60 15-1.1 5-62 15-2 5-61 16-1 14-1 16-4 14-2 16-6-16-8 14-5-14-7 16-23 14-21 16-24 14-22 16-25 14-23 16-27 14-24 16-30 14-25 16-31 14-20 16-32 14-26 16-34 14-27 16-35 14-28 16-43 14-39 16-45-16-51 14-40-14-46 17-1 11-6 17-2 11-7 18-1 5-70 18-2 5-102 18-3 5-71 18-4 5-72 18-5 5-73 18-6-18-15 5-77-5-86 18-16 5-74 18-17 5-75 18-18 5-76 18-32 5-100 19-1 10-20 19-2 9-9 19-3 9-10 19-4 10-21 19-5 9-11 19-6 10-22 19-7 10-23 19-16-19-19 10-24-10-27 19-30 10-43 19-31 10-40 19-32 10-41 19-33 10-44 19-34 10-63 19-46 10-45 19-47 10-46 19-48 10-47 19-49 10-48 19-50 10-49 19-51 10-50 19-52 10-51 19-53 10-52 19-64 10-42 19-65 10-53 19-67 10-55 19-68 10-56 19-69-19-72 10-57-10-60 19-73 10-54 19-74, 19-75 10-61, 10-62 19-76 10-64 20-1-20-4 13-5-13-8 20-5 14-5 20-6 13-9 20-7 13-10 20-17, 20-24 13-21 20-18, 20-19 13-22 20-20 13-20 20-21, 20-23 13-23 20-22 13-24 20-25 13-25 20-36 13-1 20-37 13-2 20-38 13-3 20-39 13-4 21-46 11-21 21-47 11-22 21-48, 21-183 11-34 21-49 11-35 21-50 11-36 21-57-21-59 11-37-11-39 21-66-21-75 11-40-11-49 21-173-21-175 11-25-11-27 21-82 11-50 21-83 11-51 21-90-21-95 11-52-11-57 21-101-21-108 11-58-11-65 21-115 11-66 21-121-21-129 11-67-11-75 21-130 11-76, 11-77 21-132-21-44 11-78-11-90 21-151-21-15-155 11-91-11-95 21-161-21-164 11-96-11-99 21-171 11-23 21-172 11-24 21-177-21-180 11-28-11-31 21-181 11-100 21-191 11-32 21-192 11-33 21-201 11-1 21-202 11-2 21-204 11-3 21-205 11-4 21-206 11-5 21-266-21-268 11-110-11-112 21-269 11-115 21-270 11-114 21-271 11-113 21-272-21-275 11-116-11-119 21-281-21-288 11-130-11-137 211/2-1 5-151 211/2-2 5-150 211/2-14 5-152 211/2-15 5-153 211/2-16 5-154 211/2-16-21-39 11-20 211/2-26 5-155 211/2-27 5-156 211/2-28-211/2-36 5-157-5-165 22-1-22-11 15-1-15-11  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1965 Code, as supplemented through March 29, 1984, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1965 Code. This table contains some ordinances which precede March 29, 1984, but which were never included in the 1965 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 1006  5-16-77 Art. I, § A 5-111 Art. I, §§ B-D 5-112-5-114 Art. II 5-110 Art. III, § A 5-115 Art III, § B 5-116 Art. III, § C 5-124 Art. III, §§ D-F 5-117-5-119 Art. III, § G 5-121 Art IV, § A 5-122 Art. IV, § B 5-123 Art IV, § C 5-125 Art. IV, § D 5-126 Art. V, § A 5-127 Art. V, §§ A-D 5-127-5-130 Art. V, § B 5-128 Art. VI, § A 5-120 1083  3-29-84 1 App. A, § 3.5 1084  8-14-84 1 14-23 1087 1 9-8 1089 10- 9-84 1 14-23 1093  1-21-85 1, 2 2-7, 2-8 1094  3-12-85 1 14-23(c)(8) 1097  4- 9-85 1 7-22 3-5 7-27-7-29 1100  9-10-85 1 14-23(c)(9) 1101  2-11-86 1 2-17 1102  2-11-86 1-3 Adopting Ordinance, p. vii 1103  7- 8-86 1, 2 14-44(i), (j) 1104  7- 8-86 1 7-55 1105  8-12-86 1, 2 14-32, 14-33 1106  8-12-86 1, 2 7-54(a)(6), (7) 1107  9-25-86 1 11-138-11-140 1110  4-14-87 1 14-23(c)(10)-(14) 2 14-23(d)(5), (6) 5 14-23(a)(19) 1111  5-12-87 1 14-44(k) 1112  6- 9-87 1 3-3(d) 1113  6- 9-87 1 11-1 2, 3 11-2 1114  7-14-87 1, 2 11-110, 11-111 1115  7-14-87 1 11-21 1116 11-10-87 1-11 10-29-10-38 1116A 12- 7-87 2(Art. 1, §§ A-D) 5-110-5-113 2(Art. 2) 5-114 2(Art. 3, §§ A-G) 5-115-5-121 2(Art. 4, §§ A-D) 5-122-5-125 2(Art. 5, §§ A-D) 5-126-5-129 3 5-130 1117 12- 8-87 1-3 14-23(a)(6)-(8) 4 14-23(a)(20) 1118  1-12-88 2 5-110-5-129 3 5-130 1119  2-27-88 1 10-30(a)(1) 2 10-29 3 10-37 4       Rpld 10-32(9) 5 10-32(7) 6       Added 10-32(9) 1120  7-18-88 1 11-2(d), (e) 1121  7-18-88 1 14-23(c)(15)-(18) 2 14-23(d)(7) 1122 10-11-88 1 14-23(c)(19) 1123 11- 8-88 1 App. A, § 3.601(2) 1124 12-13-88 1 10-1 1125  1-10-89 1 14-23(c)(20), (21) 1128  7-11-89 1 3-21(c) 1129  7-11-89 1 3-5(c)(1) 2 3-24(b) 1130 10-10-89 1 14-44(l) 1132  3-13-90 1 14-2 1133  6-12-90 1-3       Added 10-28 1136 10- 9-90 1, 2 10-71, 10-72 1138  6-11-91 1 14-23(c)(22)-(24) 1139  1-14-92 1 14-23(c)(25) 1140  2-11-92 1 14-23(c)(25) 1141  2-11-92 1 14-4 1142  2-11-92 1 3-21(d) 2 3-27(4)-(6) 1143  3-10-92 1 3-2(d) 1144  3-10-92 1 3-27(4)-(6) 1145  3-10-92 1 14-44(m) 1146  9- 8-92 1 14-23(c)(26) 1147  9- 8-92 1 7-56 1148  9- 8-92 1 14-23(c)(27) 1150  2- 9-93 1-3 11-2(c), (e), (f) 1151  3- 9-93 1, 2 14-23(c)(28), (29) 1152  4-13-93 2-4 11-141-11-143 1156  6- 8-93 1 14-44(n) 1158  9-14-93 1, 2 2-18 3-6 2-19 1160  7-12-94 1 2-6 1161  8- 9-94 1       Rpld 10-40-10-69       Added 10-40-10-50 1162 11- 8-94 1       Added 14-44(n) 1164  5- 9-95 1       Added 7-57 1165  5- 9-95 1 12-20-12-36 1167  7-18-95 1 10-29 3 10-30 4 10-36 1168  8- 8-95 1 14-46 2       Added 14-47-14-52 1169  8- 8-95 1       Added 14-53-14-56 1170  8- 8-95 1-3       Added 14-23(c)(30)-(32) 1173 10-10-95 1 7-30 1176 12-12-95 1 12-1 1177  1- 9-96 1, 2       Added 14-23(c)(33), (34) 1178  1- 9-96 1 11-139 1179  2-13-96 1 4-16 1180  5-14-96 1 3-21 2 3-27 1181  5-14-96 1, 2       Added 14-23(c)(35), (36) 1182  5-14-96 1       Rpld 4-4 1183  5-14-96 1 7-34 2 7-37 3       Rpld 7-46 1184  6-11-96 1       Added 4-17(c), (d) 2 4-18 3 4-19 4       Added 4-21 1185  6-11-96 1 5-4(b), (e) 2 5-23 3 5-24 4 5-42(2) 5 5-43(2) 6 5-72 7 5-74(f)(2), (g)(2) 8 5-83, 5-87 9       Added 5-124(c) 1186  8-13-96 1 7-54 1187  8-13-96 1 5-110 2 5-114 3 5-123 4 5-125 5 5-127 1189  8-13-96 1 14-39 2 14-42 1190 11-12-96 1-7 2-20 1191  1-14-97 1-5 5.5-1-5.5-5 1192  2-12-97 14-42(c) 1193  2-25-97 11-20-11-109.31 1196  3-11-97 1 13-23 1197  3-11-97 1 7-56 1199  4- 8-97 1 2-3 1200  4- 8-97 1 14-44(p) 1201  4- 8-97 1       Rpld 12-10(4) 2       Rpld 12-25 3 12-1 1204 10-14-97 1       Added App. A, § 3.9(3.901)(18) 2       Added App. A, § 2.2 (2.225.1) 3 App. A, § 6.2 1207 12- 9-97 1, 2 14-23(c)(36) 1208  5-12-98 1, 2       Added 12-50-12-54 1210  6- 9-98 1       Added 4-22 1211  6- 9-98 1       Added 7-56(r) 1215  1-12-99 1 8-25 1216  1-12-99 1       Added 14-44(q) 1217  5-11-99 1 14-28 1218  6- 8-99 1, 2 14-23(c)(16) 1219 10-12-99 1       Added 5-175-5-180 1220 10-12-99 1       Added 2-21 1222 12-14-99 1-4 14-23(c), (d) 1223 12-14-99 1 2-21 1224 12-14-99 1       Added App. A, § 7.7 1227  4-11-00 1       Added 7-58-7-62 1229  4-11-00 1       Added 9.5-20-9.5-42 3       Rpld 2-20 1230  4-11-00 1       Added 13-30-13-50 1231  4-11-00 1 13-20-13-27 1232  6-13-00 1       Added 8-4(b)       Rltd 8-4(b) as (c) 1233  6-13-00 1 14-23(a)(19) 1234  7-11-00 1 13-22(a)(1) 2, 3 13-23(b)(3), (d)(6) 4       Added 13-23(f) 1236  7-11-00 1       Added 15-16-15-28 1237  8- 8-00 1 5.5-3(b)(6) 1239 10-10-00 1 3-5(b), (c)       Added 3-5(d) 1240 10-10-00 1 4-7 1243  2-13-01 1 14-44 1244  2-13-01 1 14-21 1247  3-13-01 1       Added 9-12 1250  4-10-01 1       Added 9-51-9-56 1251  4-10-01 1       Added 4-23 2       Added 4-24 1252  7-10-01 1 4-1 2(4-16) 4-49 3-7       Added 4-50-4-63 1254 10- 9-01 1 7-56 2-5       Added 7-56.1-7-56.4 1255  2-13-02 1 2-6 1257  7- 9-02 1       Added 14-23(c)(22) 1258  7- 9-02 1       Added 14-23(d)(2) 1260  8-13-02 1       Added 14-23(c)(23) 1261  9-10-02 1       Added 9.5-35.1 1262  9-10-02 1       Added 11-120, 11-121 1263  1-14-03 1 10-20 2 10-21 3 10-24 1264  1-14-03       Added 11-160-11-182 1265  1-14-03 1 14-23(c)(22) 2 14-23(d)(2) 1266  4- 8-03 1 14-21 1267  6-10-03 1       Added 14-44(s) 1268  7- 8-03 1 12-7 1270  8-12-03 1 2-4 1271  8-12-03 1 9-30 1279 11-11-03 1 2-17 1282  2-10-04 1 2-4 1285  4-13-04 1 2-4 1288  6- 8-04 1 7-54 1289  6- 8-04 1       Added 10-2 1290  7-13-04 1 5-2 2 5-28 3 5-60 4, 5 5-100, 5-101 6 5-103 1294  8-10-04 1 2-4 1295  8-10-04 1       Added 14-34 1296  8-10-04 1(4-21.1) 4-55 2(4-21.6) 4-60 3(4-21.10)       Added 4-64 1298 10-12-04 1 8-4 1301  2- 9-05 1 5-2 1303  1-11-05 1 10-22 1306  2- 9-05 1, 2 App. A, § 3.13 1307 12-14-04 1 8-20-8-25 1310  2- 9-05 1 4-1 2       Added 4-50-4-65 1311  2- 9-05 1 15-6 1314  3- 8-05 1(13-50- 13-58) 13-60-13-68 1315  9-13-05 1-9       Added 10-86-10-94 1320  6-28-05 1 8-4 1322  8- 9-05 1 2-4(b) 1329  1-10-06 1       Added 14-23(c)(24) 1334  4-11-06 1(9-51- 9-59)       Added 9-61-9-69 2       Rpld 7-57 1336  5- 9-06 1 App. A, § 9.6 1338  6-13-06 1 8-4(c)(1) 1340  7-11-06 1 2-4(b)(8) 1341  7-11-06 1 14-23(d)(3) 1342  7-11-06 1 App. A, § 3.1 2 App. A, § 3.9 1344  8- 8-06 1 2-4 1351 12-12-06 1 5-2 2-4       Added 5-2.1-5-2.3 1358  3-13-07 1 2-4(b)(2), (3), (15), (16) 1363  6-12-07 1       Added 14-23(c)(25), (26) 1368  7-30-07 1 2-4 1371  8-17-07 1 12-2 1374  9-11-07 1 5-152 1375 10- 9-07 1 4-1 2 4-7 3 4-12 4 4-15 5       Added 4-17(e) 6 4-18 1376 10- 9-07 1 2-4(b)(17) 1377 12-11-07 1 8-5 1378  1- 8-08 1       Rpld 50-60-50-62 2-7       Added 50-60-5-65 1380  3-11-08 1 10-30 1381  3-11-08 1 1-8 2, 3 7-21, 7-22 4-9 7-24-7-29 10, 11 7-31, 7-32 12       Rpld 7-33 13-15 7-34-7-36 16 7-38 17, 18 7-40, 7-41 19-21 7-43-7-45 22 7-50 23, 24 7-54, 7-55 25 14-1 26       Added 14-21(c) 27, 28 14-32, 14-33 29 14-39 1382  4- 8-08 1 4-17 1386  8-12-08 1 2-4(b) 1390 12- 9-08 1 App. A, § 3.3 1391  2- 9-09 1, 2 App. A, § 2.2 3 App. A, § 3.3 1393  5-12-09 1       Added 14-23(c)(27) 2       Added 14-23(d)(4) 1394  6- 9-09 1 14-23(a)(16) 1397  8-11-09 1 2-4 1399  8-11-09 1 10-40-10-50, 
10-70-10-75 1400  9- 8-09 1 7-27 1401 10-13-09 1       Added 3-20.1 1402 10-13-09 1       Rpld 2-4 1404 12- 8-09 1 9-26 1406  1-12-10 1       Added 1-8.1 1412 10-12-10       Rpld 5-110-5-130 1       Added 5-110-5-131 1413  8- 9-11 1, 2 5-116, 5-126 1414 12-14-10 1 App. A, § 6.2 1415 11- 9-10 1-4 App. A, §§ 2.2, 3.9, 3.13 1417  1-11-11 1 14-44 1423  7-12-11 1 14-44 1426  8- 9-11 1 14-23 1428  9-13-11 1       Added 2-22 1431 12-13-11 1       Added 11-200-11-220 1432 12-13-11 1 5-4 2 5-23 3 5-83 4 5-87 5 5-124 1433 12-13-11 1 App. A, § 3.13(3.1304) 2 App. A, § 7.1(7.109) 3 App. A, § 11.2(11.203) 4       Added App. A, § 11.4 1434  1-10-12 1 14-44 1435  5- 8-12 1, 2 14-44 1436  6-12-12 1 11-201 2 11-204 3 11-205 4 11-210 1437  5-24-12 11-20-11-109.30 1439  7-10-12 1 3-5 1443  8-14-12 1 5-176 2 5-178 1444  8-14-12 1 4-21 1448 10- 9-12 1 8-5 1449 11-13-12 1 App. A, § 3.13 2 5-4 1450 11-13-12 1       Added 14-8, 14-8.1-14-8.4 1453  5-14-13 1       Added 14-23(d)(7) 1456  8-13-13 1       Added 7-57 1457  9-10-13 1       Added 14-23(c)(28) 2       Added 14-23(d)(8) 1458  9-10-13 1 3-5(c) 1459  9-10-13 1 2-3 1460 11-12-13 1       Added 16-1-16-191 1466 11-12-14 1       Added App. A, § 6.4 2       Rpld 3-4 1467  4-14-15 1 App. A, § 3.1304 1469  6- 9-15 1 5-2 1472  2-10-16 1 11-21 1473  3- 8-16 1       Added 14-23(c)(28) 1475  6-14-16 1       Added 12-14 1476  6-14-16 1 14-23(c) 2 14-23(d) 1481 11- 8-16 1 14-23(d) 1482 12- 7-16 1 12-21 1483 12-13-16 1       Added App. A, § 3.14 1485  3-14-17 1 14-23(c)  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
R.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 3:2531 Ch. 4(note) Title 4, Ch. 4 9-61 Title 4, Ch. 11 9-61 9:2799 11-20 13:1569 7-30 13:1570 7-30 13:1910 1-8.1 14:24 7-1 14:25 7-2 14:27 7-3 14:33 7-23 14:35 7-24 14:38 7-21 14:56 14-52 14:59 7-25 14:63.3 7-42 14:63 11-6 14:67 7-27 14-52 14:68 7-29 14:69 7-26 14:71 7-28 14:94 7-44 14:95 7-43 14:102.2 4-24 14:102.6 4-24 14:103.1 7-34 14:104 7-31 14:105 7-32 14:106 7-39 14:108 4-2 7-41 14:281 7-33 14:284 7-40 14:311 8-3 14:318 8-3 14:324 9-28 15:255(O) 2-22 15:436.2 7-60 17:236 11-20 22:1068(C) 11-120 22:1076       Ch. 11, Art. III(note) 11-110 11-120 11-121 22:1405 5-26 26:71(A)(3)(a) 9-65 26:71.1 9-65 26:72 9-65 26:73 9-65 26:88 3-1 26:271(A)(2) 9-65 26:271.1 9-65 26:271.2 9-65 26:272 9-65 26:280 3-2 26:285 3-1 tit. 27, chs. 4-7       9-61 30:1121       Ch. 9, Art. II(note) 10-40 30:1150 9-22 30:2173(2) 9-51 30:2531.4 9-53 tit. 32 11-47 14-8.2 32:1 9-52 14-1 32:4(C) 14-1 32:41 14-28 32:51 14-1 32:52 14-1 32:53 14-1 32:54 14-1 14-21 32:58 14-1 32:61 14-21 32:62 14-1 32:65 14-1 32:71 14-1 32:72 14-1 32:73 14-1 32:74 14-1 32:75 14-1 32:76 14-1 32:77 14-1 32:81 14-1 32:101 14-1 32:102 14-25 32:122 14-1 32:123 14-1 32:125 14-1 32:141 14-1 32:143 14-1 32:143.1 14-1 32:144 14-1 32:146 14-1 32:190 14-1 32:190.1 14-1 32:191 14-1 32:191.1 14-1 32:191.2 14-1 32:191.3 14-1 32:231 14-1 32:232 14-1 32:233 14-1 32:234 14-1 32:235 14-28 32:251 14-1 32:252 14-1 32:253 14-1 32:281 14-1 32:282 14-1 32:286 14-1 32:295 Ch. 14(note) 14-1 32:295.1 14-1 32:303 14-1 32:322 14-1 32:352 14-1 32:353 14-1 32:392 14-43 32:402 14-27 32:1301-32:1310 11-20 33:101-119 et al 13-67 33:401(A)(32) 1-8 Ch. 7(note) 33:401(A)(9) 9-2 33:402(8) Ch. 8(note) 33:405 2-3 33:423 2-5 33:1361 1-1 33:2218.1 et seq. 12-53 33:2716.1 11-25 33:4161 10-29 33:4172-33:4175       2-18, 2-19 33:4721- 
33-4730 App. A, Art. XI, § 11.3 33:4726 App. A, Art. XI, § 11.3 33:4727 App. A, Art. IX(note) 33:4741 Ch. 5(note) 5-1 33:4744 5-4 33:4761 Ch. 5(note) 5-3 5-61 33:4861.1 11-139(a) 33:4861.4 11-139(b) 33:4861.5 11-139(c) 33:4861.26 11-139(d) 33:4862 et seq. 11-2 33:4876 Ch. 9(note) 9-28 14-43 33:5062 9-27 37:1361-37:1379 5-77 37:1377(d) 5-77 37:1901 11-6 37:1961 5-164 38:84 5-110 40:4.1-40:4.6 9-12 40:20 Ch. 9(note) 40:582.1-40:582.7       11-76 40:1275 4-9 40:1299.41A(1) 9-61 40:1603 5-28 40:1721 5-2 40:1758-40:1761       10-1 Title 42, Ch. 12, Pts. I, II       11-120(1) 42:1111 11-52 46:371-46:373 11-40 tit. 47, ch. 2 11-21 11-25 11-91 ch. 2-A 11-21 11-76 ch. 2-13 11-76 ch. 18 11-91 47:301       ch. 11, Art. II(note) 47:301(4)(d)(ii) 11-24 47:301(10) 11-23 47:303 11-24 47:303.1 11-23 47:341-47:363 11-2 47:451 et seq. 11-20 11-23 47:463 14-46 47:551 11-23 47:1061 11-121 47:1508 11-91 47:1509 11-91 47:1562 11-104 47:1562-47:1573       11-91 11-102 47:1565.1 11-109.14 47:1574 11-91 11-102 47:1576       11-102 11-106 11-109 47:1601 11-11 47:1602 11-111 51:571-51:579 7-38  
