CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PLAQUEMINE, LOUISIANA 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE CHARTER AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 1983 by Order of the Mayor and 
Board of Selectmen 
Republished 2011 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF PLAQUEMINE, LOUISIANA 
AS OF AUGUST 2018 
____________ 
Edwin M. Reeves, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Timothy L. Martinez 
Oscar S. Mellion 
Jimmie Randle, Jr. 
Lindon A. Rivet, Jr. 
Michael W. Rivet 
Ralph J. Stassi, Jr. 
Selectmen 
____________ 
L. Phillip Canova, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Roxane M. Richard 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    Part I of this volume contains the Charter of the City. Part II, the City Code, constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Plaquemine of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Plaquemine City Code, as adopted by an ordinance of June 29, 1967, and ordinances adopted by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen subsequent thereto. 
    The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes that tie related sections of the Code together and that refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any section of the 1967 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein, can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the sixth section of chapter 9 is 9-6. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-2 and 3-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-2.1, 3-2.2, 3-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation that represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE SRT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Kathleen M. Grobe, supplement editor; and Sergio M. Navarro, proofreader; of the editorial staff of Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida, and is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Selectman Lindon A. Rivet, Jr. offered the following ordinance, seconded by Selectman Oscar S. Mellion: 
ORDINANCE NUMBER: 306 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF PLAQUEMINE, LOUISIANA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    WHEREAS, Plaquemine, Louisiana, is empowered to adopt a codification of its ordinances by Louisiana Revised Statutes, Sections 33:1361 through 33:1367; and 
    WHEREAS, the Mayor and Board of Selectmen are desirous of exercising said power; and 
    WHEREAS, the Mayor and Board of Selectmen, published in the Plaquemine Post South, official journal for the City, on March 17, 24, 31, 2011, and April 14, 2011, public notice of a Public Hearing on the "Code of Ordinances for the City of Plaquemine" and the Mayor and Board of Selectmen's intention to adopt an ordinance at its meeting previously scheduled for Tuesday, April 12, 2011, and rescheduled for Wednesday, April 20, 2011; 
    WHEREAS, such a code and revision, prepared by the Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, under the supervision of L. Phillip Canova, Jr., City Attorney, has been presented to, examined and considered by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen and approved by them; now therefore 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Selectman of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, and it is hereby ordained by the same: 
    Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of the Chapters 1 to 24, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before Wednesday, April 20, 2011, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2: That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after Wednesday, April 20, 2011, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the city not specifically mentioned is hereby repealed. 
    Section 3. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor by the Mayor or Board of Selectmen, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of such Code shall be punished as provided in Section 1-13 of such Code. 
    Section 4. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Board of Selectmen to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 5. That in case of the amendment by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-13 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 6. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by said officer, to insert in their designated places all amendments and all ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the Mayor and Board of Selectmen to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 7. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter by additions or deletions any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Plaquemine to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violation this section shall be punished a provided in Section 1-13 of the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine." 
    Section 8. As provided in Chapter 1, Section 8 of the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine," all ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. Any subsequent renumbering by the Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, in editing supplements to the Code shall not affect the substance and effect of the ordinance renumbered. 
    Section 9. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
    Section 10. That this ordinance shall become effective as provided by law. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, that all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed in their entirety. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, that if any provision or item of this ordinance or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect other provisions, items, or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions, items or applications of this ordinance are hereby declared severable. 
    The foregoing was adopted by the following vote: 
Yeas: Oscar S. Mellion, Ralph J. Stassi, Jr., Michael W. Rivet, Timothy L. Martinez, Jimmie Randle, Jr. and Lindon A. Rivet, Jr. Nays: None. Absent: None. Abstained: None.  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 307  6-14-11 Omitted 1 308  6-14-11 Included 1 309  7-12-11 Omitted 1 310  9-27-11 Included 1 311  9-27-11 Included 1 312 11- 8-11 Omitted 1 313 11-30-11 Omitted 1 314  3-13-12 Included 1 315  3-27-12 Included 1 316  4-24-12 Included 1 317  7-10-12 Omitted 2 318  7-10-12 Omitted 2 319  8-21-12 Included 2 320  9-11-12 Included 2 321  9-25-12 Omitted 2 322 10- 9-12 Included 2 323 10-23-12 Omitted 2 324 10-23-12 Omitted 2 325 10-23-12 Included 2 326 11-13-12 Omitted 2 327 11-13-12 Included 2 328 12-11-12 Omitted 2 329  1-15-13 Included 2 330  3-20-13 Included 2 331  4- 9-13 Omitted 2 332  4-23-13 Omitted 2 333  6-11-13 Omitted 2 334  6-11-13 Omitted 2 335  7- 9-13 Omitted 2 336  8-27-13 Included 3 337  9-10-13 Omitted 3 338 10- 8-13 Omitted 3 339 10- 8-13 Included 3 340 10-22-13 Omitted 3 341 10-22-13 Omitted 3 342 10-22-13 Omitted 3 343  3-11-14 Included 3 344  3-25-14 Included 3 345  4- 8-14 Included 3 346  6-24-14 Omitted 4 347 10-14-14 Omitted 4 348 10-14-14 Omitted 4 349  1-13-15 Included 4 350  3-24-15 Included 4 351  3-24-15 Included 4 352  4-14-15 Included 4 353  6- 9-15 Included 4 354  6- 9-15 Omitted 4 352A  8-11-15 Included 5 355  8-11-15 Included 5 356 10-13-15 Included 5 357 10-28-15 Omitted 5 358 11-17-15 Omitted 5 359  6-14-16 Omitted 5 360  6-14-16 Omitted 5 361 10-25-16 Omitted 6 362 10-25-16 Omitted 6 363  2-14-17 Omitted 6 364  6-13-17 Included 6 365  6-13-17 Omitted 6 366  6-13-17 Omitted 6 367 10-10-17 Omitted 7 368 10-10-17 Included 7 369 10-10-17 Included 7 370 10-24-17 Omitted 7 371 10-24-17 Omitted 7 372 10-24-17 Included 7 373 10-24-17 Included 7 374 11- 8-17 Omitted 7 375 12-12-17 Omitted 7 376 12-12-17 Omitted 7 377 12-12-17 Included 7 378  5- 8-18 Omitted 7  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter of the Town [City] of Plaquemine, Louisiana consists of Act 109 of the General Assembly of 1878, as amended. The arrangement of sections in this Act has been maintained. The historical notes following some of the sections refer to Acts which amended the 1878 Act. Catchlines to the sections have been added by the editor. The following provisions have been omitted: Enacting, effective date, and repealing. Where there were obvious omissions the word has been inserted in brackets by the editor. Typographical errors have been corrected, rather than inserted following the misspelled word. 

Sec. 1. - Governing authority. 
(a)  [ Members. ] The governing authority of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, shall consist of a mayor, six (6) selectmen and a chief of police. 
(b)  [ Time of municipal elections. ] Municipal elections shall be held at the same time as congressional elections, in accordance with the provisions of Title 18, Section 402(B) of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, 1f, 1950, as amended, commencing with the congressional elections occurring in the fall of 1992 as the date of the next municipal election for the office of the mayor, the offices of board of selectmen and the office of the chief of police, in the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, and that all future municipal elections be held at the same time as congressional elections following the adoption of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 1053].(Ord. No. 1053, 9-22-87) 
(c)  [ Taking of office; term. ] The municipal officers elected shall take office on the first day of January following their election, and shall hold office for a period of four (4) years. 
(d)  [ Ordinance not to decrease terms. ] The terms of the office of municipal officers in office as of the date of adoption of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 1030] shall not be decreased by the passage of this ordinance, and those officers serving as of the effective date of this ordinance shall continue to serve in their respective capacities until their successors are sworn into office. 
(e)  [ Filling of vacancy, etc. ] If no election is held on the date herein prescribed or if any vacancy in any municipal office elective by the people occurs or if any officer elected fails to qualify, such a vacancy shall be filled in accordance with provisions of Article XI, Section 13 of the Constitution of Louisiana or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Res. of 12-11-84, § 1; Ord. No. 1026, 9-24-85; Ord. No. 1030, 3-25-86; Ord. No. 1053, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note- In its amendment of § 1 above, Ord. No. 1030, adopted March 25, 1986, had included provisions designated as subsections (f)-(h) which pertained to the submission of a certified copy to the secretary of state, conflicting ordinances, and the invalidity of these provisions. Because of the administrative nature of these subsections, the editor, at his discretion, has omitted them from inclusion in § 1. 
Sec. 2. - Election districts. 
(a)  The mayor and chief of police (marshal) shall be elected at large by qualified voters throughout the City of Plaquemine. 
(b)  The six (6) selectmen of the City of Plaquemine shall be elected one each from the following six (6) single-member election districts: 
(1)  District 1 (1) shall encompass all that are located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the Missouri Pacific RR and the northwest corner of the municipal boundary, proceed easterly and southerly along the municipal boundary to the intersection with a nonvisible census boundary (the boundary of Precinct 13B and Precinct 20 and the boundary of Precinct 14A and Precinct 20) thence northwesterly along this boundary to its intersection with Court Street; thence proceed westerly along the centerline of Court Street to the intersection with the centerline of Constitution Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Constitution Street to the intersection with the center line of Barker Alley; thence proceed easterly along the centerline of Barker Alley to the intersection with the centerline of Railroad Avenue; thence proceed northerly along the centerline of Railroad Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Main Street; thence proceed easterly along the centerline of Main Street to the intersection with the Missouri Pacific RR, thence proceed northerly along the Missouri Pacific RR to the intersection with Bayou Plaquemine; thence proceed southwesterly along Bayou Plaquemine to its intersection with the municipal boundary; thence proceed north, southwest, northwest and northeast along the municipal boundary to the point of beginning. 
(2)  District 2 (2) shall encompass all that are located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the south side of Bayou Plaquemine and the Missouri Pacific RR; proceed southerly to the intersection with the centerline of Main St., thence west on Main St. to its intersection with Railroad Ave., thence south on Railroad Ave. to its intersection with Barker Alley; thence westerly along the centerline of Barker Alley to the intersection with the centerline of East Street; thence proceed southerly on the centerline of East Street to the intersection with the centerline of Division Street; thence westerly on the centerline of Division Street to the intersection of the centerline of Federal Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Federal Street to the centerline of Plaquemine Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Plaquemine Street to the centerline of Clay Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Clay Street to the centerline of Court Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Court Street to the centerline of Peters Street; then southerly along the centerline of Peters Street to the centerline of Meriam Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Meriam Street to the centerline of Grace Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Grace Street to the centerline of W.W. Harleaux Street, thence westerly along the centerline of W.W. Harleaux Street to the centerline of Calvin Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Calvin Street to the centerline of Meriam Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Meriam Street to the centerline of Brusle Street; thence southerly on Brusle Street to the center line of W.W. Harleaux Street; thence westerly on W.W. Harleaux Street to the corporate boundary of the City of Plaquemine; thence northerly on the corporate boundary its intersection with Bayou Plaquemine; thence easterly along the Bayou Plaquemine to the point of beginning. 
(3)  District 3 (3) shall encompass all that are located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection Court Street and the a nonvisible census boundary (the boundary of Precinct 13B and Precinct 20 and the boundary of Precinct 14A and Precinct 20) thence south east along this boundary to its intersection with the municipal boundary, thence southeast and southwesterly along the municipal boundary to its intersection with Eden Steet, thence north on the centerline of Eden Street to its intersection with LaBauve Street; thence westerly along the centerline of LaBauve Street to the centerline of Baist Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Baist Street to the centerline of Elm Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Ferdinand Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Ferdinand Street to the centerline of Fort Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Fort Street to the centerline of Marshall Street; thence north along the centerline of Marshall Street to the centerline of Iron Farm Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Iron Farm Road to the centerline of Levy Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Levy Street to the centerline of WW Harleax Blvd. Street; thence easterly along the centerline of WW Harleax Blvd. to the centerline of Brusle Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Brusle Street to the centerline of Meriam Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Meriam Street to the centerline of Calvin Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Calvin Street to the centerline of WW Harleax Blvd.; thence easterly along the centerline of WW Harleax Blvd. to the centerline of Grace Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Grace Street to the centerline of Meriam Street; thence westerly on Meriam Street to the centerline of Peters Street; thence northerly on Peters Street to the centerline of Court Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Court Street to the centerline of Clay Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Clay Street to the centerline of Plaquemine Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Plaquemine Street to the centerline of Federal Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Federal Street to the centerline of Division Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Division Street to the centerline of East Street; thence northerly along the centerline of East Street to the centerline of Barker Alley; thence easterly along the centerline of Barker Alley to the centerline of Constitution Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Constitution Street to the centerline of Court Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Court Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  District 4 (4) shall encompass all that are located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of LaBauve Street and the centerline of Eden Street (LA Hwy. 1), proceed southerly along the centerline of Eden Street to the southern municipal boundary, thence southwesterly along the municipal boundary to its intersection with Pecan Place; thence northerly along the centerline of Pecan Place to the centerline of Belleview Drive; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Belleview Drive to the intersection with Edmund Drive; thence northwesterly in a perpendicular manner with Edmund Drive to the intersection with the corporate boundary; thence following the corporate boundary northwest, east, southeast, northeast, northwest and southwest to its intersection with Sebastian Street, thence north on the centerline of Sebastian Street to its intersection with Price Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Price Street to the intersection with the centerline of Regina Street; thence northerly on the centerline of Regina Street to its intersection with St. Clement Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of St. Clement Avenue to the centerline of Marshall Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Marshall Street to the centerline of Fort Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Fort Street to the centerline of Ferdinand Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ferdinand Street to the centerline of Elm Street; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Baist Street; thence northerly on the centerline of Baist Street to the centerline of LaBauve Street; thence easterly along the centerline of LaBauve Street to the point of beginning. 
(5)  District 5 (5) shall encompass all that are located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Iron Farm Road and the centerline of Marshall Street, proceed southerly along the centerline of Marshall Street to the centerline of St. Clement Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of St. Clement Avenue to the centerline of Regina Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Regina Street to the centerline of Price Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Price Street to the centerline of Sebastian Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Sebastian Street to the municipal boundary; thence southwest, southeast, southwest, and northwest, southwest, southeast, northeast and southeast along the municipal boundary to the centerline of Belleview Drive, then proceed northerly along the centerline of Belleview Drive to the intersection with Pecan Place; thence proceed southeasterly along the centerline of Pecan Place to the municipal boundary; thence proceed southerly, southeasterly, northeasterly and northwesterly along the municipal boundary to the intersection with an unnamed waterway; thence proceed northeasterly along the centerline of the unnamed waterway to the centerline of Sherwood Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Sherwood Drive to the centerline of Evangeline Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Evangeline Avenue to the intersection of a waterway known as Iron Farm Ditch; thence easterly and southerly along the centerline of Iron Farm Ditch to the centerline on Iron Farm Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Iron Farm Road to the point of beginning. 
(6)  District 6 (6) shall encompass all that are located within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of W. W. Harleaux Blvd. and the centerline of Levy Street, proceed southerly along the centerline of Levy Street to the centerline of Iron Farm Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Iron Farm Road to the centerline of a waterway known as Iron Farm Ditch; thence northerly and westerly along the centerline of Iron Farm Ditch to the centerline of Evangeline Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Evangeline Avenue to the centerline of Sherwood Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Sherwood Drive to the centerline of an unnamed waterway; thence westerly along the centerline of the unnamed waterway to the point where it meets the western municipal boundary; thence continue westerly and northerly along the municipal boundary to its intersection with the centerline of Bayou Rd; thence northerly along the centerline of Bayou Rd to the centerline of W. W. Harleaux Blvd.; thence easterly along the centerline of W. W. Harleaux Blvd. to the point of beginning. 
(Res. of 12-11-84, § 2; Res. of 11-12-85; Ord. No. 16, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 178, 3-19-03; Ord. No. 200, 2-10-04; Ord. No. 201, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 202, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 315, 3-27-12) 
Sec. 3. - Election of mayor, selectmen and marshal-Place; notice; conducting. 
    The election of the Officers created by the second [first] Section of this Act shall be held by the Duly Qualified Electors of said Town [City] at the office of the Mayor of said Town [City] or at such other public places as may be determined by the Mayor and Board of Selectmen in ordering the same, and to be designated in the public notices given at such election, and be previously notified to the inhabitants of said Town [City] by publication in at least one Newspaper published therein, or by public notices posted up at the door of the Court House and two other public places in said Town [City], for fifteen days preceding said election, and the poll for holding the same shall be open from Nine o'clock A.M. until Four o'clock P.M., and shall be presided over by the Mayor, two members of the Board (to be selected by the Mayor), and the Clerk of the Board; and in the absence of the Mayor, one of the Selectmen so selected shall act in the place of the Mayor, and in the absence of the Selectmen so appointed, the Mayor shall select others in their stead, and said election, shall be conducted according to the laws regulating elections for Members of the General Assembly of this State, and the returns thereof shall be made out in duplicate, one copy of which shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State and the other filed away in the Archives of said Town [City]. 
Sec. 4. - Same-Tie vote. 
    In the event of a tie vote at said election, or the death or resignation of any of the Officers elected under the provisions of this Act, the Board shall order an election, as provided in Section 3 hereof, to determine such election or to fill such vacancy, and a plurality of the votes cast shall determine any election held under this act. 
Sec. 5. - Same-Organization meeting; general powers; seal, process and bonds. 
    On receiving the Commission of Election after the election of May, 1878, as herein provided the Mayor and Selectmen elected shall meet and organize themselves into a body politic to be known as the Mayor and Selectmen of the Town [City] of Plaquemine, and as such shall have perpetual succession, and in that name they and their successors in office shall forever in law be capable of suing and being sued, or defending and being defended, of impleading and being impleaded, in all courts and places of law, and in all suits and actions and may have an official seal, which they may alter at pleasure. Judicial process shall be served on the Mayor, and all bonds necessary to be taken under the provisions of this Act shall be payable to the Mayor or his successors in office. 
Sec. 6. - Same-Terms of office; oath of office; mayor to approve actions of board of selectmen; tie vote; mayor to be committing magistrate, to hold court daily. 
    The Mayor and Selectmen of said Town [City] shall hold their offices for four years, as herein provided, or until their successors are duly qualified, and shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully and impartially perform the duties incumbent on them, which said oaths, shall be kept in a bound book in the archives of said board. The Mayor [shall] approve all laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations passed by the Board, but shall not be entitled to vote upon any question before the Board, except in case of a tie, when he shall give the casting vote. He shall be committing magistrate, with full power to examine and commit in all cases arising under the ordinances of said Town [City], within its limits, in the same manner and to the same extent as Justices of the Peace now or may hereafter do, and is hereby fully authorized and empowered to examine, try and sentence any and all persons for any and all violations of the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of said Town [City] of Plaquemine, or offenses against the same, and he shall also have jurisdiction of any civil matter growing out of the Police laws, ordinances and regulations of said Town [City], in the manner and extent of a Justice of the Peace. He shall hold his Court daily, when necessary, between the hours of nine o'clock a.m. and two o'clock p.m. or longer if need be, for the hearing of complaints and the trial of offenses, and all fines imposed by him and collected pursuant to the provisions of this Act, shall be paid into the Corporation Treasury at least once a month. 
(Act of 5-5-1890; Act of 6-4-07; Ord. No. 847, § 1, 7-27-72) 
Sec. 6a. - * Mayor pro tem. 
    The Mayor Pro Tem, acting in the absence, death or resignation of the Mayor, shall have the same jurisdiction and exercise all the rights and powers conferred by law upon the Mayor. 
(Act of 6-5-1899) 
* This section number has been supplied by the editor. 
Sec. 7. - Election of designated town [city] officers; combining offices authorized; terms of office; oath of office; bond requirements; officers subject to authority of mayor and board. 
    The Mayor and Selectmen elect, shall within ten days after being commissioned, assemble, qualify and proceed to the election of suitable persons for the positions of Town [City] Collector, Clerk and Treasurer, and whenever necessary, an Assistant Town [City] Marshal. The offices of Marshal and Collector and Clerk and Treasurer may be combined in one*. The officers elected as hereinabove provided shall hold their offices one year, and shall take and subscribe an oath for the faithful performance of their duty, and give security in such sum as may be required by the Board, and be at all times subject to the directions of the Mayor and regulations of the Board of Selectmen established for the Government of the same in the performance of their respective duties assigned to them. 
Sec. 8. - Collector, powers and duties. 
    The Collector shall have full and ample power to collect any and all taxes and licenses levied by the Board, and all fines levied by the Mayor, and shall render a full and correct account of all monies by him so received, whenever so required by said Board, and to that end shall have, and he is hereby vested with all the rights and powers now vested in or which may hereafter be vested in the State Tax Collectors to enforce the payment of same. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 1, 7-27-72) 
Sec. 8a. - Chief of Police-Qualification; election; term of office.[2] 
    The Chief of Police, who shall be a citizen and taxpayer, shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City, and his election shall be held on the same day as that of the Mayor and Board of Selectmen; and he shall hold office for four years, unless sooner removed for legal cause. 
(Act of 5-5-1890; Ord. No. 278, 1-13-09) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 8a would seem to repeal, by implication, the possibility of combining the office of marshal with that of any other office. 
Editor's note- This section number has been supplied by the editor. See also editor's note to section 7. 

Sec. 9. - Same-Powers and duties; compensation. 
    The Chief of Police is hereby vested with all the powers of a peace officer and fully authorized and empowered to serve and execute all warrants, writs, summons, orders, search warrants, mittimus or commitments issued by the Mayor, Judge, or any Justice of the Peace within said City in offenses against the State of the Laws, ordinances or regulations of said City; to make arrests for the infractions of the Laws of the State and the laws, ordinances and regulations of said City; to follow and arrest all offenders flying from said City, all in the same manner and to the same extent as Sheriffs in the discharge of their duties, and shall be entitled to the same compensation as provided by law for Sheriffs in criminal cases. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 1, 7-27-72; Ord. No. 278, 1-13-09) 
Sec. 10. - Town [City] clerk, powers and duties; salary, certified copies of board proceedings as evidence. 
    The Clerk or Secretary of the Board shall be Ex-Officio Assessor of said Town [City] of Plaquemine, and shall have possession and charge of the Archives of the Board, and shall keep and preserve the same, together with a minute of their proceedings and all the bonds, etc., of the Town [City] Officers, and shall make known and publish the same in such manner as said Board may determine, and shall receive such salary as said Board may fix; and that certified copies from said Clerk of any and all proceedings had before said Board or before the Mayor's Court of said Town [City] shall be evidence in the Courts of this State. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 1, 7-27-72) 
Sec. 11. - Treasurer, bond; duties. 
    The Treasurer shall hold his office as aforesaid, give good and sufficient security for the faithful disbursement and correct account of all monies he may receive and be under the direction and control of said Board, to whom he shall render an account and turn over the funds in his possession whenever so required. 
Sec. 12. - Assessor, powers and duties; compensation. 
    It shall be the duty of the Assessor of the said Town [City] to make out in the month of May and June of each year, an assessment of all the property, real and personal, within the limits of said Corporation and subject to taxation by the Laws of the State, and to deliver the same, after being exposed for and during ten days, as may be provided, for correction to the Board, and to this end said Clerk and Ex-Officio Assessor is hereby vested with the authority which is now or may hereafter be vested in State Assessors, and shall be governed by the same rules and regulations. It shall also be his duty, whenever so required, to make out and deliver to said Board a list of all persons pursuing trades, occupations or professions subject to license within the limits of said Town [City]; for all which he shall receive such compensation as said Board may fix. 
Sec. 13. - Powers and authority of municipality. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen of said Town [City] of Plaquemine shall have full and ample power and authority to make and pass all such laws, ordinances, and regulations as may be necessary and proper. 
    First: To establish, regulate, and maintain the peace and good order of the town [city], and to provide for and preserve its cleanliness and salubrity in such manner as may be considered best, not inconsistent with the laws of the State or of the United States. 
    Second: To adopt a common seal. 
    Third: To purchase and hold, alienate and convey any estate, real or personal; to accept any gift, grant or inheritance of property for public or charitable purposes; to erect school, market or fire engine houses; to build or establish a wharf or wharves, and to build a corporation work-house. 
    Fourth: To establish a quarantine for the protection of the town [city] against contagious diseases and epidemics. 
    Fifth: To levy and collect such annual and special taxes on all the property, movable and immovable, real and personal, not exempted by the law of the state, within the limits of said town [city] as shall be deemed necessary and in accordance with law. 
    Sixth: To impose an annual license tax on all trades, professions, occupations and callings, pursued within the limits of said Town [City], as keepers or owners of stores and shops or stands of all kinds, coffee houses, beer saloons, or gaming saloons of any and all kinds, warehouses, sawmills, lumber yards, work shops of any and all kinds, druggist, physicians, attorneys and agents, hotels, boarding houses and restaurants, livery stables and stock yards, peddlers and hawkers of goods, wares and merchandise, and all trades, occupations or professions taxed by the State, or whether so taxed, or not by the State, and to fix such tax or license on the same as may be deemed proper and necessary to the extent of double the amount of the tax levied or imposed by the State [3] and which said license shall be for the calendar year, beginning January first and ending December thirty-first, and shall be due and payable on January first of each year and shall be deemed delinquent on March first of each year. 
    Seventh: To fix the amount of the bonds to be given by the Town [City] officers from whom bonds are or may be required; to Fix the Salaries or compensation of all officers or of persons employed by them; to define the duties and to fix the Term of office of such officers as they may elect, and to remove for cause anyone of the officers or persons appointed by the said Mayor and Board; to fix their own compensation and to impose such fines as they may deem proper upon themselves for nonattendance of the meetings of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 2-35, § 1, 4-29-63; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 9-29-64; Ord. No. 927, 2-13-79) 
    Eighth: To survey and lay out streets and public squares, to regulate and make improvements to the streets, squares and other public property, and to provide for lighting and watering the same; to construct or establish a wharf or wharves within the corporate limits of said town [city], and to fix the wharfage dues thereon; to order and direct the filling, opening, widening and continuing any of the streets or drains of said town [city], and if, for the above or any public purpose, the land of any private individual or body corporate is to be had, to purchase the same at a reasonable price, or to cause same to be expropriated pursuant to the mode and formalities of law existing relative to the same; to regulate the proportions and to make and repair all common drains, public roads, causeways and bridges; to determine the completion and pavement of the streets and sidewalks; to prevent the stopping, obstructing or encroaching upon any street sidewalk, levee, public square, road or the river and bayou banks, and the navigation of the Bayou Plaquemine within the limits of said corporation, and to order any object, no matter what may be its value, which may encumber said places or prevent the free use of the same, to be removed or sold for whom it may concern in the manner and after such advertisement as shall be required by ordinance. 
    Ninth: To clean and keep free from obstruction the banks of the River Mississippi and of the Bayou Plaquemine, and to regulate the free use of the same not inconsistent with the laws of the State and the United States, within the limits of said town [city], and to open or cause to be opened such ancient natural drains as may have been obstructed by the owners of adjacent lands. 
    Tenth: To determine what animals may run at large within the limits of said town [city], and to prohibit others from doing so under such penalties as may be necessary and proper; to impound all animals running at large in said town [city] in violation of the ordinances and regulations of the same, and to fix the penalties and fines which the owners of such animals shall pay before delivering up the same to them, and to pass laws for the sale of such animals, if not reclaimed within such time as may be fixed. 
    Eleventh: To abate nuisances, to suppress houses of ill-fame, and to restrain and prohibit gambling; to cause all vagrants, idle or disorderly persons, all persons of evil life or ill-fame, and all such as have no visible means of support, to give security of their good behavior for a reasonable time, or in case of inability or refusal on their part to give such security, to cause them to work in the corporation work-house, or on the streets of said town [city], for a period not exceeding sixty days, or until such security be given. 
    Twelfth: To make appropriations for and to erect a corporation work-house, and to provide by suitable ordinances and regulations for the efficient government of the same. 
    Thirteenth: To establish patrols and night watches; to erect street lamps, dig cisterns or well, lay water pipes, build horse racks, etc., in any and all parts of said town [city] they may deem proper. 
    Fourteenth: To pass and enforce laws and ordinances imposing fines upon any and all persons who shall open or conduct any business, or pursue any occupations or calling requiring a license, as herein provided, without having first obtained such license; to enable said town [city] to collect said fines, full and ample power is hereby given said board by process before any court of competent jurisdiction, with the right to the immediate seizure and sale of the property of such person or persons, and their arrest and detention until same be paid. 
    Fifteenth: To regulate the proper government of all wagons, carts, drays, trucks, omnibuses, carriages, and other vehicles of any description kept for use or hire in said town [city], and to impose on any and all such vehicles an annual license tax not exceeding twenty dollars each, to be paid as may be determined by said board; provided, the fund thus arising be used for the repair of the streets and bridges in said town [city]. 
    Sixteenth: To establish market places, public and private to provide for their efficient government, together with the rent or lease of the same for such time and in such manner as may be deemed proper; and also to determine and fix the fees and dues to be paid by all persons exposing meats, fish, fruit, vegetables, or merchandise of any kind therein or within the limits of said corporation; and to control and regulate the sale of bread in said town [city], and to determine the quality and weight thereof. 
    Seventeenth: To control and regulate the policing of all public meetings or assemblies within said town [city], as well as that of theatres, taverns, public balls, places for shows and exhibitions, houses of public entertainment, saloons of all kinds, and shops and places for the sale of liquors, and to license the same as herein provided, with full power to regulate, prohibit, or close the same, together with all places of business, or public resort, on Sundays and holidays, whenever, in the opinion of said board, the interest, public safety or order or tranquility of said town [city] may require it; and finally, to impose on all persons keeping such places of public resort or amusement such duties and regulations as they may deem proper. 
    Eighteenth: And to the ends aforesaid, and for the good order, government, police, health, comfort, peace, pleasure and safety of said town [city], to enact, pass and enforce any law, ordinance or regulation necessary, not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of this State. 
(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 6-30-46; Ord. No. 542, § 1, 2-9-54) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State constitution reference- Prohibition against political subdivision of state imposing greater license tax than imposed by state, Arts. 10, 8, Const. 1921. 

Sec. 14. - Wharfage. 
    The Mayor and Board of Selectmen of said Town [City] shall have the power and authority to levy, determine and enforce the collection and payment of wharfage on boats or watercrafts of all kinds, landing or touching at said Town [City], whether on River Mississippi or Bayou Plaquemine, under such regulations and under such sum as may be determined by them, and to that end shall have and exercise the same authority, rights and privileges granted to the City of New Orleans. 
Sec. 15. - Collection of licenses, taxes, etc. 
    For the purpose of levying and collecting any and all taxes, licenses, penalties, and market or wharfage dues, the Mayor and Board of Selectmen of the said Town [City] are hereby vested with full and ample authority to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of this State, or of the United States, and to compel by compulsory and summary process the prompt and punctual payment of all such taxes, licenses, penalties, and dues as herein provided, by seizure and sale when necessary; and they are hereby authorized and empowered to exercise and confer upon the Assessor and Collector of said Town [City] full and sufficient authority and power to carry into full force and effect such laws, ordinances, and regulations, under the provisions of and to the full extent of the laws now in force, or which may hereafter be in force, for the assessment and collection of taxes, licenses, penalties and dues, under the revenue laws of this State, necessary so to do. 
Sec. 16. - Taxes, licenses, etc., to constitute lien; recording of delinquent taxpayer lists. 
    The taxes, licenses, and dues assessed, levied, determined, and imposed by the said Mayor and Board of Selectmen of the Town [City] of Plaquemine, in virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be and constitute a lien and privilege on the property, goods and effects against which the same may be assessed, second only to that of the State; and to preserve said lien and privilege against such property, goods and effects in favor of said Town [City] of Plaquemine, a list of the delinquent taxpayers, with a brief description of the property assessed and statement of the taxes or licenses claimed and due, shall be recorded in the office of the Parish recorder of the Parish of Iberville, at such time each year as said Board may determine. 
Sec. 17. - Relationship between parish and town [city] defined. 
    All property within the limits of said Town [City] of Plaquemine, shall be and remain exempt from any and all taxes which may be assessed or levied by the authorities of the Parish of Iberville; provided, said Town [City] provide for and pay all criminal expenses occurring for offenses committed within its limits, and provided further, that the authorities of said Town [City] levy, collect and pay to the School Board of said Parish a special school tax, equal to the amount of that assessed by the Parish, as required by special laws, for the improvement and extension of the public schools, and that the authority of the Police Jury of said Parish of Iberville, shall cease within the limit of said Corporation, except in so far as same relates to the public property of said Parish situated therein. 
Sec. 18. - Quorum; when majority required; veto power of mayor; overriding veto. 
    The mayor and four (4) selectmen shall form a quorum to transact business (or five (5) selectmen in the absence of the mayor); but to levy a tax, toll or impost, or to fix the amount of or to pass any appropriation shall be by a vote of the majority of the board of selectmen, with the approval of the mayor, and such vote shall be duly recorded. The mayor shall have the right of vetoing any law, ordinance, or resolution of the board of selectmen, but when he exercises such right he shall return the law or ordinance vetoed to the board of selectmen within three (3) days after its passage, with his reasons, in writing, for such veto, when, if five (5) members of the board of selectmen vote to give the same effect, it shall become a law notwithstanding such veto. 
(Ord. No. 1031, 5-13-86) 
Sec. 19. - Time ordinances, etc., to take effect; publication. 
    All laws, ordinances or regulations of said Mayor and Board of Selectmen shall have effect two days after publication in any newspaper published in said Town [City], to be selected by the Board, or in the event of no paper being published therein, then by posting the same at three public places in said Town [City] for the time aforesaid. 
Sec. 20. - Management and control of ferries and dykes. 
    Said Mayor and Board of Selectmen shall have the management and control of ferries across the River Mississippi from the west to the east bank thereof, and the ferries and dykes across the Bayou Plaquemine from the south or east side to the north or west side of the same, within the limits of said Town [City], with the right to let and lease the same under each such regulations and upon such terms as may be deemed best, the one-half of the funds realized from the sale or lease of such ferries and dykes to go to the treasury of said Town [City], and the other half of the same to the Parish of Iberville, the right herein granted not to interfere with any right or privilege now in force under existing laws. 
Sec. 21. - Right of appeal. 
    Said Mayor and Board of Selectmen shall have the right to appeal from any judgment wherein said Board may be either plaintiff or defendant in any of the courts of this State, under the rules and regulations in all such courts; provided, without being required to give bond or security for such appeal. 
Sec. 22. - Continuation of present officers in office. 
    The Mayor and Selectmen of the Town [City] of Plaquemine now in office shall constitute and remain in office until the first Monday of May next, or until their successors are duly qualified. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - SPECIAL ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and the special acts amending the Charter. 
Date Act 
Number Section Disposition      -1878 109 1-22 1-22  5- 5-1890 6 8a  6- 5-1899 6a  6- 6-1899 2  6- 4-07 2 6  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This table shows the location of ordinances and resolutions amending the Charter. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section Disposition 378 6-30-46 1 13(18th) 542 2-9-54 1 13(18th) 718 9-29-64 1 13(7th) 2-35 4-29-63 1 13(7th) 847 7-27-72 1 6, 8-10 927 2-13-79 13(7th) Res. 12-11-84 1, 2 1026 9-24-85 1 Res. 11-12-85 2 1030 3-25-86 1 1031 5-13-86 18 1053 9-22-87 1(b) 16 12-17-91 2(b) 178 3-19-03 2 200 2-10-04 2(b) 201 3-9-04 2(b) 202 3-9-04 2(b)(5) 278  1-13-09 8a 9 315  3-27-12 2(b)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Plaquemine, Louisiana." 
(Code 1967, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Method and procedure in adopting a code of ordinances, R.S. 33:1361 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of selectmen of the city: 
    Board of selectmen. Whenever the words "board of selectmen" are used, they shall be construed to mean the mayor and board of selectmen of the City of Plaquemine. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Plaquemine, consisting of Act 109 of the General Assembly of 1878, as amended, a copy of which is printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the word "Plaquemine" followed them. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of time allowed or prescribed by law or by order of court, the date of the act, event or default after which the period begins to run is not to be included. 
The last day of the period is to be included, unless it is a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a legal holiday. A half-holiday is considered as a legal holiday. A legal holiday is to be included in the computation of a period of time allowed or prescribed, except when: 
(1)  It is expressly excluded; 
(2)  It would otherwise be the last day of the period; or 
(3)  The period is less than seven days. 
    Court, city court. Whenever the words "court," or "city court" are used herein they shall be construed to mean the city court of the City of Plaquemine. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
    Officers, departments, etc. Except as otherwise specifically provided, whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title alone, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana." Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code any specific act is required to be done by any designated officer or official of the city, such act may be performed by any duly authorized member of his department. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Parish. The words "the parish" or "this parish' shall mean the Parish of Iberville. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. Includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The words "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
    Real property. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    R.S. The abbreviation "R.S." shall mean the latest edition of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Louisiana. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
    Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Interpretation of revised statutes, R.S. 1:1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed nor taken to be titles of such sections, chapters, articles or divisions or as any part of the section, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, chapter, article or division, including the catchlines or headings are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes and references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall repeal any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising, guaranteeing or authorizing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness; 
(2)  Pertaining to any contract or obligation of the city; 
(3)  Of an administrative nature not inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)  Affecting any right or franchise conferred or granted prior to the effective date hereof; 
(5)  Establishing the compensation of municipal officers and employees; 
(6)  Levying annual taxes or any budget or appropriation ordinance; 
(7)  Regulating traffic or parking at specific locations not inconsistent herewith; 
(8)  Accepting, vacating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening or ordering the improvement of any street or public way; 
(9)  Relating to special assessments; 
(10)  Relating to sewer districts; 
(11)  Zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(12)  Which is of a temporary or special nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. of 6-29-67, § 6) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Code and any code adopted by reference herein, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Code 1967, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions shall be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the board of selectmen. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, is hereby amended as follows:..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) will make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Plaquemine to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1967, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-11. - Responsibility of officers of corporations violating this Code. 
    For the purpose of enforcing this Code, a corporation shall be deemed to be represented by its president, or in his absence by its vice-president, or in the absence of both, by the office or individual in charge of the affairs of the corporation. 
(Code 1967, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of selectmen that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of selectmen without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this Code and where no specific penalty is provided, therefor, the violation of any provisions of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days or by both fine and imprisonment, within the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-14. - Assessment of court cost; off-duty law enforcement officers; subpoena fees. 
(a)  In all criminal matters, including traffic violation cases, tried under city ordinances in the city court of Plaquemine, in addition to the fine or other penalty which may be legally imposed against every defendant who is convicted after trial or after a plea of guilty or who forfeits his bond, the judge may assess cost of court in an amount not to exceed $15.00 which shall be deposited in the judicial expense fund of the city court of Plaquemine. 
(b)  In all traffic violation cases, the city judge may assess in addition to the foregoing cost a sum not less than $5.00 and not to exceed $10.00 as additional cost of court, the proceeds from which shall be deposited in the city marshal's expense account, and shall be used to defray operational expenses of the office of marshal, all as may be useful and necessary for the proper conduct of the marshal's office for maintenance, purchase of law enforcement equipment and other expenses of the marshal as may be authorized and approved by the judge of the city court. 
(c)  In all criminal matters, including traffic violation cases and delinquency adjudication, tried under city ordinances in the city court of Plaquemine, in addition to the fine or other penalty which may be legally imposed against every defendant who is convicted after trial or after a plea of guilty or who forfeits his fine, the judge may assess costs of court in an amount not to exceed $15.00, the proceeds from which shall be deposited in a special fund maintained and administered by the governing authority for the City of Plaquemine and from the governing authority for the city shall pay the witness fees due off-duty law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 1020, 2-12-85; Res. of 6-10-86; Ord. No. 008, 1-8-91) 
State Law reference- Costs, R.S. 13:1899. 
Sec. 1-15. - Fee for criminal records checks, accident reports and complaints. 
(a)  The Plaquemine Police Department, through the chief of police, is hereby authorized to charge any person an amount of $15.00, for copying, administration charges with connection with access to criminal records checks, accident reports, and review of any and all complaints, not subject to the confidentiality requirements as provided by law. 
(b)  The Plaquemine Police Department, through the chief of police, is hereby authorized to charge any person an amount of $35.00, for copying, administration charges with connection with access to body camera video, dash cam video, and review of any and all complaints, not subject to the confidentiality requirements as provided by law. 
(c)  The Plaquemine Police Department, through the chief of police, is hereby authorized to retain the proceeds from these funds in a separate account to defray the costs of copy equipment and/or recording equipment and/or electronic storage. 
(Ord. No. 088, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 377, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 1-16. - Chief of police appearance bond fee; appropriation. 
(a)  A fee of $15.00 shall be allowed for each appearance bond taken by the chief of police when required to do so, unless suspended by the judge of the court in which the charge requiring the bond is filed. Upon acquittal of the defendant, this fee shall be refunded to the individual who paid the fee. 
(b)  The fee authorized in subsection (a) shall be payable to the general fund of the city. The city shall, subject to applicable law, appropriate $13.00 of the fee to the chief of police to be used for law enforcement purposes. 
(c)  The city may appropriate, quarterly, $2.00 of the fee authorized in subsection (a) to the Louisiana Association of Chiefs of Police. 
(Ord. No. 154, 9-11-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:2334. 
Sec. 1-17. - Judicial building fund. 
(a)  The city court may impose a service charge not to exceed $10.00 per filing. The fee shall be paid to the clerk of court at the time of filing. The collection of the filing fee shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, Article 5181 et seq. 
(b)  In each proceeding where a fine is imposed or court costs are ordered to be paid, a service charge not to exceed $10.00 may be collected by the city court, which shall be in addition to all other fines, costs, or forfeitures lawfully imposed. 
(c)  All monies collected in accordance with this section shall be forwarded to the city court and placed in an account dedicated exclusively to the acquisition, leasing, construction, equipping, and maintenance of new and existing city court facilities and for the maintenance and payment of any bond indebtedness on any such existing facilities. 
(d)  The city court shall have control over the fund and all disbursements made from the fund. 
(Ord. No. 163, 2-19-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 13:1910. 
Sec. 1-18. - Office of motor vehicles fee. 
    A fee of $4.50 shall be allowed and is hereby levied for each service or transaction carried out as an operation of the local office of motor vehicles. The fee shall be used to defray the costs of operations of the local field office of motor vehicles, including but not limited to facility rental, utilities and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 176, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 355, 8-11-15) 
State Law reference- Authority for above fee, R.S. 32:429. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Election of mayor, selectmen and marshal, § 3 et seq.; election of designated town officers, § 7; collector, § 8; marshal, § 8a; clerk, § 10; treasurer, § 11; assessor, § 12; powers and authority of municipalities, § 13. 
Cross reference- Ordinances of an administrative nature not inconsistent with this Code save from repeal, § 1-5(3); gas inspector, § 6-146 et seq.; civil defense, Ch. 7; offenses against public administration, § 9-36 et seq.; fire department, § 10-16 et seq.; playground and recreation board, § 14-16 et seq.; planning, Ch. 15; municipal planning commission, § 15-16 et seq.; regional planning commission, § 15-46 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 15-61 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Municipalities and parishes, R.S. Title 33. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Corporate limits. 
    The complete description of the corporate limits is on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-1, 2-1.1; Ord. No. 805, 8-12-69; Ord. No. 806, 8-12-69; Ord. No. 810-A, 5-12-70; Ord. No. 816, 6-23-70; Ord. No. 839, 12-14-71; Ord. No. 841, 3-14-72; Ord. No. 889, 3-8-73; Ord. No. 902, 1-11-77; Ord. No. 072, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 073, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 105, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 108, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 2-2. - City employees working on private property. 
    City employees may work on private property on city time, or on their own time using city equipment, only with the permission of the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-3. - Copies of public records. 
    The city authorizes and empowers the city clerk to charge as a fee $0.50 per copy for public records copied by the city on behalf of persons requesting same and $4.00 per certified copy for persons requesting same. 
(Res. of 3-14-89; Ord. No. 356, 10-13-15) 
State Law reference- Fees for copies of public records, R.S. 44:32. 
Sec. 2-4. - Public, educational, governmental access programming support. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 45:1361 et seq., providers of cable or video services holding a state-issued certificate of franchise authority as provided in R.S. 45:1361 et seq. and operating within the city's municipal limits shall pay to the city an amount equal to one-half percent of the gross revenues as that term is defined by the "Consumer Choice for Television Act of 2008" derived from operation within the city's municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 271, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 2-5. - Use of municipal property for business operations within the city. 
    No person or entity may enter upon, traverse, either above ground or below, or otherwise utilize any property, servitude or other property right owned, leased, possessed or controlled by the city (herein referred to as "city property") for the conduct of business operations without first being issued a permit to enter city property for business operations as more fully set forth hereafter. 
(1)  Location of any system for business operations within city property without a valid permit from the city pursuant to this section presents a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens and their property and is expressly forbidden. 
(2)  The city recognizes and reserves any and all rights available to it to regulate use of any city property. 
(3)  The granting of any city license, permit, or other requirement for doing business within the city shall not be construed as authorizing any such person or entity the right to utilize city property for the conduct of business operations. 
(4)  Any person or entity desiring to operate a system occupying city property "(applicant") shall make a written request to the city for a permit, which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, and contact person of the person or entity making the request; 
b.  Necessary corporate information, if applicable; 
c.  Name, address, email address, and home, office and cell telephone numbers of a person with authority to act on behalf of the applicant in case of emergency; 
d.  Description of the proposed activity; 
e.  Identification of the city property which applicant's system will occupy. Said identification shall include the following: 
1.  Map drawn to scale of the location of all of applicant's system presently occupying city property; 
2.  Inventory of all equipment, structures, and facilities comprising applicant's system occupying city property; and 
3.  Description of all anticipated construction, major maintenance, and major installation activities which shall include the specific locations and the beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year; and the tentative locations and beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the two-year period following the next calendar year. 
f.  Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance covering and affecting the applicant's business operations occupying city property. Applicant shall notify the city of cancellation of such policy(ies) at least 30 days in advance of such cancellation; and 
g.  Name of all contractors acting or working on behalf of applicant within city property along with the name and home, office, and cell telephone numbers of a person with authority to act on behalf of the contractor in case of emergency. 
(5)  Upon provision of all of the information required by subsection (4), the city shall issue a permit allowing the applicant/permittee to enter city property to conduct business operations in accordance with the specific information provided to the city by the applicant/permittee. 
(6)  Standard provisions of each permit granted pursuant to this section shall include the following: 
a.  Conditions of occupancy. The system shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the public uses use of city property and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins city property. 
b.  Restoration of public ways. If, during the course of the permittee's construction, installation, or maintenance of the system, there occurs a disturbance of any city property by the permittee, the permittee shall replace and restore such city property to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the city property existing immediately prior to such disturbance. 
c.  Relocation at request of the city. If the city shall lawfully elect to vacate, relocate, abandon, alter, reconstruct or change any city property, the permittee, upon 30 days' written notice by the city via certified mail to the permittee, shall remove, relay and relocate its structure, equipment, and facilities at its own expense. Should the permittee refuse or fail to remove system within 30 days after written notification, the city shall have the right to remove the component parts of the system and charge the permittee for the costs of removal. 
d.  Relocation at request of third party. The permittee shall, on the request of any person holding a lawful building moving permit, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from any city property, as necessary, any property of the permittee provided: 
(i)  The expense of such is paid by said person benefiting from the relocation, including, if required by the permittee, making such payment in advance; and 
(ii)  The permittee is given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. For purposes of this section, "reasonable advance written notice" shall be no less than 30 days in the event of a temporary relocation, and no less than 120 days for a permanent relocation. 
e.  Interference with use of right-of-way. When working within city property, permittee shall not unreasonably interfere with public uses of said city property and the safety, health, and convenience of the public in the public's use thereof for ordinary travel. 
(7)  No less than three business days prior to commencement of construction, installation or maintenance activities within city property, the permittee shall notify the city of the specific locations and beginning and ending dates of said construction, installation, or maintenance project and shall provide current, accurate contact information for both the permittee and the contractor as outlined in subsection (4). Upon receipt of this notification, the city shall determine whether the proposed construction, installation, or maintenance activities shall pose an unreasonable inference with public uses. If the city determines the proposed activity presents no such unreasonable interference, it shall issue the permittee a notice to proceed. If the permittee receives no written notification from the city within 24 hours of the proposed commencement of activities, the proposed activities may be deemed approved. This section shall not apply to emergency repair projects or utility service extension projects which the permittee could not have anticipated. 
(8)  The permittee shall keep all of the information required by subsection (4) current at all times by immediately providing the city written notice of changes. 
(9)  Any person or entity: 
a.  Whose system occupies city property for business operations without obtaining the permit required in this section; 
b.  Who fails to provide the 72-hour notice prior to commencement of construction, installation, or maintenance activities as required in subsection (6); or 
c.  Who fails to maintain current, accurate information required by subsection (4) concerning any system occupying city property 
may have any permit granted pursuant to this section revoked and may be denied future authorization for construction, installation, or maintenance activities for a period of two years. 
(10)  Any violation of this section shall afford the city the full range of remedies available under any applicable law or regulation including the levying of fines. The election of one or more remedies shall not be construed as a waiver of any other legal and/or equitable remedy including, but not limited to the city's right to seek injunctive relief, damages, and attorney's fees as the law might allow. 
(Ord. No. 274, §§ 1-10, 10-14-08) 
Sec. 2-6. - Procedure to amend electronic version of appendix A to chapter 23, section 16(B) [subsection 23-16(b)]. 
(a)  After the mayor and board of selectmen amend chapter 23, section 16(B), appendix A [subsection 23-16(b)], it shall be the sole duty and responsibility of the mayor and city clerk, as soon as reasonably possible, to amend the electronic version of appendix A to chapter 23, section 16(B) [subsection 23-16(b)] to reflect the action taken by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(b)  As soon as reasonably possible, the city clerk shall deliver a copy of the amended electronic version of appendix A to chapter 23, section 16(B) [subsection 23-16(b)] to the city inspector and the city planning and zoning secretary and verify said action to the mayor. 
(c)  The mayor and city clerk are empowered to designate a person in their office to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) herein. 
(Ord. No. 296, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 2-7. - Compensation of Plaquemine Civil Service Board Members. 
(a)  The city may appropriate, as compensation, to the members of the Plaquemine Civil Service Board, a per diem for attendance at meetings of the board for a maximum of 12 days per year. 
(b)  The per diem for attendance at meetings of the board for the board members may be $25.00 and for the board's chairman, $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 351, 3-24-15) 
Secs. 2-8-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND BOARD OF SELECTMEN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Election of mayor and board of selectmen, § 3 et seq. 

Sec. 2-16. - Compensation. 
    The salary of each member of the board of selectmen shall be set at $1,180.00 per month, as reflected in the 2017/2018 City of Plaquemine fiscal budget. 
(Ord. No. 927, 2-13-79; Amend. of 1-13-86; Ord. No. 1072, 3-14-89; Ord. No. 96, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 314, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 344, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 373, 10-24-17) 
Charter reference- Authority to fix compensation, § 13 (seventh). 
Sec. 2-17. - Meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the mayor and board of selectmen shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at the hour of 6:30 p.m. at the city hall. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-18. - Rules of procedure. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen hereby adopted "Robert's Rules of Order" for the conduct of their meetings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-19. - Conduct of persons in attendance at meetings for the mayor and board of selectmen; penalty for violation. 
(a)  All persons attending regular or special meetings, during executive sessions by the mayor and board of selectmen shall remain in the spectator area behind the bar and/or rail, except duly authorized city personnel, councilmembers, the mayor and those parties given permission by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of no more than $150.00. 
(Amend. of 1-22-85) 
Sec. 2-20. - Procedure regarding items on agenda for executive session. 
(a)  The board of selectmen or mayor shall contact the city attorney and explain and identify the item on the agenda that the mayor or city council members believe appropriate to be discussed in executive session. 
(b)  The city attorney shall then check the appropriate statutes and jurisprudence to determine whether the item can legally be discussed in executive session. 
(c)  If there is an employee to be discussed in executive session, the employee shall be contacted by the city attorney, notified that he is to be discussed in executive session, and determine whether or not the employee wishes to have himself discussed in executive session or in open session. Further, the employee shall be advised of his legal rights to have his attorney present at either the executive session or the open session. 
(d)  The city attorney shall then contact the clerk as to the item to be placed on the agenda with regard to the executive session. If said item is to be personnel, it shall be stated as follows: "To discuss personnel, possible executive session. To discuss litigation, parties ____________ ." 
(Res. of 4-14-87) 
Sec. 2-21. - Public comment. 
(a)  Persons desiring to speak before the mayor and board of selectmen or any of its committees must notify the city clerk that they wish to speak and on what topic in writing by filling out a comment card before the meeting is brought to order. 
(b)  The opportunity for public comment shall be limited to comments that are relevant to items that are listed on the agenda. 
(c)  The time for each speaker to make a public comment shall be limited to five minutes. 
(d)  The comment cards to be filled out will require the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of proposed speaker; 
(2)  Agenda item on which they would like to speak; 
(3)  Whether or not they would like to speak in support or opposition to the item. 
(e)  The sign up period for the public comment period shall begin at 6:15 p.m. and shall end promptly at 6:30 on the date of each meeting. 
(f)  All speakers shall refrain from using discourteous or obscene language, threatening harm to any person, or making any comment which is not relevant to the discussion of the agenda item. 
(Ord. No. 255, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 2-22-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances establishing the compensation of the municipal officers and employees saved from repeal, § 1-5(5). 
State Law reference- Disability and relief fund for firemen, R.S. 33:2021 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Joining of risk management agency. 
(a)  The city shall join the Louisiana Risk Management Agency and participate in its group self insurance fund which has been formed to service the workmen's compensation and employer liability claims of the employees of the municipalities joining the agency. 
(b)  The mayor is authorized to execute and the clerk attest the application to join the Louisiana Municipal Risk Management Agency and participate in its group self insurance fund with respect to workmen's compensation and employer liability claims in the form and substance of the application on file in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 939, 10-9-79) 
State Law reference- Local Governmental Subdivision Self Insurance Act of 1979, R.S. 33:1341 et seq. 
Secs. 2-32-2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Employees' Retirement System, R.S. 11:1341 et seq. 

Sec. 2-41. - Coverage provided. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend the provisions of Act No. 356, Regular Session, Louisiana, Legislature of 1954 [R.S. 33:7151 et seq.], providing retirement to eligible officers and employees of the city. In pursuance of such policy, and for such purpose, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations. The coverage of eligible officers and employees shall not be retroactive. 
(Code 1967, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-42. - Contract with board of trustees of municipal employees retirement system. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the board of trustees of the municipal employees retirement system to secure coverage of eligible officers and employees as provided in section 2-41. 
Sec. 2-43. - Contributions by employees. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of officers and employees for the purpose provided in section 2-41 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by the board of trustees in accordance with Act No. 356 of 1954 [R.S. 33:7151 et seq.], and shall be paid over to the board of trustees in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations of such agency. 
Sec. 2-44. - Contributions by city. 
    Employer contributions and assessments for administrative expenses under this division shall be paid from amounts appropriated for such purposes to the board of trustees in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-45. - Records and reports. 
    The city clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-29) 
DIVISION 3. - MERIT COMPENSATION PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal employees merit award systems, R.S. 33:1891 et seq. 

Sec. 2-46. - Enactment. 
    This division is enacted by the mayor and board of selectmen of the city to recognize the service of its employees rendered for the city during their term of employment. Length of service is an accomplishment by an employee of the city that promotes, fosters and encourages economy, productivity and efficiency in the delivery of services to the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 026, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 041, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 2-47. - Title. 
    The title of this division shall be "City of Plaquemine Merit Compensation Plan." 
(Ord. No. 026, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 041, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 2-48. - "Employee" defined. 
    "Employee of the City of Plaquemine" is defined as those persons employed by the City of Plaquemine. 
(Ord. No. 026, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 041, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 2-49. - Award. 
    Upon the employee accomplishing ten years of service for the city, in recognition of this meritorious service, and for the reasons set forth in section 2-46, the city may award the employee a corporeal movable, not to exceed in value the amount set forth in R.S. 33:1893. 
(Ord. No. 026, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 041, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 2-50. - Budget; discontinuance. 
    The funds necessary to acquire the corporeal movable as set forth in section 2-49 shall be appropriated each year and expended from the general operating funds for the city. The city reserves the right to discontinue this merit award if the amount budgeted causes the city's general government budget to be at a deficit or it is determined by a majority vote of the mayor and board of selectmen that it is not in the best interest of the city to so provide this award. 
(Ord. No. 026, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 041, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 2-51. - Amendment of plan. 
    This plan may be amended as necessary to meet the requirements of applicable laws, statutes or regulations. It may also be amended as deemed necessary by the city or to meet the interests of the objectives of this plan as may be determined from time to time by the city. All rights to further amend, refine and redefine are specifically reserved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 041, 5-25-93) 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL RETIREMENT BENEFITS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 094, adopted Nov. 12, 1996, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 2-52-2-56. In order to provide for better classification and to facilitate the indexing, reference, and use, the editor, at his discretion, has designated these new provisions as a new Div. 4 to Ch. 2, Art. III. 

Sec. 2-52. - Intent. 
    Pursuant to the authority of R.S. 33:1420.1, the city, through its governing authority, recognizes the services of its retired city employees rendered for the city during their term of employment. This length of service is an accomplishment that promoted economy and efficiency in the performance of the municipal government of the city. As a result of this service, in addition to any other benefits that its employees may be due, the city had enacted this division to supplement its employees' retirement compensation. It is the intent of the mayor and board of selectmen that this supplemental retirement compensation will assist its retired employees in obtaining the basic necessities of life in their retirement years and recognize the merit of their service. 
(Ord. No. 094, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 2-53. - Short title. 
    The title of this division shall be "The City of Plaquemine Special Retirement Benefits Plan." 
(Ord. No. 094, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 2-54. - Definition of "employees." 
(a)  For the purpose of these sections, "employees" shall be defined as all full-time permanent city employees that have been employed by the city for more than 20 years. Elected officers are hereby excluded. 
(b)  The provisions of paragraph (a) notwithstanding, those employees of the city light and water plant who were employed by the Louisiana Energy and Power Authority pursuant to a contract dated the 27th day of September, 1989, and effective October 1, 1989 through September 30, 1994, shall be entitled to the benefits of the city's special retirement benefits plan under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Former employees of the city light and water plant must meet all of the terms and provisions of the city's special retirement benefits plan. 
(2)  Former employees of the city light and water plant can not include the time employed by the Louisiana Energy and Power Authority to comply with the provisions of paragraph (a). 
(3)  Former employees of the city light and water plant must apply for the benefits of the city's special retirement benefits plan during the term of the contract, to-wit: October 1, 1989 through September 30, 1994. 
(4)  After September 30, 1994, former employees of the city light and water plant who were employed by the Louisiana Energy and Power Authority as per the contract described in this subsection are no longer eligible for the benefits under the city's special retirement benefits plan. 
(5)  The provisions of subsection (4) above notwithstanding, if the former employees of the city light and water plant return to the employ of the city by October 31, 1994, those employees so employed will be eligible for the benefit under the city's special retirement benefits plan. 
(Ord. No. 094, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 2-55. - Payment. 
    The city will pay to the employee, the first of the month after the employee has retired, the sum of $200.00 per month. Upon the death of the employee, the city will discontinue payments. 
(Ord. No. 094, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 252, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 372, 10-24-17) 
Sec. 2-56. - Budget, discontinuance. 
    The funds of the city's special retirement benefits plan will be budgeted each year and will be expended from the general operating funds for the city. The city reserves the right to discontinue this special retirement benefits plan if the amount budgeted causes the city's budget to be at a deficit or it is determined by a majority vote of the mayor and board of selectmen for the city that it is not in the best interest of the city to so provide this benefit. 
(Ord. No. 094, 11-12-96) 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-57. - Prohibition on political activities. 
(a)  Political activities or electioneering by unclassified city employees or city-elected officials, during business hours and within city-owned lands, structures, movables or buildings is prohibited. 
(b)  "Political activities or electioneering" is defined as the utilization of city movables for the purposes of advancing, conducting or promoting a political candidate, political campaign or public referendum; utilization of city land, structures or buildings for meetings or conferences conducted for or on behalf of political candidates or public referendums. 
(c)  Whoever willfully violates this section shall be subject to the penalty of suspension with or without pay, demotion or termination after written notice of the violation is served and a hearing is held before the mayor and board of selectmen within 20 days of service of the notice. 
(Amend. of 11-25-86) 
Sec. 2-58. - Nondiscrimination policy. 
    The city, through its mayor and board of selectmen, hereby adopts the following nondiscrimination policy with regard to its employees and persons applying for employment with the city: 
(1)  Pronouncement of equal opportunity; disabled applicants/employees; sexual advances prohibited. The City of Plaquemine (the "city") is an equal opportunity employer. In accordance with federal, state and local law, the city recruits, hires, promotes and evaluates all personnel without regard to race, religion, color, sex, marital status, age, national origin, veteran status and disability. The city shall not disqualify disabled applicants or employees because of their inability to perform marginal or nonessential job functions. The city commits itself to make reasonable accommodation to help disabled applicants or employees meet legitimate criteria. Job applicants and present employees are evaluated solely on ability, experience and the requirements of the job. Without in any way limiting this policy, it shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to make unwelcome advances, requests for sexual favor, and other verbal or physical expressions of a sexual nature to other employees. 
(2)  Reporting violations; grievance procedure for disable employees. Any employee who believes he or she has been subjected to or has observed actions in violation of this policy subjected to or has observed actions in violation of this policy should report the incident to his or her supervisor. If, for any reason, the employee does not wish to discuss the incident with his or her immediate supervisor, the employee may also bring the matter directly to the attention of the chairman of the Plaquemine Civil Service Board. In the event of a disabled employee, the disabled employee shall also bring the matter directly to the attention of the customer service director, American[s with] Disabilities Act (ADA) coordinator. 
a.  The customer service director, ADA coordinator, shall immediately conduct an investigation regarding the complaint/grievance set forth by the disable employee; and 
b.  The customer service director, ADA coordinator, shall report the findings of the investigation directly to the personnel committee appointed by the mayor; and 
c.  The personnel committee shall review the report, conduct further investigations, if necessary, and render a decision; if the disabled employee does not agree with the decision of the personnel committee, the disabled employee can appeal to the personnel board for the city; and 
d.  The personnel board for the city shall review the report of the investigation, decision of the personnel committee and render a decision. 
(3)  Disciplinary action for violations. Any employee who violates this policy will be subject to immediate disciplinary action up to and including discharge. 
(4)  Construction of policy with regards to employment. Nothing in this policy shall be construed as any guarantee or promise to any applicant or any employee of any continued employment or any employment whatsoever, nor shall any provisions of this policy constitute or be interpreted by any party or tribunal to constitute any contractual rights of employment, express or implied, with the city or any obligation of employment rights created by covenants of good faith and fair dealing, either expressed or implied. Employees are not employed for any definite term by the city. No representative of the city has any authority to enter into an agreement for employment for any specified period of time or to make any agreement contrary to this provision. 
(5)  Construction of policy with regards to disciplinary action and employee responsibility. Nothing in this policy shall be interpreted as constituting any waiver of or limitation on the city's right to take appropriate disciplinary measures, nor shall it limit each employee's responsibility to protect, guard and take adequate precautions for his or her own safety and health in the workplace. 
(6)  Amendment of policy. This policy may be amended as necessary to meet the requirements of applicable laws, statutes or regulations. It may also be amended as deemed necessary by the city or to meet the interests of the objectives of this policy as may be determined from time to time by the city. All rights to further amend, refine and redefine are specifically reserved by the city. 
(Res. of 11-13-91; Ord. No. 042, 5-25-92; Ord. No. 185, 6-10-2003) 
Sec. 2-59. - Prohibition to purchase and maintain dogs. 
    The purchase and maintenance of dogs for the purpose to trace and pursue criminals and fugitives from justice and in pursuance of the duties of law enforcement by the Plaquemine Police Department is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 133, 10-26-99) 
Sec. 2-60. - Selective service registration requirements for city job applicants. 
    Every male who is at least 18 years old, but has not yet attained the age of 26, seeking employment with the city, shall submit documentation evidencing his registration or exemption from registration with the Federal Selective Service System before being employed. 
(Res. of 6-13-2000) 
Secs. 2-61-2-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-64. - Personnel; mayor's powers. 
    The mayor shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To supervise and direct the administration and operation of all municipal departments, offices, and agencies, except the Plaquemine Police Department and Plaquemine City Court. All administrative staff shall be subordinate to the mayor. 
a.  To supervise, discipline and direct the duties and responsibilities of all municipal employees. 
(2)  To delegate the performance of administrative duties to such municipal officers or employees as he deems necessary and advisable. 
(3)  Subject to applicable state law, ordinances, and civil service rules and regulations, to appoint, hire, terminate and remove municipal employees, except employees of the Plaquemine Police Department and Plaquemine City Court. However, the appointment, hiring, termination and removal of the department heads, supervisors, and any assistant supervisors shall be subject to approval by the board of selectmen. 
(Code 1967, § 2-42; Ord. No. 100, 4-22-97) 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 100, adopted April 22, 1997, repealed Div. 2, which pertained to the personnel board and derived from Code 1967, §§ 2-42-2-47. 

Secs. 2-65-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ALCOHOL AND DRUG PERSONNEL POLICY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- A resolution adopted May 10, 1988, enacted the provisions set out herein at the editor's discretion. 
It should be noted, however, that a resolution adopted May 23, 1989, adopted a policy of mandatory drug testing for employees of the city, such testing to be set at a date and time by the mayor and board of selectmen. After such mandatory drug testing, there shall be random drug testing of city employees for reasons set out in the preamble of the resolution. 

Sec. 2-76. - Use or attendance under inference prohibited. 
(a)  The city hereby states as its policy that the use of any alcohol or any illegal drug during working hours or attendance at work under the influence of any illegal drugs or alcohol is a violation of the city policy and will be grounds for suspension or termination of employment. 
(b)  The purpose of the city's policy is to prevent use and possession of alcohol and illegal drugs during working hours or attendance at work under the influence of any illegal drugs or alcohol and to provide a fair manner of dealing with accusations of suspected incidents of alcohol or illegal drug use during working hours. 
(Res. of 5-10-88) 
Sec. 2-77. - Administrative procedure. 
(a)  If alcohol or illegal drug use is reasonably suspected by the supervisor responsible for an employee's performance during working hours and while the employees is on duty, the supervisor will report the reasonable basis for his suspicion to the mayor and city attorney. The supervisor will request the suspected employee to execute a consent and authorization to a blood test or breath/alcohol test. 
(b)  If the breath/alcohol test results are equal to the state statutorily prescribed presumption of intoxication, this will form a rebuttable presumption that the suspected employee is intoxicated during working hours and while on duty. "Rebuttable presumption" means that once the city has proven that the breath/alcohol test is greater than the percentage established by the state for a driving while intoxicated (D.W.I.) charge, blood test is positive for illegal drugs listed by the city, or the employee refused to take the breath/alcohol test or blood test, it is the obligation of the employee to prove that the employee was not under the influence of any illegal drugs or alcohol during working hours or attendance at work under the influence of any illegal drugs or alcohol. 
(c)  If the blood test is conducted and the blood test is positive for the drugs listed by the city as impairing mental and physical abilities to perform, the positive results shall form a rebuttable presumption that the employee has engaged in illegal drug use during working hours and while on duty. 
(d)  If the employee refuses to submit to a blood test or a breath/alcohol test, the supervisor is hereby empowered to bring the investigation before the mayor and board of selectmen seeking either dismal or termination of the employee for suspected alcohol and/or illegal drug use during working hours and while on duty. The failure to submit to a blood test or breath/alcohol test shall be considered a rebuttable presumption that the employee had taken alcohol and/or was under the influence of illegal drugs during working hours and while on duty. The city, through its supervisor and mayor, shall be required to present information sufficient to provide a reasonable basis for suspicion of alcohol and illegal drug use by the suspected employee during working hours and while on duty or being under the influence of alcohol and/or illegal drugs. 
(Res. of 5-10-88) 
Sec. 2-78. - Drug and alcohol authorization and acknowledgment. 
    "I hereby authorize any duly appointed medical examiner by the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, or any duly qualified law enforcement officer for the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, or any duly certified testing facility, or the testing facility operated and maintained by the Plaquemine City Court, to draw blood and/or obtain a urine specimen or to conduct a breath/alcohol intoximeter test from me as requested by the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana. 
    I understand that the test(s) will be conducted to determine if I have been taking any illegal drugs, using non-prescribed drugs, and/or alcohol. I further authorize any duly appointed medical examiner by the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, or any duly qualified law enforcement officer for the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, or any duly certified testing facility, or the testing facility operated and maintained by the Plaquemine City Court to release to the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, the results of these test(s). I am taking or using the following medication(s):____________________________________________. 
    I understand that the test(s) are to determine if I have been taking/using any illegal drugs, using non-prescribed drugs, and/or alcohol and that a positive test finding and/or result, absent a valid, reasonable, legitimate explanation, is sufficient evidence of a violation of City policy and will be grounds for my suspension or termination of employment with the City. 
Date: _____ _____EMPLOYEE  
(Res. of 5-10-88; Ord. No. 262, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 2-79. - Illegal drugs tested. 
    The following illegal drug group selected are based upon known abuse in the community and the ability of each drug to adversely effect physical/mental performance. All of the listed drugs are controlled substances under state and federal law: 
(1)  Amphetamine/methamphetamine (i.e. crystal, speed). 
(2)  Benzodiazepines (i.e. valium, librium, oxazepam, serax, dalmane, ativan). 
(3)  Barbiturates (i.e. amobarbital, butabartibal, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, secobarbital). 
(4)  Cocaine. 
(5)  Methadone. 
(6)  Methaqualone (i.e. quaalude). 
(7)  Opiates (i.e. codeine, heroin, morphine, hydromorphone, hydrocodone). 
(8)  Phencyclidine (PCP). 
(9)  THC (marijuana). 
(10)  Alcohol. 
(Res. of 5-10-88) 
Secs. 2-80-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation generally, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 2-86. - Advancing money to persons prohibited. 
(a)  The city, through any of its departments or employees, shall be prohibited from making any advances to employees on their salary. 
(b)  The city, through any of its departments or employees, shall be prohibited from loaning any public funds to or for any person. 
(c)  The city, through any of its departments or employees, shall be prohibited from donating to or for any person any public funds. 
(d)  The city, through any of its departments or employees, shall be prohibited from cashing any checks or negotiable instruments submitted by private individuals or corporations, this does not prohibit the city from accepting payment for its various services by check or negotiable instrument made to order of the city for the exact amount owned. 
(Ord. No. 918, 5-23-78) 
Sec. 2-87. - Sale of city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer of the city, or any employee of the city to sell any property belonging to the city, whether movable or immovable, unless the following provisions are first complied with: 
(1)  The sale of any immovable property, or real property, shall be in compliance with R.S. 33:4712 and 33:4712.1, which provides for advertisement in a newspaper published in the municipality, publication three times in 15 days, one week apart. Such statute further provides that any opposition to the proposed ordinance shall be made in writing, filed with the clerk or secretary of the municipality within 15 days after its first publication. If an opposition is filed, the governing authority shall not adopt the ordinance until a hearing has been held. If the ordinance is adopted, it shall not become effective until ten days after its passage, during which time any interested citizen may apply to the district court having jurisdiction of the municipality for an order restraining the disposition of the property. This statute further provides that after the ordinance becomes effective, it cannot be contested for any reason. The provisions of such statute with reference to the sale of realty are hereby adopted as a part of this section. 
(2)  The mechanics for the sale of movable property shall be as follows: 
    Before disposition can be made of movable property, a resolution must be introduced, giving the reasons for the action on the part of the governing authority, and fixing the minimum price and terms of the sale, lease or other contract to be made with reference to the property. Notice of the proposed resolution must be published once in the official journal of the city. 
    Any opposition to the proposed resolution shall be made in writing, filed with the city clerk within five days after publication of such notice. A hearing of such opposition shall be automatically set on the agenda for the next ensuing meeting following the filing of the opposition; placing of said matter on the agenda shall be done by the city clerk without further authorization from any other officer of the city. If the resolution authorizing the sale is adopted, after said publication, it shall not become effective until ten days after it has been published in the official journal of the city, during which time any interested citizen may apply to the district court having jurisdiction over the municipality for an order restraining the disposition of the property. After the resolution becomes effective, it cannot be contested for any reason. 
(3)  Such property shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash, after the above provisions have been complied with. 
(Code 1967, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-88. - Public response agencies; reimbursement of costs. 
(a)  Any public response agency, including, but not limited to, the Plaquemine Fire Department and the Plaquemine Police Department, shall have the authority to charge any person causing or contributing to a discharge or potential discharge of a hazardous material or substance. The public response agencies shall have the authority to charge for extraordinary expenses of undertaking any remedial actions necessary to contain, abate, clean up, restore, remove or respond to a discharge or potential discharge. This authority shall include the expense of notification of the public through the parish's Community Alert Network or any other public alert system or device. 
(b)  The governing authority of any public response agency assessing charges for remedial costs for actions taken in the cleaning up of, preparation for or prevention of any discharge or potential discharge of hazardous material or substance as provided in this section shall also have the authority to use any reasonable means to collect and enforce the collection of such costs. In any such action, the governing authority of any public response agency shall be entitled to recover the amount of such costs, together with all costs of court and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 033, 9-8-92) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 2-89. - Franchise fee. 
    All persons or entities providing cable or video services to the citizens of the City of Plaquemine pursuant to a state-issued certificate of franchise authority as provided in R.S. 45:1361 et seq. shall, pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 45:1366, pay the city a franchise fee equal to five percent of the cable or video service provider's gross revenues, as that term is defined by the "Consumer Choice for Television Act of 2008," derived from operations within the city's municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 270, 9-9-08) 
Secs. 2-90-2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-100. - Purchases. 
    It is hereby the policy of the city that purchases of any and all supplies for the city and contracting for the repair and maintenance of city equipment, machines and vehicles shall be through the city purchasing agent. 
(Res. of 11-12-91) 
Sec. 2-101. - Sole source vendor. 
    Sole source procurements: A contract may be awarded for a required supply, service, or major repair without competition when, the mayor or his designee determines in writing that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or major repair item. 
(Ord. No. 165, 2-19-2002) 
Secs. 2-102-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES RELATIVE TO FEDERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS 

Sec. 2-116. - Intent. 
    The procedures described herein are intended to serve as guidelines for the procurement of supplies, equipment, construction services and professional services for federal assistance programs. These guidelines have been developed pursuant to the standards governing state and local grantee procurement as set forth in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-102, Attachment O. 
(Res. of 2-25-86) 
Sec. 2-117. - Code of conduct. 
(a)  No employee, officer or agent of the city shall participate in selection or in the award or administration of a contract supported by federal funds if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. Such a conflict could arise when the employee, officer or agent, any member of his her immediate family, his or her partner or an organization which employs or is about to employ any of the above has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for award. 
(b)  No officer, employee or agent of the city shall solicit or accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from contractors, potential contractors or parties to subagreements, except where the financial interest is not substantial or the gift is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value. 
(c)  Any alleged violation of these standards of conduct shall be referred to the city attorney for investigation upon the request of the city. Where violations appear to have occurred, the offending employee, officer or agent shall be subject to disciplinary action, including, but not limited to, dismissal or transfer. Where violations or infractions appear to be substantial in nature, the matter may be referred to appropriate officials for criminal investigation and prosecution. 
(Res. of 2-25-86) 
Sec. 2-118. - Procurement procedures. 
    The director or supervisor of each department or agency of the city responsible for procurement of services, supplies, equipment or construction obtained with funds from federal assistant programs shall review all proposed procurement actions to avoid the purchase for unnecessary or duplicative items. Such reviews shall consider consolidation or breaking out to obtain a more economical purchase. Where determined appropriate by the director or supervisor, an analysis to determine which approach would be the most economical shall be undertaken. 
(Res. of 2-25-86) 
Secs. 2-119-2-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-130. - Intention. 
    This program is intended to identify red flags that will alert our employees when new or existing accounts are opened using false information, protect against the establishment of false accounts, methods to ensure existing accounts were not opened using false information, and measures to respond to such events. 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Sec. 2-131. - Contact information. 
    The senior management person responsible for this program is the mayor or his successors and/or assigns. 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Sec. 2-132. - Risk assessment. 
    The city has conducted an internal risk assessment to evaluate how at risk the current procedures are at allowing customers to create a fraudulent account and evaluate if current (existing) accounts are being manipulated. This risk assessment evaluated how new accounts were opened and the methods used to access the account information. Using this information the utility was able to identify red flags that were appropriate to prevent identity theft. New accounts opened in person and account information accessed via telephone (person). 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Sec. 2-133. - Detection (red flags). 
    The City of Plaquemine, City Light and Water Plant, adopts the following red flags to detect potential fraud. These are not intended to be all-inclusive and other suspicious activity may be investigated as necessary. 
(1)  Fraud or active-duty alerts included with consumer reports; 
(2)  Notice of credit freeze provided by consumer reporting agency; 
(3)  Notice of address discrepancy provided by consumer reporting agency; 
(4)  Inconsistent activity patterns indicated by consumer report such as recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries, unusual number of recent credit applications, a material change in use of credit, accounts closed for cause or abuse; 
(5)  Identification documents appear to be altered; 
(6)  Photo and physical description do not match appearance of applicant; 
(7)  Other information is inconsistent with information provided by applicant; 
(8)  Other information is inconsistent with information on file; 
(9)  Application appears altered or destroyed and reassembled; 
(10)  Personal information provided by applicant does not match other sources of information (i.e. credit reports, Social Security number not issued or listed as deceased); 
(11)  Lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth; 
(12)  Information provided is associated with known fraudulent activity (i.e. address or phone number provided is same as that of a fraudulent application); 
(13)  Information commonly associated with fraudulent activity is provided by applicant (i.e. address is a mail drop or prison, nonworking phone number or associated with answering service/pager); 
(14)  Social Security number, address, telephone number is the same as that of other customer at utility; 
(15)  Customer fails to provide all information requested; 
(16)  Personal information provided is inconsistent with information n file for a customer; 
(17)  Applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in purse or wallet; 
(18)  Identity theft is reported or discovered. 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Sec. 2-134. - Response. 
    Any employee that may suspect fraud or detect a red flag will implement the following response as applicable. 
(1)  All detections or suspicious red flags shall be reported to the senior management official: 
(2)  Ask applicant for additional documentation; 
(3)  Notify internal manager-Any utility employee who becomes aware of a suspected or actual fraudulent use of a customer or potential customers identity must notify the customer service director; 
(4)  Do not open the account; 
(5)  Close the account. 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Sec. 2-135. - Personal information security procedures. 
    The utility adopts the following security procedures: 
(1)  Employees will not leave sensitive papers out on their desks when they are away from their work stations. 
(2)  Employees [will] log off their computers when leaving the work areas. 
(3)  No visitor will be given any entry codes or allowed unescorted access to the office. 
(4)  Passwords will not be shared or posted near workstations. 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Sec. 2-136. - Identify theft prevention program review and approval. 
    This program has been reviewed and adopted by the mayor and board of selectmen. The appropriate employees of the utility have been trained on the contents and procedures of this identity theft prevention program. 
    A report will be prepared annually and submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen to include matter related to the program, the effectiveness of the policies and procedures, the oversight and effectiveness of any third-party billing and account establishment entities, a summary of any identify theft incidents and the response to the incident, and recommendations for substantial changes to the program, if any. 
(Res. of 12-16-08) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate alcoholic beverages, § 13 (seventeenth). 
Cross reference- Intoxication as a defense in criminal code, § 9-11. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, R.S. 26:1 et seq.; authority to regulate sale of alcoholic beverages, R.S. 26:493. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Alcoholic beverages: Any fluid or any solid capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption, and containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquor, beer, porter, ale, stout, fruit juice or wine. 
    Liquor: All distilled or rectified alcohol spirits, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin and all similar distilled alcoholic beverages, including all dilutions and mixtures of one or more of the foregoing, such as liquors, cordials and similar compounds. 
(Ord. No. 937, 9-11-79) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 3-2-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful sales to minors and purchases by minors, § 9-164. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-16. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any intoxicating, spirituous, vinous or malt liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on all days of the week. 
(b)  Barrooms, nightclubs and lounges. It shall be unlawful for all barrooms, nightclubs and lounges to remain open after 2:00 a.m. and to reopen any earlier than 6:00 a.m. the same day. 
(c)  Package liquor and grocery stores. All package liquor stores and grocery stores shall be prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the same day. 
(d)  Restaurants, cafes and cafeterias. It shall be unlawful for any restaurant, cafe or cafeteria to sell alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the same day. 
(e)  Penalty for violation. Anyone violating the provisions of paragraphs (b) through (d) hereof, upon conviction, shall be fined not exceeding $500.00 or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days or both, and the liquor license shall be suspended or revoked in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 816-B, 7-14-77; Ord. No. 971, 2-9-82) 
Sec. 3-17. - Public property. 
(a)  Sale. No person shall sell alcoholic beverages or liquor on the streets, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way of the city nor shall a person sell such alcoholic beverages or liquors from a window, door or other aperture facing a street or sidewalk or other public right-of-way within the city limits of the city. 
(b)  Consumption. No person shall consume an alcoholic beverage or liquor while standing, walking or sitting on the public street or sidewalks of the city or on the grounds of any business, outside of the business building, nor shall any person carry an opened bottle, cup, glass or any other open container containing alcoholic beverages or liquor while standing, walking or driving a motor vehicle on the public streets of the city or the grounds of any business premise. 
(c)  Exemption. There shall be exempted from this section the immediate area of any special event such as a fair or festival when sponsored by a nonprofit organization and when a permit has been granted by the city. Such permits shall specifically delineate the boundaries of the immediate area and the time period from which the special event is authorized to be held. A signed copy of each such permit shall be furnished to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 937, 9-11-79) 
Secs. 3-18-3-28. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Permits for dealers in beverages of high alcoholic content, R.S. 26:71 et seq.; permits for dealers in beverages of low alcoholic content, R.S. 26:271 et seq. 

Sec. 3-29. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or to have in possession for sale, any alcoholic beverages without first obtaining from the mayor and board of selectmen a permit to engage in such matters of business as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-1, 3-20) 
State Law reference- Authority to require permits under this division, R.S. 26:74, 26:274. 
Sec. 3-30. - Fees. 
(a)  Any person applying for a permit under this division shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  Class A retail liquor permit -$500.00 for each place of business in the city with consumption of alcohol on the premises; 
(2)  Class B retail liquor permit -$500.00 for each place of business in the city of operating package liquor houses with no consumption of alcohol on the premises. A class B retail liquor permit includes grocery and convenience stores. 
(3)  Class C retail liquor permit -$250.00 for each place of business in the city which only sells wine and beer for on premise consumption. 
(4)  Class D retail liquor permit -$250.00 for package houses selling wine and beer only, through unbroken packages, with on-premises consumption of alcohol prohibited. 
(5)  Class T temporary liquor permit -$25.00 for a temporary liquor permit, valid for only three days. 
(6)  Class W wholesales -$500.00 for each place of business in the city. 
(b)  The procedure for the collection of the fees herein levied shall be the same as is now in effect and force for the collection of Louisiana State License Taxes. 
(c)  The mayor shall have the power, upon written request, to waive the permit and fee requirements for temporary permits for any charitable or nonprofit organization to serve alcoholic beverages at functions such as fairs, dances and other such events sponsored by the organizations. 
(d)  The fee for any alcoholic beverages permit issued after July 1 in any year for any new business shall be one-half the annual fee. 
(Code 1967, § 3-2, 3-6, 3-21, 3-24, 3-25; Ord. No. 1012-A, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 054, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 059, 12-22-93; Ord. No. 071, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 212, 11-23-04) 
State Law reference- Limitation on permit fees, R.S. 26:74, 26:274. 
Sec. 3-31. - Application; renewal; penalty for late application. 
(a)  All applications for permits under this division shall be filed in writing, on a form, and in the manner required by the mayor and board of selectmen as hereinafter provided. Application for a new permit or for renewal of any permit shall be filed on said form, in writing, all permits being considered as original applications, no later than November 1 of the year preceding this year in which the applicant intends to renew its application or commence a new business. If the applicant fails to file said application by November 1 of the year preceding the year in which the permit is sought, a ten percent penalty shall be assessed against the permit for failure to timely file the application. If a person commences business on January 1 without having filed a permit prior to such date, the chief of police shall be entitled to arrest the owners and operators of the premises for violating the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  All applications shall be forwarded to the mayor, board of selectmen and chief of police. The mayor, board of selectmen and chief of police shall have 35 days from receipt of the application to file written objections thereon. If an objection is filed with the city clerk, a hearing shall be scheduled, within 30 days, before the mayor and board of selectmen to consider the application and the objection filed. 
(c)  If a change in ownership of an establishment with a valid city alcohol permit occurs, the city shall immediately be notified, in writing, of the act of sale or lease. The new owner shall be allowed to continue to operate under the old permit if: 
(1)  The new owner and previous owner apply for a transfer and/or assignment of the previous owner's permit within ten days of the act of sale or lease; and 
(2)  The new owner applies for a state alcohol permit within five days of the act of sale or lease. 
(3)  The previous owner shall be allowed to transfer or assign his/her/its permit only after written application to, and with the approval and consent of the mayor and board of selectmen, who shall have full power to approve or deny any transfer of a permit in the manner as provided for the issuance or rejection of an original application for a permit. 
(4)  The new owner shall be charged an administration fee of $100.00, to cover the cost of investigation, clerical, and administration of the transfer/assignment alcohol permit application. 
(5)  The new owner or lessee shall provide, at the time of application to the city, a certified copy of the act of sale or lease, a copy of all appropriate documentation which indicates the date the new owner or lessee applied to the alcoholic beverage control commission. 
(Code 1967, § 3-3; Res. of 9-9-86; Ord. No. 055, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 166, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 213, 11-23-04) 
State Law reference- Applications for renewal, R.S. 26:89. 
Sec. 3-32. - Qualifications of applicants. 
(a)  Applicants for permits issued under this division shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation and over 21 years of age; 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two years next preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(3)  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor; in cases where the applicant has a bona fide written lease, a copy of such lease shall be filed with the application form filed with the city; 
(4)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state or any other state; 
(5)  Has not been convicted in this or in any other state or by the United States of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, or illegally dealing in controlled dangerous substances; 
(6)  Has not had revoked a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages issued by the United States or any state for one year prior to the application, nor has been convicted or had judgment against him involving alcoholic beverages by this state or any other state of the United States for one year prior to the application; 
(7)  Has not been convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter; in the event of such conviction, the granting or denial of a permit is within the discretion of the city; 
(8)  Has not been convicted of violating any of the provisions of the state laws regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(9)  Is not the spouse of a person whose application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked, unless judicially separated or divorced; 
(10)  Satisfactory proof has been submitted to the city that the applicant's premises as set forth in the local application has been inspected and approved by the state fire marshal and state board of health; 
(11)  Not owe the state or the city any delinquent sales taxes, penalties or interest, or occupational license fees, excluding items under formal appeal pursuant to applicable statutes. 
(b)  If the applicant for a permit under this division is a partnership or anyone in partnership with or financed by another, all members of the partnership or all the persons in any way financially interested in the business shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant in this section. The application shall state the full names of all partners and persons financially interested and furnish their proper addresses and each shall furnish his affidavit showing his qualifications, as required of an applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, all officers and directors and all stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock and the person who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. However, the requirements as to citizenship and residence do not apply to officers, directors and stockholders of corporations applying for permits only. If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one or more managers, agents, servants, employees or other representatives, that person shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant, to be shown on the affidavit of each accompanying the application. 
(c)  If the applicant for a permit under this division, or any other person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the permit shall be denied. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3, 4, 3-22; Ord. No. 055, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 081, 11-14-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:80, 26:280. 
Sec. 3-33. - Denial for misstatement of fact. 
    Any misstatement or suppression of fact in an application for a permit under this division or accompanying affidavit is a ground for denial of such permit. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:84, 26:282. 
Sec. 3-34. - Required for each location; application for change of location; service beyond scope of permit. 
    Separate permits shall be required for each and every place where alcoholic beverages are sold either by wholesale or retail. All permits when issued shall be personal to the person to whom issued and shall be conducted only in a place of business specified and designated in the application for the permit issued, and no change of such place of business shall be allowed except after written application to and with the approval and consent of the mayor and board of selectmen who shall have full power to approve and deny such change in the manner as is provided for the issuance or rejection of any original application for a permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to serve alcoholic beverages outside of the places or premises for which a permit has been issued, provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the delivery of such liquor in unbroken or unopened packages or containers. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-5, 3-23) 
Sec. 3-35. - Proximity of licensed premises to churches, playgrounds, schools, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages on any premises situated within 300 feet of a municipal public playground, or of a building used exclusively as a regular church, synagogue, public library or school, except a school for business education conducted as a business college; the measurement of this distance shall be made from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, library, playground or school to the nearest point of the premises to be licensed. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to any premises which are maintained as a bona fide hotel, railway car or fraternal organization, nor to any premises which has been licensed to deal in alcoholic beverages for a period of one year or longer; prior to November 30, 1961. 
(b)  Should any premises licensed to deal in beverages of low alcoholic content be located within 300 feet of property which is purchased or acquired after the license was obtained for the construction, erection, movement or development of a public playground or a building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library or school, such subsequent purchase or acquisition shall not be grounds for the revocation, withholding, denial or refusal to renew the permit on such premises either by the state or the city. 
(c)  However, should any premises licensed to deal in beverages of high alcoholic content be located within 300 feet of property which is purchased or acquired after the license was obtained for the construction, erection, movement or development of a public playground or a building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library or school, such subsequent purchase or acquisition shall be grounds for the withholding, denial or refusal to renew the permit for the sale of beverages of high alcoholic content on such premises either by the state or the city. 
(d)  A variance may be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficult or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the regulations and this chapter. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-10, 3-27; Ord. No. 051, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 115, 11-10-98) 
State Law reference- Authority to limit location of business, R.S. 26:81, 26:281. 
Sec. 3-36. - Dancing in connection with licensed premises. 
    Dancing shall be permitted on premises where alcoholic beverages are being sold, provided, the fact that dancing is permitted on such premises shall not violate, tend to violate or cause a violation of subparagraphs 1 through 11, inclusive, of R.S. 26:88 and subparagraphs 1 through 11, inclusive, of R.S. 26:285, as amended which sections of the Revised Statutes of the State of Louisiana are hereby adopted as part of this section by reference. 
(Code 1967, § 3-11) 
Sec. 3-37. - Term. 
    Permits issued under this division are good only from the time of issuance to December 31 of the year for which issued, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:76, 26:276. 
Sec. 3-38. - Transferability; exception. 
    Permits issued under this division are not assignable or inheritable, except as provided in subsection 3-31(c) of this Code. Where the location of the business is changed, the change shall be noted on the permit by the issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 167, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:76, 26:276. 
Sec. 3-39. - Display. 
    All permits issued under this division shall be prominently displayed by the licensee in his place of business so as to be easily seen and read by the public. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:76, 26:276. 
Sec. 3-40. - Acts prohibited on premises; cause for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No person holding a retail dealer's permit and no servant, agent or employee of the permittee shall do any of the following acts upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  a.  Sell or serve beverages of alcoholic content to any person under the age of 21 years, unless such person submits any one of the following: 
1.  A valid, current Louisiana driver's license which contains a photograph of the person presenting the driver's license. 
2.  A valid, current driver's license of another state which contains a photograph of the person and birth date of the person submitting the driver's license. 
3.  A valid, current special identification card issued by the state pursuant to R.S. 40:1321 containing a photograph of the person submitting the identification card. 
4.  A valid, current passport or visa issued by the federal government or another country or nation that contains a permanently attached photograph of the person and the date of birth of the person submitting the passport or visa. 
5.  A valid, current military or federal identification card issued by the federal government containing a photograph of the person and date of birth of the person submitting the identification card. 
b.  Each form of identification listed above must on its face establish the age of the person as 21 years or older and there must be no reason to doubt the authenticity or correctness of the identification. No form of identification mentioned above shall be accepted as proof of age if it is expired, defaced, mutilated or altered. If the driver's license, state identification card or lawful identification submitted is a duplicate, the person shall submit additional identification which contains the name, date of birth and picture of the person. In addition, an educational institution identification card, check cashing identification card or employee identification card shall not be considered as lawful identification for the purposes of this paragraph. 
(2)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person. 
(3)  a.  Intentionally entice, aid or permit any person under the age of 21 years to visit or loiter in or about any place where alcoholic beverages are the principal commodities sold, handled or given away. However, the provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit the presence of any person under the age of 21 years on or about a licensed premises for any function sponsored by a religious or charitable organization with tax exempt status under section 501(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States or by a fraternal beneficiary society with tax exempt status under section 501(8) of said code and no alcoholic beverages are sold, handled, given away or accessible during the presence of any such person. 
b.  Permit any person under 21 years of age to work in any capacity unless that person is a musician performing in a band on the premises under written contract for a specified period of time by the permittee and the musician is under direct supervision of his parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises or to solicit patrons for prostitution on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, wet T-shirt contest or exhibition, bathing suit contest or exhibition, lingerie contest or exhibition, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on the licensed premises. 
(6)  Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind or type of alcoholic beverage, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under his or her permit. 
(7)  Intentionally conduct, allow or condone illegal gambling, as defined by law, on the premises described in the application for the permit. 
(8)  Employ or permit females, commonly known as "B girls", to frequent the premises and solicit patrons for drinks or to accept drinks from patron and receive therefor any commission or any remuneration in any other way. 
(9)  a.  Employ anyone under the age of 21 in any capacity in an establishment where the sale of alcoholic beverages constitutes its main business; however, if the sale of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business of the establishment, anyone under the age of 21 may be employed as long as the employment does not directly involve the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
b.  If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business and alcoholic beverages are not sold for consumption on the premises, an employee under the age of 21 years may be permitted to participate in the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages to collect the price and taxes and issue receipts therefor or may be permitted to bag packaged alcoholic beverages, or both, where immediate supervision is provided. 
(10)  Fail to keep the licensed premises well lighted and all outside windows and doors open to view from the sidewalk or outside. 
(11)  Permit the playing of pool or billiards by any person under 21 years of age, or permit such a person to frequent the licensed premises operating a pool or billiard hall, except in a structure where the position of the pool or billiards playing area is separate and distinct from the area where alcoholic beverages are dispensed to patrons. 
(12)  Allow the sale, dispensing or distribution of alcoholic beverages in any type of automatic mechanical vending machine activated by the use of a coin, token or similar instrument. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to establishments exempt from holding permits under applicable Louisiana law. 
(13)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of controlled dangerous substances. 
(14)  Accept food stamp coupons as payment for alcoholic beverages in violation of the provisions of Public Law 88-525 and Regulation 1600.2(i) issued pursuant to that section of the federal statute by the United States Secretary of the Department of Agriculture. 
(15)  a.  Play live or recorded music which is so unreasonably intrusive or offensive as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of the property of a person residing within 200 feet of the premises. This prohibition shall not apply to any licensed premises which are not located within 200 feet of a residence or which were not located within 200 feet of a residence on the date that the first permit was granted for the premises. This prohibition shall not apply to any premises which provides an entry area with two separate doors or sets of doors separating the exterior of the entrance from the area where music is played. Any licensed premises which are not on the effective date of this paragraph in compliance with the provisions of this paragraph shall have a reasonable time either to modify the premises to comply with this paragraph or to cease the playing of music as described herein. 
b.  Any person residing within 200 feet of licensed premises on which is played live or recorded music which is so unreasonably intrusive of offensive as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of his property shall have a cause of action for damages and may obtain injunctive relief if the premises are not in compliance with the provisions of this paragraph. 
(16)  Sell or serve any alcoholic beverages at a price fixed on an "all you can drink" basis after the hour of 10:00 p.m. 
(b)  Violation of this section is punishable as provided below and is also sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit as provided by the laws of the state in addition to the penalties set forth below: 
(1)  On the first violation, the retail dealer shall be issued a reprimand from the mayor and board of selectmen, payment of fine to the city's general fund of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00 and a member of management or the owner shall perform not less than one nor more than two eight-hour days of community service, approved by the mayor and board of selectmen, for the city. 
(2)  On the second violation, if the second violation occurs within two years of the first violation, the retail dealer's permit shall be suspended for not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days, pay a fine to the city's general fund of not less than $300.00 nor more than $600.00, and a member of management or the owner shall perform not less than two nor more than four eight-hour days of community service, approved by the mayor and board of selectmen, for the city. 
(3)  On the third violation, if the third violation occurs within two years of the second violation as defined in subsection (c)(2) below, the retail dealer's permit shall be revoked and/or payment of a fine to the city's general fund of not less than $600.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(4)  In the event the retail dealer's permit is not revoked after the third violation, as defined above, any subsequent violation by the retail dealer may subject the retail dealer's permit to revocation or suspension, solely within the discretion of the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(c)  Violation of subsections (a)(1), (3), (9) [and/or] (11) above shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  On the first violation, the retail dealer shall be issued a reprimand from the mayor and board of selectmen, payment of fine to the city's general fund of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 and a member of management or the owner shall perform two eight-hour days of community service, approved by the mayor and board of selectmen, for the city. 
(2)  On the second violation, if the second violation occurs within two years of the first violation, the retail dealer's permit shall be suspended for 30 days, payment of fine to the city's general fund of not less than $500.00 nor more than $750.00 and a member of management or the owner shall perform four eight-hour days of community service, approved by the mayor and board of selectmen, for the city. 
(3)  On the third violation, if the third violation occurs within two years of the second violation as defined in subsection (c)(2) above, the retail dealer's permit shall be revoked and pay a fine to the city's general fund of not less than $500.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(Amend. of 8-13-85; Ord. No. 044, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 060, 12-22-93; Ord. No. 082, 11-14-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:90, 26:286. 
Sec. 3-41. - Additional causes for suspension or revocation. 
    In addition to any other causes enumerated in this division, the city may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this division for any one of the following causes: 
(1)  If the holder of a permit to sell alcoholic beverages or any of the persons who must possess the same qualifications failed to possess the qualifications required in section 3-32 at the time of application or fails to maintain such qualifications during the licensed year. 
(2)  If the permit was granted to any person who is or has been engaged in an alcoholic beverage business with a person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been revoked. 
(3)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the permit. 
(4)  If the holder of a permit has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of any one of the following offenses: 
a.  Violation of the Sunday closing law; 
b.  Violation of any municipal or parish ordinance providing for Sunday closing hours; 
c.  Violation of any municipal or parish ordinance enacted pursuant to the authorization of the laws of the state. 
(5)  If, without a proper license, a retailer allows any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises or on any parking lot or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises. 
(6)  If any dealer or any person described in section 3-32 violated or has violated any provision of this chapter. 
(7)  If any dealer fails to pay any excise taxes, occupational license taxes or sales taxes due by any regulated business to the state or to any parish or municipality. 
(8)  If the permit was issued to an interposed person in contravention of R.S. 26:83. 
(9)  If the holder of any retail dealer's permit, or his agent, employee or representative, allows the placement or operation of a video draw poker device upon his licensed premises in violation of part V-B of chapter 14 of title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statues of 1950. 
(Ord. No. 061, 12-22-93; Ord. No. 082, 11-14-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:91, 26:287. 
Sec. 3-42. - Additional requirements for permits relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Any person or entity holding an alcoholic beverage permit from the city shall be required to provide and/or to require the following: 
(1)  Each employee who may sell alcoholic beverages to the public shall be informed of the laws of the city and state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors; 
(2)  Each employee who may sell alcoholic beverages to the public shall check identification of all persons purchasing alcoholic beverages who appear to be 35 years or less; 
(3)  Signs stating that no alcoholic beverages will be sold to minors and that identification will be checked shall prominently be displayed and visible upon entering, at the checkout counter or bar where purchases are made and where alcoholic beverages are displayed; 
(4)  Each employee, owner or authorized representative of a corporation shall be required to sign and/or execute a statement and/or acknowledgement that he/she understands that the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors will result in criminal prosecution and could result in termination of employment. The statement and/or acknowledgement will be kept on file with the city clerk of the city for the term of the liquor permit; 
(5)  No employee, owner, corporation or entity convicted of the sale of alcoholic beverages to a minor shall be allowed, permitted or employed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1039, 11-25-86) 
Sec. 3-43. - Additional requirement to issuance of licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The city selectmen for the district of the licensee shall be empowered and is authorized to sign and execute the necessary documentation, permits and papers to issue licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages in their respective district. 
(b)  No license shall issue until the city selectman for the district of the licensee has executed the necessary documentation, permits and papers as provided by the mayor, city clerk and board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 1040, 11-25-86) 
Secs. 3-44-3-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BARTENDERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 3-56-3-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-64. - License required; identification card required; exemption for owners and proprietors. 
(a)  License for bartenders. It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in the sale, as bartender, of retail or wholesale beer, porter, ale, fruit juice, wine, malts, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, as a bartender, whether hired by the owner, or conducting the business as owner thereof, or as a partner or member of a corporation engaged in such business, within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a bartender's license to sell and serve such beverages as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Picture identification cards. It shall be required of all bartenders to obtain a picture identification card from the chief of police before engaging in the sale of alcoholic or intoxicating liquors as defined above. 
(c)  Possession of card. It shall be required of all bartenders to have in their possession at all times the picture identification card required above. 
(d)  Owners and proprietors exempted. Owners and proprietors of lounges and barrooms are hereby exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 3-35; Amend. of 7-12-88; Amend. of 9-13-88; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Sec. 3-65. - Application. 
    The application for a bartender's license under this division shall be in writing and sworn to before a notary public, shall contain the full name and correct address of the applicant, and shall include a sworn statement that he or she possesses the qualifications set forth in section 3-66. 
(Code 1967, § 3-37; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Sec. 3-66. - Qualifications. 
    Each applicant for a bartender's license to dispense alcoholic beverages from behind a bar shall possess the following qualifications: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation and over 21 years of age; 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two years next preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(3)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, the state or any other state or country; 
(4)  Has not been convicted in this or in any other state or by the United States or any other country of soliciting for the prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place or illegally dealing in controlled dangerous substances; 
(5)  Has not had a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States, any state or by any political subdivision of a state authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked with one year prior to the application or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against him or her involving alcoholic beverages by this or any other state or by the United States for one year prior to the application; 
(6)  Has not been adjudged by the alcoholic beverage control board or convicted by a court of violating any of the provisions of R.S. title 26 and the amendments thereto; 
(7)  Has not been convicted of violating any municipal or parish ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 26:494; 
(8)  Has not had a certificate of qualification to dispense alcoholic beverages from the bar issued by any other parish, municipality or state suspended or revoked; 
(9)  Has obtained the approval of the mayor and the chief of police on the application filed as having met all of the requirements contained in the foregoing subsections. 
(Code 1967, § 3-36; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93; Ord. No. 259, 10-30-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:79, 26:279. 
Sec. 3-67. - Issuance of license; fees; refusal to issue. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the approval of the mayor and chief of police on the application filed and having met all the requirements contained in section 3-66, the chief of police shall issue a bartender's license to the applicant, which bartender's license shall be valid for one year. 
(b)  It shall be required of all bartenders to pay an annual fee of $20.00 to the chief of police for the acquisition of a bartender's license, which shall be deposited in the city's general fund. It shall be further required of all bartenders to pay an expense fee of $5.00 to the chief of police to defray the cost of supplies to prepare, frame, formulate, photograph and execute the bartender's permit. 
(c)  The chief of police may refuse to issue a bartender's license to dispense alcoholic beverages from any bar to any person who lacks any of the qualifications set forth in section 3-66 or in the interest of the public health, safety and morals. 
(Code 1967, § 3-38; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Sec. 3-68. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any act, or failure to act, by any person certified to be qualified to dispense alcoholic beverages under the provisions of this division, which is a violation of this division or any other ordinances of the city, shall subject such person to having his or her bartender's license to dispense alcoholic beverages from behind a bar suspended or revoked by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Code 1967, § 3-39; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Sec. 3-69. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police refusing to issue or to suspend or revoke a bartender's license as provided in this division may take a devolutive appeal therefrom to the mayor and board of selectmen within 15 days of written notification of the decision. The appeal must be taken by submitting a written request therefor to the city clerk. The mayor and board of selectmen shall hear the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal by the city clerk. The decision of the chief of police shall be final unless appealed within the time, and in the manner, set forth above. 
(Code 1967, § 3-40; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Sec. 3-70. - Responsibility of employer. 
    The owner of the establishment or the officer or agent in charge of any corporation shall be held responsible for the verification that the employees possess a valid bartender's license. His or her failure to follow the provisions hereof shall subject him or her to a revocation of the license or permit issued to conduct the business in the city. The proprietor of any establishment who hires a bartender without a valid bartender's license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-13 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-41, 3-42; Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Sec. 3-71. - Temporary permits; conditions for issuance. 
    Whenever a temporary alcohol permit is issued under the provisions of section 3-29 et seq., any person engaged in the sale, as bartender, of retail or wholesale beer, porter, ale, fruit juice, wine, malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, as a bartender, whether hired by the owner, or conducting the business as an owner thereof, or as a partner or member of a corporation engaged in such business, within the corporate limits of the city, shall obtain a temporary bartender's license to sell and serve such beverages under the same terms and conditions as set forth above, except for the following: 
(1)  It shall be required of all bartenders to pay a fee of $10.00 to the chief of police for the acquisition of the temporary bartender's license. 
(2)  The temporary bartender's license shall be valid for three days. 
(3)  The mayor shall have the power, upon written request, to waive the temporary bartender's license for persons providing service to any charitable or nonprofit organization when the charitable or nonprofit organization is serving alcoholic beverages at functions sponsored by the organization. 
(Ord. No. 062, 12-22-93) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Street carnivals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a street carnival within the city limits. 
(Code 1967, § 11-103) 
Sec. 4-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Provisions of the former § 4-2, which pertained to the regulation of charitable raffles, bingo, keno, etc., and derived from Ord. No. 1014, adopted Sept. 25, 1984, were amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 1033, adopted Oct. 14, 1986. At the editor's discretion, said ordinance has been codified as a new Art. III. See the editor's note to Art. III for further explanation. 
Secs. 4-3-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Dance halls, R.S. 4:361 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-16. - Scope. 
    The article shall not be construed to include any private club or organization and shall apply only to established places of business. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Sec. 4-17. - Bar and lounge to be separate from dining and dancing area. 
    The bar or lounge shall be separate from the dining and dancing area. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Sec. 4-18. - Minimum dancing area. 
    Dances may be held only in places offering a minimum of 300 square feet for the purpose of dancing. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Sec. 4-19. - B-girls and go-go girls prohibited. 
    B-girls and go-go girls shall be prohibited in dances. Any male engaging in the same activity as a B-girl or go-go girl shall also be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73; Amend. of 6-11-85) 
Sec. 4-20. - Hours. 
    Dances may be held only during the period of time from 1:00 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Sec. 4-21. - Music. 
    The music provided for dances may be by either a band or a jukebox. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Secs. 4-22-4-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-31. - Required; eligibility. 
    The only established places of business which will be eligible for licenses for the holding of dances under this division shall be places with a restaurant and lounge in operation and serving meals, short-order or otherwise. Sandwich shops and drive-in restaurants shall not be eligible for licenses. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Sec. 4-32. - Approval. 
    All licenses under this division shall be approved by mayor and board of selectmen prior to issuance. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Sec. 4-33. - Fee. 
    Licensees under this division shall pay a fee of $25.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 866, 7-10-73) 
Secs. 4-34-4-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE BINGO AND OTHER GAMES OF CHANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1033, adopted Oct. 14, 1986, amended § 4-2 and added provisions designated as §§ 4-3-4-15.8. In order to preserve Code format and to provide for the inclusion of future provisions into Art. I, the editor, at his discretion, has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. 1033 as a new Art. III, §§ 4-45-4-63. 
Cross reference- Gambling on premises of alcoholic beverage establishments, § 3-40(a)(7); gambling, § 9-98 et seq. 
State Law reference- Charitable Raffles, Bingo and Keno Licensing Law, R.S. 4:701 et seq. 

Sec. 4-45. - Authorization to license certain organizations. 
    The provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the city to the contrary notwithstanding, upon being granted a license from the city clerk, it shall be lawful for any bona fide nonprofit veterans, charitable, educational or religious organization which has been domiciled in the city for a period of at least six months prior to its application, holding at least 75 percent of its meetings in the city, to hold and operate the specific kind of game or games of chance commonly known as "raffle" or "raffles," played by drawing for prizes or the allotment of prizes for chance by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game or games and by conducting the game or games accordingly; and in the game of chance commonly known as "bingo," (defined as a game played for prizes with cards bearing numbers or other designations, five or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as numbered objects are drawn from a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers of such a card) by selling shares or tickets or rights to [participate in such games and by conducting the games accordingly when] the entire net proceeds of such games are to be devoted entirely to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited within the state. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-2, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-46. - Electronic or video bingo machines. 
(a)  General requirements and restrictions. It shall further be lawful for such an organization to use electronic or video machines, hereafter termed "electronic bingo machines," after having received a license from the city clerk, for public playing of bingo made available at any location licensed under this section for charitable bingo; provided, that all requirements of this section not in conflict with the provisions of this article are met. Any such electronic bingo machines shall be subject to the following requirements and restrictions concerning its operation and use: 
(1)  The cost of each game played shall be not less than one quarter nor more than four quarters; 
(2)  Payout shall be not less than 80 percent and not more than 90 percent of the total amount wagered; 
(3)  The maximum prize awarded shall not be more than $1,000.00 per quarter; 
(4)  A machine shall dispense no cash, only tickets verifiable as valid indicating the prize amount; 
(5)  A machine shall play the game of bingo as described in R.S. 33:4861.4, except that a random number generator in the machine shall replace the drawing of numbered objects from a receptacle, and may play "cover-all bingo" in which all numbers of the card must be covered; 
(6)  A machine shall allow the player a choice of cards on which to play and must show a "BINGO" at the end of play; 
(7)  A machine shall allow only a linear-based payout in which the amount of the payout follows a straight line progression in direct proportion of the amount wagered; 
(8)  A machine shall provide for an electronic readout giving, at a minimum, a summary of total wages, total pays, total payout, and current prize allotment since the last date of summary or the last date of reset of the machine. 
(b)  Leasing of machines. An electronic bingo machine may be leased by any holder of a bingo license issued pursuant to this section. However, in no case shall any lease agreement entered into authorize the lessor to receive a percentage of the receipts from the machine. Only cash prizes may be awarded winners of games on an electronic bingo machine. At least 45 percent of the net win from the machine must be paid to the licensee owing or leasing it. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-3, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-47. - Pull-tabs. 
(a)  No organization, distributor, manufacturer or any representative licensed hereunder, either with knowledge or circumstances whereunder it reasonably should have known, shall possess, display, put out for play, sell or otherwise furnish to any person any deal of pull-tabs: 
(1)  In which the winning pull-tabs have not been completely and randomly distributed and mixed among all other pull-tabs in the deal; 
(2)  In which the location or approximate location of any of the winning pull-tabs can be determined in advance of opening the pull-tabs in any manner or by device, including, but not limited to, any pattern in the manufacture, assembly or packaging of pull-tabs by the manufacture, by any markings on the pull-tabs or container or by the use of a light; or 
(3)  Which does not conform in any respect to these requirements as to manufacture, assembly or packaging. 
(b)  A distributor shall not purchase or be furnished any seals for pull-tabs from a manufacturer of pull-tabs unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The manufacturer's label or trademark has been registered with the office of state police; 
(2)  Each individual pull-tab manufacturer has conspicuously set forth on it the name of the manufacturer or a label or trademark which identifies its manufacturer; 
(3)  The pull-tab is a type approved by the office of state police for use in Louisiana. 
(c)  The entire net proceeds from the use of electronic bingo machines and pull-tabs are to be devoted to educational, charitable, religious or public-spirited uses. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-4, 1-14-86) 
Sec. 4-48. - Application for license-filing; required information. 
(a)  Each applicant for such license shall file with the city clerk a written application therefor in the form prescribed in rules and regulations hereinafter promulgated, duly executed and notarized, in which shall be stated: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable the city to determine whether or not it is a bona fide organization or association in accordance herewith; 
(2)  The names and addresses of its officers, a list of all active members, the specific kind of game of chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant, and the place or places where and the date or dates and the time or times when such game or games of chance are intended to be conducted by the applicant under the license applied for; 
(3)  The items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such game or games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid; 
(4)  The specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such game or games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner; 
(5)  That no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person for holding, operating, conducting or assisting in the holding, operating or conducting of such games of chance; 
(6)  That no proceeds of such game or games of chance shall be used in any manner for election campaign contributions; and 
(7)  A description of all prizes to be offered and given in all such games of chance to be held, operated and conducted under such license and such other information as shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations. 
(b)  The names and addresses of the owner and owners of the premises where the games of chance are to be operated shall be provided, and if owned by a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and stockholders of the corporation, including a list containing the names and addresses of all of its officers and members. The only exception of this provision shall be in the case of churches or synagogues, which are required to submit the names of those people responsible for the operation of the game of chance and the names of all persons who would be working in conjunction therewith. 
(c)  In each application there shall be designation an active member or members of the applicant under whom the game or games of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and conducted, and to the application shall be appended a statement executed by the applicant and by the member or members, as designated, that he or they will be responsible for the holding, operating and conducting of such game or games of chance and of this article, if such license is granted. 
(d)  All applicants for permits under this section shall file with their application proof of nonprofit tax-exempt status recognized by the Internal Revenue Service in compliance with section 26 USCA 501C of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-5, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-49. - Same-Investigation of qualification of applicant; report to board of selectmen. 
    The city clerk shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each applicant and the application, and shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to hold, operated and conduct games of chance under the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations governing the holding, operating and conducting thereof in the city; that the member or members of the applicant designated in the application to hold, operate or conduct or assist in holding, operating or conducting the game or games of chance for which the license is applied are bona fide active members of the applicant and persons of good moral character and have never been convicted of crime; and that no proceeds of the same will be used in any manner for election campaign contributions. After such investigation, the city clerk shall present his/her report to the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-6, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-50. - Hearing for issuance or denial of licenses; amendment of license; no permit to be issued to associates or subsidiaries of previously permitted organizations. 
(a)  A hearing shall be conducted by the board of selectmen, held upon due notice to the applicant, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application. After said hearing, the board of selectmen shall vote to issue or deny a license to the applicant for the holding, operating and conducting of the specific kind, or one of the specific kind, of games of chance applied for accordingly. 
(b)  Any license issued under this article may be amended upon application made to the city, if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the original license. 
(c)  No permit for the operation of games of chance under this article shall be issued to an organization which is directly associated with or a subsidiary of any organization which, at the time of the application, holds a permit for the staging of games of chance issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-7, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-51. - Holding, conducting or operating games for benefit of other organizations prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any organization whose license has been revoked or which has been denied a permit or license to hold, operate or conduct charitable games of chance within the city to hold, operate or conduct or assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any charitable game of chance on behalf of, in connection with, or for the benefit of any other organization. 
(b)  The prohibition contained hereinabove shall extend to the officers and those individuals listed in the application or any organization denied such a permit or license. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-8, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-52. - Form, content and display of license. 
(a)  Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations promulgated by the city and shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the kind or kinds of game or games of chance authorized to be held, operated and conducted thereunder; 
(2)  A statement of the name and address of the licensee, of the names and addresses of the member or members of the applicant under whom such game or games of chance will be held, operated and conducted, of the number of times or the hours during which such game or games of chance are authorized to be conducted; of the place or places where and the date or dates and time or times when such game or games of chance are to be conducted, and for the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such game or games of chance are to be devoted; and 
(3)  Any other information which may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein. 
(b)  Each license issued for the conduct of any game of chance shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where any game is to be conducted thereunder at all times during the conduct thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-9, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-53. - City control and supervision over games; suspension and revocation; right of entry for inspection. 
    The city, [after] issuing any license under this article, shall have and exercise control and supervision of all games of chance held, operated or conducted under such license, to the end that the same are fairly held, operated or conducted under such license, the rules and regulations promulgated by the city, the provisions of this article and R.S. 33:4851.1 et seq. governing the holding, operating and conducting of the same. The city shall have the power and authority to suspend any license issued by such governing body and to revoke the same, after hearing, for any violation of any such provision, and shall by its officers and agents have the right of entry at all times into any premise where any such game of chance is being held, operated and conducted or where it is intended that any such games of chance shall be held, operated and conducted, or where any such equipment being used or intended to be used in the conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same. Any organization whose license is suspended hereunder shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-10, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-54. - Effective period of permit. 
    No permit for the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance issued under this article shall be effective for a period of more than one year from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-12, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-55. - Limitations on games. 
(a)  Frequency of games. No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under any license issued under this article more often than six sessions per month. In any event, no games of chance shall be held more often than six days per month. 
(b)  Door prizes. Door prizes may be given away and not included in total dollar amount of prizes awarded, but door prizes must be listed on the game report by description, value, name of donating entity and name and address of winner; provided, that said prizes awarded at a game of chance shall not be purchased or leased by that organization. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-13, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-56. - Persons entitled to hold games; equipment; expenses; commission or salaries. 
(a)  No person shall hold, operate or conduct or assist in holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance under any license issued under this article except an active member of the organization or association to which the license is issued. 
(b)  No such game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee. 
(c)  No item of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under this article, except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered, which are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding, operating or conducting thereof, under any circumstances whatever. 
(d)  No commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operating or conducting of any game of chance so held, operated or conducted. 
(e)  Any such game or games shall be held, operated or conducted only on or in premises owned and occupied by the licensee hereunder, unless a waiver is granted by the mayor and board of selectmen upon written request of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-14, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-57. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Statement of receipts; required information. On the tenth of the month following the month in which any such game of chance is held, operated or conducted, the organization or association which held, operated or conducted the same and its member or members who were in charge thereof shall furnish to the city clerk a duly notarized statement showing: 
(1)  The amount of the gross receipts from the sale of shares, tickets or rights in any manner connected with participation in said game or the right to participate therein; 
(2)  Each item of expense incurred or paid; and each item of expenditure made or to be made; 
(3)  The name and address of each person to whom each such item has been or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor; 
(4)  The net profit derived from each such game of chance and the uses to which such net profit has been or is to be applied; and 
(5)  A list of prizes offered or given, with the respective values thereof. 
(b)  Duty of licensed to maintain. It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such report. 
(c)  Failure to timely file reports. Any organization or association failing to timely file a report as required in paragraph (a) above shall automatically be assessed $100.00 as a late fee. Failure to either subsequently file the required report or pay the $100.00 penalty for filing late shall result in the revocation of the license held by the organization or association. 
(d)  Forfeiture of license. Additionally, any organization or association failing to timely file required reports for any three months during a calendar year shall thereby forfeit its license to operate in this city. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-58. - Books and records; annual audit. 
(a)  Examination of books, records and personnel. The city shall have the power to examine or to cause to be examined the books and records of any organization or association to which such license is issued so far as the may relate to any transactions connected with the holding and conducting of any game of chance thereunder and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereto, under oath, in relation to the conducting of any such game of chance under any such license, but any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Authority to conduct annual audit. Additionally, the city clerk, or his designee, shall conduct a full annual audit of each licensee's books and records and inspect each licensee's property leases, so far as they may relate to any transaction connected with the holding and conducting of any game of chance thereunder. 
(c)  Payment of cost for audit. The city clerk may bill each licensee for the cost of auditing the licensee's books and records. These charges may be paid by the licensee from the bingo proceeds. Failure to cooperate with the city clerk and/or his designee in conducting the annual audit, or failure to pay the cost of the annual audit as determined by the city clerk, shall result in the revocation of the license of any organization or association. 
(d)  Consent statement required. A signed statement consenting to such full annual audits shall be required on a form provided by the city tax collector prior to the granting or renewal of any license. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15.1, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-59. - Immunity. 
    No persons, association or corporation possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of in the city any shares, tickets or rights to participate in any game or games of chance conducted or to be conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this article, lawfully, conducting or participating in the conduct of any such game of chance; or permitting the conduct of any such game of chance upon premises owned by him or it, or any game of chance conducted or to be conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this article, shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of R.S. 14:90. However, this immunity shall not extend to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or participating in the conduct of any game of chance under any license obtained by any false pretense or statement made in any application for such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares, tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned by him or it of any game of chance conducted under any license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false or fraudulent pretense or statement. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15.2, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-60. - Violations; revocation of license; ineligibility period. 
    Any period who shall make any false statement in any application for a license under this article, or shall fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding, operating or conducting of games of chance under any such license, or shall falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate to any transaction connected with the holding, operating and conducting of any game of chance under any such license, or shall permit unlicensed bingo on the premises of the licensee, or shall violate any of the provisions of this article or of any terms of such license, shall be a disorderly person and if convicted as such shall, in addition to suffering any other penalties which may be imposed, forfeit any license issued under this article and shall be ineligible to apply for a license under this article for one year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15.3, 1014-86) 
Sec. 4-61. - Payment of license fees. 
    The licensee shall pay to the city clerk all license fees due hereunder, which license fees shall be paid, in advance, on or before the first day of January, 1987, and annually thereafter. Any activities conducted requiring such license by the proposed licensee who has not obtained such license for the current year shall subject the conductor or conductors of such activities to the criminal penalties to which the conductors of unlicensed bingo games, etc., as described in this article, are subject. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15.4, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-62. - Commercial hall operators; proof of authorization to sell supplies or equipment. 
    All commercial hall operators intending to sell bingo supplies shall present to the city clerk proof of authorization to sell supplies or equipment as required under R.S. 33:4861 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15.5, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 4-63. - Bingo halls-Loss of authorization to operate. 
    Bingo halls in violation of the rent provisions of this article shall lose their authorization to operate. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 4-15.6, 10-14-86) 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES, CARNIVALS, STREET FAIRS, CIRCUSES 

Sec. 4-64. - Permits and sites. 
(a)  The provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the city to the contrary notwithstanding, the chief of police is hereby authorized to grant permits to temporary commercial amusement enterprises, nonprofit organizations, and/or nonprofit amusement enterprises, including parades, carnivals, street fairs, circuses, musical concerts and other similar activities, pursuant to the provisions of the building code, other applicable building regulations of the city, and the further provisions hereof, but without complying with the provisions of the zoning ordinance in specified circumstances; however, that application for each permit must be made in person at least 60 days prior to the date of opening unless waived by the mayor for good cause. 
(b)  The application of parties seeking a permit under this article must contain a full legal description (or route description in the case of a parade) of the property upon which the carnival, street fair, circus or other similar activity is intended to be held, and such permit shall be null and void for any other location. 
(c)  Upon receipt of each application for a permit under this article, the chief of police shall notify the selectman in whose district parade, carnival, street fair, circus or other similar activity is to be held. 
(Ord. No. 138, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 219, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-65. - Requirements for permit. 
    No permit shall be issued to any promoter, place of business or establishment without the applicant having first complied with all of the provisions of the building code, the electrical code, the plumbing code, and any and all other applicable regulations set forth hereafter or contained in any of the above ordinances, or any other ordinance or resolution of the city. In furtherance of this article, the chief of police is hereby authorized to establish rules and regulations for those applying for permits or licenses under the provisions hereof; and no license or permit shall be issued until all of the necessary information and requirements under such rules and regulations have been furnished to and approved by the chief of police. The chief of police shall require the applicant for a permit under this article to furnish a letter or certificate of compliance or approval from the following: 
(1)  From the state health department for the parish that adequate medical, first aid and sanitary facilities are available in accordance with the guidelines for mass gatherings, unless waived by appropriate state agency, state department, parochial agency, parochial department, municipal agency, and/or municipal department; 
(2)  From the sheriff, state police and/or the chief of police, whoever is applicable, attesting that adequate arrangements have been made for parking, traffic control, security and law enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 138, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 219, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-66. - Insurance and bond; hold harmless agreement. 
(a)  In addition to compliance with the regulations prescribed hereinabove and the regulations established by any other applicable ordinance of the city, every applicant for a permit under this article shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance policy in the amount not less than $100,000.00 for one person and $500,000.00 for any one accident shall be in force and effect at the time and on the site where the parade, carnival, street fair or circus is to be conducted. 
(b)  The chief of police for good cause may require the applicant for a license or permit hereunder to furnish a cash or surety bond in the minimum of $1,000.00, conditioned upon saving harmless the city from any and all liability or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit hereunder. 
(c)  The chief of police for good cause may waive the requirements in subsection (a) and/or (b) if the applicant for a permit hereunder shall execute an agreement with the city holding the city harmless from any and all liability or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 138, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 219, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 4-67. - Permit fee. 
    A nonrefundable fee of $25.00 shall be charged the applicant for a permit, due upon submission of the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 219, 7-19-05) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate animals, § 13 (tenth). 
Cross reference- Cruelty to animals, § 9-1700. 
State Law reference- Animals generally, R.S. 3:1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate, R.S. 3:2531 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Killing of squirrels prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or injure any squirrel within the city limits. 
(Code 1967, § 4-7) 
Sec. 5-2. - Keeping, maintaining or harboring animals so as to create a nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or harbor any animal within the city limits whereby a nuisance is created or caused. 
(b)  A nuisance is hereby defined, for the purposes of this section, to be anything offensive, noxious or injurious; anything vexatious, disagreeable or annoying; any act, condition or the like, obnoxious or injurious to a community or any member of a community. 
(Code 1967, § 4-8) 
Sec. 5-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, repealed former § 5-3 which pertained to procedure where rabies suspected, and derived from the 1967 Code, § 4-18. 
Sec. 5-4. - Pit bull defined. 
    A "pit bull" is hereby defined as follows: 
(a)  The bull terrier breed of dogs; 
(b)  Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dogs; 
(c)  The American pit bull terrier breed of dogs; 
(d)  The American Staffordshire breed of dogs; 
(e)  Dogs of mixed breeds or other breeds than above listed which breed or mix breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; 
(f)  Any dog which has appearance or characteristics of being predominantly of the breeds of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier; any other breed commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs, or pit bull terriers; or a combination of any of these breeds. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, changed the title of § 5-4 from "Dangerous animal defined" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 5-5. - Keeping pit bull dog prohibited; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city any pit bull dog unless a special annual permit is first obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, changed the title of § 5-5 from "Keeping dangerous animals prohibited; exception" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 5-6. - Issuance of special permits. 
    The city shall issue a special permit for the keeping or maintenance of a pit bull dog if it finds: 
(a)  That the pit bull is at all times kept or maintained in a safe manner and that it is at all times confined securely so that the keeping of such pit bull dog will not constitute a danger to human life or property of others. 
(b)  That adequate safeguards are made to prevent unauthorized access to the pit bull dog by members of the public. 
(c)  That the health and well-being of the pit bull dog is not in any way endangered by the manner of keeping or confinement. 
(d)  That the keeping of the pit bull dog does not constitute a nuisance and will not harm the surrounding neighborhood or disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighbors. 
(e)  That the keeping of the pit bull dog will not create or cause offensive odors or constitute a danger to public health. 
(f)  That the quarters in which the pit bull dog is kept or confined are adequately lighted and ventilated and are so constructed that they may be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. Also structures used to confine pit bull dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such pit bull dogs are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the side of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house pit bull dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. 
(g)  That the applicant for such special permit prove his ability to respond in damages to and including the amount of $300,000.00/$500,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any other person or persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of a pit bull dog. Proof of liability to respond in damages may be given by filing with the city a certificate of insurance stating that the applicant is at the time of his application and will be during the period of such special permit insured against liability to respond in such damages or by posting with the city a surety bond conditioned upon payment of such damages during the period of such permit period. Such certificate of insurance or bond shall provide that no cancellation of the insurance or bond will be made unless ten days' written notice if first given to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-7. - Authority to consult and seek advice. 
    The city inspector, in investigating any applicant for a permit under this section or in enforcement of this section, is authorized to consult with and seek the advice of the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the Humane Society, any representative of the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter and Control, or any individual, agency, organization or society which may be able to provide information and advice concerning the keeping of pit bull dog(s). 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-8. - Inspection for renewal of special permit. 
    Prior to the annual renewal of any special permit issued hereunder and on a tri-annual basis after the issuance of any special permit or after its renewal, the city inspector shall inspect the premises subject to such special permit to determine whether the person to whom it has been issued is continuing to comply with all of the conditions specified in this section. If the city inspector determines during any such inspection that any of the conditions therein specified are being violated, he shall refuse to renew any such special permit, or he shall revoke such special permit in the event the violation is not corrected within such period of time as he shall direct. A fee, up to $200.00, shall be charged for each such tri-annual inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-9. - Number of pit bull dogs limited. 
    In no event shall a permit be issued for the keeping of more than two pit bull dogs at any single location. 
(Ord. No. 1056-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, changed the title of § 5-9 from "Number of dangerous animals limited" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 5-10. - Permit fee. 
    No permit shall be issued for the keeping of a pit bull dog(s) unless all provisions of sections 5-4 through 5-12 are complied with and an annual fee, up to $300.00, is paid to the city inspector. This permit fee shall be paid annually on or before the first day of January of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-11. - Applicability of sections 5-4 through 5-12. 
    The provisions of sections 5-4 through 5-12 shall not apply to the keeping of pit bull dog(s) in a bona fide, licensed veterinarian hospital for treatment or the maintenance of pit bull dog(s) or bona fide educational institutions for the purpose of instruction or study, provided such pit bull dog(s) are securely confined and are properly cared for in a manner satisfactory to the chief of police and/or city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-12. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  The penalties for the violation of sections 5-4 through 5-11 shall be the uniform criminal penalty provided in section 9-25 of the Code of Ordinances for the city. 
(b)  In addition, the city attorney is authorized to institute the procedures set forth for a hearing on dangerous and vicious animals as provided herein and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1054-A, 1-12-88; Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Secs. 5-13-5-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-16. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be effective inside the boundaries of the city and shall hereinafter be referred to as "The Iberville Parish Animal Shelter and Control Ordinance adopted by the City of Plaquemine." 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned means to completely forsake and desert an animal previously under the custody or possession of a person without making reasonable arrangements for its proper care, sustenance, and shelter for a period of 24 hours. 
    Animal means any living vertebrate creature except human beings, including, but not limited to, mammals, birds, fowl, reptiles and fish, except when referring specifically to the control of rabies where the meaning of the term "animal" shall be limited to mammals, domestic and wild. 
    Animal establishment means a facility operated as a pet shop, grooming shop, commercial kennel, commercial livery stable, permanent or transient zoo, circus or performing animal act, or for the boarding of dogs and cats or the training of dogs for any purpose. Animal shelters operated by public authorities and veterinary medical facilities are exempt from the definition. 
    At-large stray means any animal that is not within the confines of a home or under authorization of the owner thereof, in a pen or cage, on a leash or in the physical possession of the owner or the owner's agent. Hunting or stock dogs, and show dogs and cats or other animals, while being worked or shown under the supervision of their owners or the agents or employees of said owners, are exempt from this definition. 
    Bite means the breaking of the skin of a human being by an animal's teeth, mouth, claws or beak. 
    Breeder means any person who breeds a female dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining a monetary gain from the sale of any portion of the litter produced. 
    Carrier means any airline, railroad, motor carrier, shipping line, or other enterprise engaged in the business of transporting for hire. 
    Cat means any member of the Felidae (feline) family. 
    Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
    Collar means a band, choke chain, harness, or other device worn around the neck of an animal in a humane way to which a vaccination tag may be affixed. 
    Commercial kennel means any person, partnership, or corporation engaged in the commercial breeding of dogs or cats or both for sale individually or in litter lots, or in the boarding, training, sale or hire of dogs or cats for compensation, or operation of a guard dog service. Animal hospitals operated by licensed veterinarians as a part of the practice of veterinary medicine, shelters operated by public authorities, and tax-exempt humane organizations shall not be considered commercial kennels. 
    Commercial livery stable means any establishment where one or more horses are let for hire to be ridden or driven, or where one or more horses are boarded for a fee. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that when unprovoked, shall be deemed a dangerous dog if it: 
(1)  On two separate occasions within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person or the dog are off the property of the owner of the dog; or 
(2)  Bites a person causing an injury; or 
(3)  On two separate occasions within the prior 36-month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury to a domestic animal off the property of the owner of the dog. 
(4)  The director and/or his agents shall make all determinations that a dog is a dangerous dog. 
    Dealer means any person, not a public entity, who, as a business, sells, exchanges, or donates or offers to sell, exchange, or donate animals to any person. 
    Department means the department of Iberville Parish Animal Shelter and Control, sometimes referred to herein as the "Iberville Parish Animal Shelter" or "IPAS." 
    Director means that person designated by the Iberville Parish President or his agent as responsible for the administration of the parish animal services, and, except where clearly limited by the context, shall include duly-appointed officers and others duly authorized and acting under the authority of the director. 
    Dog means any member of the Canidae (canine) family. 
    Dwelling means the house or other structure in which one or more persons live. For determining the maximum number of dogs, only one dwelling per subdivided lot will be used to establish the number of dogs permitted. 
    Electronic fence means a fence that controls the movement of a dog by emitting an electrical shock through an electric collar worn by the dog when the dog nears or crosses the boundary of the property around which the fence is located. 
    Excessive barking means unprovoked animal noises of such a loudness, intensity and duration as to prevent or interfere with a person's ability to enjoy his property, included, but not limited to, situations where: 
(1)  On more than one occasion has awakened the complainant up from sleep; or 
(2)  Continues in such a manner so as to cause mental anguish or suffering, loss of sleep or a disturbance of the peace. 
    Grooming shop means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed, excluding animal shelters. 
    Horse means any horse, pony, donkey, or mule. 
    Indoor dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Lives inside a dwelling; 
(2)  Is not left outside unattended; 
(3)  Eats and sleeps in a dwelling. 
    Isolation means the secure, humane confinement of a dog or cat that has been bitten by a known rabid animal so as to prevent such dog or cat from coming in contact with any other animal. Isolation enclosures shall be so constructed and secured that entry will be limited to the owner of the confined dog or cat, with the primary enclosures so located within a secondary enclosures to prevent accessibility to the public. 
    Noncommercial kennel means a private residence, which exceeds the maximum allowable number of dogs in which the director of Iberville Parish Animal and Control has deemed it appropriate to permit such. The kennel must be in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws. 
    Nuisance by an animal means the damaging, soiling, defiling, urinating or defecating upon, or repeatedly trespassing upon property other than its owner's, excessive barking or other disruptive noises so as to disturb the peace and repose of persons living or working nearby, molesting, threatening, attacking or interfering with persons on private or public property, chasing motor vehicles or bicycles, attacking other domestic animals, or disturbing or turning over garbage or trash containers, or causing unsanitary conditions or odors on or about the premises of its owner by urination or defecation. 
    Owner means any person who has a right of property in an animal, or who keeps an animal in his care, harbors an animal, acts as custodian for an animal, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
    Pet shop means any person who obtains animals for sale, exchange, or barter, to the general public, or who grooms animals, as a principal or agent, or who holds himself out to be so engaged. 
    Primary enclosures means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a limited amount of space such as a house, room, pen, run, cage, compartment, or hutch. 
    Proper food means daily food of sufficient quality and quantity provided for each animal to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper shelter means adequate shelter provided for each animal from the elements as required, preventing unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper veterinary care means veterinary care provided for each animal sufficient to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering by the animal. 
    Proper water means daily water of sufficient quality and quantity provided for each animal to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering by the animal. 
    Vaccination against rabies means the injection subcutaneously or otherwise by a licensed veterinarian, or by a person under his supervision, of animal rabies vaccine approved by the state health officer or the director. 
    Vaccination certificate means a serially numbered certificate on a form approved by the director, and signed by a veterinarian or his representative, stating the name of the owner of the dog or cat to which issued and a description of the dog or cat to which issued, indicating the year for which issued, certifying that such dog or cat was inoculated or vaccinated against rabies, and stating the date thereof. 
    Vaccination tag means a suitable tag, bearing the same number as the vaccination certificate and indicating the year for which it was issued. 
    Vicious animal shall mean an animal having a mean or bad temper or that has demonstrated in overt ways a propensity to bite or attack humans without provocation whether on or off the premises of the owner, not to include law enforcement, seeing eye, or guard dogs who aid the disabled. 
    Vicious dog means a dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts serious bodily injury on or kills a human being and was previously determined to be a dangerous dog. 
    Wild or exotic animals shall mean any undomesticated mammal which can normally be found in the wild state including but not limited to any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state or any crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. Ferrets, nonpoisonous snakes, rabbits and rodents which have been bred and raised in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from this definition. 
    Working days means Mondays through Fridays, excluding legal holidays recognized by the parish council. 
    Undomesticated shall mean any species not accustomed to living with or in close association to man, and having no proven traditional long-term association with man or society. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-18. - Penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this chapter" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this chapter" does not include the failure of a parish government officer, parish government employee, city government officer or city government employee to perform an official duty unless this chapter specifically provides that failure to perform the duty is to be punishable as provided in this section. 
(c)  The violation of any provision of this chapter, whether by act or omission, where no specific penalty is provided, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a term of imprisonment of up to 30 days in the parish jail or a fine of up to $500.00 or both. Unless specifically provided otherwise, or the context thereof so dictates, each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-19. - Authority and duties of director. 
(a)  The director shall administer the department, shall have the authority and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall be authorized to represent the parish and/or city in all actions resulting from enforcement or attempted enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  The director shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of an animal with which he deals in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-20. - Keeping of wild, exotic or vicious animals. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following shall be designated wild or exotic animals: tigers, lions, cougars, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs, lynx, bobcats, bears, wolves, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, poisonous snakes, komodo dragons, African buffalo, hyenas, coyotes, deer, any crocodilian including, but not limited to alligators, crocodiles and gavials, any other species of nonhuman primates, raccoons, skunks, squirrels, foxes, rate birds, hybrid species consisting of wolves, coyotes, or jackals, interbred with domestic dogs and ocelots or margays interbred with domestic cats. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any vicious, wild or exotic animal. 
(c)  Qualified educational institutions, zoological parks, public-operated parks or displays, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, scientific organizations, veterinary clinics, law enforcement and commercial guard dogs shall be exempt from this section. 
(d)  Duel violations. Violations of this section shall be dual violations in reference to violations of Title 56 of the State Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-21. - Hindering, or interfering with officers. 
    No person shall hinder, or interfere with any officer or agent of the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter and Control department engaged in, or because of, the performance of any duty provided for, directly or indirectly, by this chapter. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00, or shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-22. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for impounding and boarding, per dog, running at large: 
(1)  First offense: $35.00. 
(2)  Second Offense: $50.00. 
(3)  Third Offense: $100.00. 
(4)  Per day boarding: $10.00 (Note: The "per day" boarding fee is in addition to the fees listed for a first, second and third offense, whichever is applicable, for impounding an at large dog.) 
(b)  Fees for impounding and boarding, per cat, running at large: 
(1)  First offense: $15.00. 
(2)  Second Offense: $30.00. 
(3)  Third Offense: $45.00. 
(4)  Per day boarding: $10.00 (Note: The "per day" boarding fee is in addition to the fees listed for a first, second and third offense, whichever is applicable, for impounding an at large cat.) 
(c)  The owner of an animal which has been impounded for the third time shall surrender the animal to IPAS. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-23. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The department shall have the authority to appoint animal control officers and such other personnel as it deems proper for maintaining a public animal shelter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The director and duly appointed animal control officers shall have authority to exercise the following limited police powers: 
(1)  Contact law enforcement to issue citations for the enforcement of this chapter, as well as take action necessary to enforce state statutes regarding animals. 
(2)  Obtain warrants for such violations and assist law enforcement personnel in making arrests for such violations. 
(3)  Submit affidavits to the courts regarding such violations. 
(c)  In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the director or his authorized representatives are authorized to enter private property without warrant to pursue, capture, or otherwise apprehend animals subject to impoundment or restraint under the provisions of this chapter. If an animal enters an uninhabited structure and the officer can safely gain entry in the same manner as the animal, the officer may enter the structure to capture the animal. If the animal enters the structure through an opening such as a window, hole in the wall or like entrance, the structure will be secured and the officer will obtain permission to enter from the owner/tenant or obtain a warrant to enter the structure. If human safety is a legitimate and immediate concern, the officer may enter the uninhabited structure to capture the animal. This authority to enter does not include inhabited structures unless other justifications dictate immediate entry. 
(d)  The Iberville Parish sheriffs, the City of Plaquemine police officers, and the parish animal control officers have authority to enforce provisions of this section. 
(e)  For any prosecution of a violation of this chapter which results in a conviction, pre-trial diversion, or nolo contendere, there shall be an administrative fee in addition to any other fees. This fee shall be as established by the IPAS from time to time, and shall be dedicated to the operation of the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter and Control Department and shall not be waived. 
(f)  The animal control shelter, or its agents, may enforce any provision of this chapter by instituting a suit for injunctive relief and use summary process, including all temporary restraining orders permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-24. - Owner's responsibilities. 
    Owners of dogs and cats shall be responsible for compliance with the following: 
(a)  All dogs and cats, except cats which have been properly vaccinated for rabies, neutered or spayed and properly tagged, except any dog that is being trained for, or being used for the common and accepted practices associated with search and rescue and the legal hunting of game, including birds and animals, and the herding of livestock, shall be kept from running at-large and must be confined. Community cats may be allowed outside so long as the cats do not prove to be a nuisance. The owner of a cat or dog which causes damage to another person's property shall be responsible for that damage. If a dog causes damage to another person's property, the director may classify the dog as dangerous and enforce the guidelines as set forth in this chapter. Failure of the owner to follow the instructions of the director may result in the animal being seized and humanely disposed of by euthanization, placement for adoption or transfer to a rescue facility. 
(b)  Owners shall be responsible for practicing a flea and tick program in order to prevent fleas and ticks from becoming a nuisance or infesting the yards of neighboring properties. 
(c)  Owners of animals that bite an individual are responsible for notifying IPAs. The duty to notify IPAS shall apply at all times, including holidays, weekends and after normal business hours of IPAS. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to confine outside animals in an enclosed area. 
Animals may be tethered in accordance with the provision contained in section 5-28 of this chapter. The primary enclosure should contain a minimum of 48 square feet (six feet by eight feet) per animal. Outside animals that reside in a neighborhood with fencing restrictions must be kept inside or confined in an outside kennel. The kennel must meet the requirements as set forth in the minimum standards of care for animal shelters contained in this chapter. Any animal found in violation will be seized. The owner will have five days to correct the discrepancy or the animal will become the property of IPAS. Whether or not the animal is redeemed, the owner will be responsible for all fees. Whoever is found to be guilty of failing to provide the proper enclosures shall be fined not less than $250.00 or more than $500.00 or serve five days in jail. 
(e)  The owner of any dog housed outside shall provide a proper shelter which will provide adequate protection from the elements. This includes, but is not limited to, a doghouse, enclosure, or ready access to an already existing structure. In addition, the owner shall provide the dog access to an adequate water supply. The owner shall provide adequate food for the dog and must feed the dog at least once per day. Any fenced or walled enclosure will consist of chain link, wood, brick, vinyl fencing or any other material deemed appropriate by the director of the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter. The barrier will be a minimum of four feet high but at all times will be of a sufficient height to preclude the dog from escaping over the barrier. No fence or wall will have openings greater than two inches in diameter. 
(f)  No owner shall tether a dog to a moveable object which the dog must physically move the object in order to move about the enclosure. 
(g)  Dogs confined to residential properties by an electronic fence collar are not allowed to be closer than ten feet to any public sidewalk, public footpath, alleys, or streets. The fence shall not be installed closer than two feet from an adjacent property. Any dog confined by an electric fence must have a rabies tag attached at all times and be up to date on rabies vaccination. An electronic fence collar may only be used as a secondary means of restraint and not as a replacement for actual fencing material or an enclosure. Any dog confined by an electric fence collar is still considered to be at large. The owner of a dog confined by an electric fence collar shall be responsible for any damage caused by the dog. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any occupant or owner of a dwelling to keep or allow to be kept outdoors on the premises of any dwelling more than three dogs, except that a litter of pups may be kept for a period of time not exceeding three months from birth. This provision shall not apply to any establishment where dogs are lawfully kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or boarding. In a case where the number of dogs exceeds the legal limit, the owner may apply to the director for a noncommercial kennel permit. The director will approve the permit if the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is adequate space to house the dogs. 
(2)  The additional dogs do not create a health risk for the humans or other animals which occupy the residence. 
(3)  The additional dogs do not degrade the environment for the surrounding residences. 
(4)  All animals on the property have been properly vaccinated. 
(5)  There is an adequate tick and flea control program. 
(6)  The applicant is an compliance with all other portions of this chapter. 
(7)  The applicant and or owner/caretaker of the dwelling have not received any legitimate dog complaints from adjacent residences or the surrounding neighborhood. If the director find that all of the conditions listed under this subsection exist, he may issue a noncommercial permit. If the director finds that one or more of the conditions as listed under this subsection are not in compliance, he may deny the permit and the applicant will be required to come into compliance. 
(i)  For indoor dogs, there shall be a limit of four dogs. The director may enforce the regulations for outdoor dogs for any owner who permits his indoor dogs to create a nuisance. 
(j)  Owners of dogs have been declared dangerous must register the dogs with IPAS and abide by the provisions set forth in section 5-35. 
(k)  Owners are responsible for limiting the number of cats in their possession in order to prevent the cats from creating or becoming a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-25. - Rabies tags required for dogs and cats. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owners of dogs and cats to obtain at all times a rabies tag for each such animal. Tags containing vaccination numbers shall be securely fastened at all times to a collar or harness and worn at all times by the dog or cat for which the tags were issued. Hunting or stock dogs, show dogs and cats, and law enforcement dogs are excepted from wearing tags while being worked, conditioned or shown under the supervision of their owners or agents thereof. For their safety, ear-tipped cats who have been vaccinated against rabies are not required to wear the license tag on a collar and are exempted from this requirement. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain, harbor or possess any dog or cat in the city unless such dog or cat, if it is over four months old, is vaccinated with rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian and a tag evidencing such vaccination is affixed to the collar or harness. 
(c)  Fees for tags for dogs and cats shall be paid to the designated licensing agents by their owners. 
(d)  Rabies tags shall be renewed annually during their anniversary month. 
(e)  The requirements imposed by this section shall not apply to dogs or cats kept by regularly chartered medical schools, veterinary schools, veterinary hospitals, and public animal control shelters and tax-exempt humane organization shelters. 
(f)  Persons failing to obtain a rabies tag required by this section shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 5-5. 
(g)  Any person who counterfeits or imitates the rabies tag provided by the licensing authority, or who shall put on a dog or cat any such counterfeit or imitation tag, shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 5-5. 
(h)  Rabies tags are not transferable. 
(i)  Rabies vaccination may only be distributed by, harbored by and administered by a Louisiana licensed veterinarian. 
(j)  Upon request of the director or the agency, the owner or keeper of any dog or cat must furnish evidence that such dog or cat has been vaccinated by a licensed Louisiana veterinarian and is current on its vaccination against rabies as required herein. 
(k)  The director or his authorized agents or representatives shall impound any animal suspected of being infected with rabies. The disposition of any animal so suspected and impounded shall be at the discretion of the director. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-26. - Nuisance; owner to maintain clean premises. 
(a)  No person shall willfully or knowingly harbor or keep on his premises or elsewhere any animal which causes an unreasonable disturbance of the peace of the neighbors or occupants of adjacent premises, or suffer or permit any animal to create a nuisance as defined in this chapter. This includes excessive barking. A person shall be deemed to have willfully and knowingly violated this section, if such person, having been notified by the department or law enforcement officers of such disturbances, shall have refused for a period of 24 hours to correct same and prevent reoccurrence. In the matter of excessive barking, the remedy shall be immediate upon notification. 
(b)  The owner of any animal shall maintain his premises in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens or yards in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of said premises. The animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that noise emanating therefrom shall not be disturbing to such persons. 
(c)  Premises on which animals are kept shall be maintained so as to prevent disagreeable odors arising therefrom, or the presence of breeding of flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. Provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors, and disease hazards. 
(d)  If any part of a public street or the private property of a person other than the owner of the animal shall be soiled by the excreta of that animal, whether such nuisance shall take place in the presence of the owner or not, the owner shall upon becoming aware thereof, promptly remove such excreta and dispose of it in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-27. - Cruelty to animals prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally or with criminal negligence commits any of the following shall be guilty of cruelty to animals: 
(1)  Overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded or overworks a living animal. 
(2)  Torments, cruelly beats, cruelly ill-treats, unjustifiably or otherwise abuses or injures any living animal, whether belonging to himself or another. 
(3)  Causes, instigates or permits any dog fight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals or humans. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, operate, attend, sponsor, or in any way further a contest that pits animals against each other and for anyone to maintain facilities for this purpose. 
(4)  Having charge, custody, or possession of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, unjustifiably fails to provide it with proper food, proper water, proper shelter, proper veterinary care or with humane care and treatment. An animal shall be provided with: 
a.  Clean, sanitary, safe and humane conditions; 
b.  Sufficient quantities of appropriate food daily served in a sanitary container or dish; 
c.  Proper shelter as defined in section 5-11 of owner's responsibilities; 
d.  Adequate quantities of visibly clean and fresh water available at all times provided in a sanitary manner; 
e.  Medical attention and/or necessary veterinary care when an animal is sick, diseased, or injured. This shall include necessary efforts to maintain an animal's coat and skin in a reasonably healthy condition free of fleas and ticks. Upon request of the agency, written proof of veterinary care must be provided. 
f.  Sufficient space for the animal to move about freely to exercise, lie down, as well as sit and stand. 
(5)  Abandons any animal. A person shall not be considered to have abandoned an animal if he delivers to an animal control shelter an animal which he found running at large. An animal shall also be considered abandoned if any of the requirements listed in subsection (4)a. through f. of the preceding paragraph are not met for more than 24 hours. 
(6)  Impounds or confines, or causes to be impounded or confined in a shelter or other place, a living animal and fails to supply it during such confinement with proper food, proper drink, and proper shelter. 
(7)  Carries, or causes to be carried, a living animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise, in a cruel or inhumane manner. No animal shall be transported in the truck[trunk] of any vehicle at any time. It shall be unlawful to transport any animal on a public road in any open-bed vehicle unless the animal is safely and humanely restrained (at minimum by a harness with double tethering for dogs) so that the animal is unable to jump or fall out of the vehicle. If transporting an animal in a kennel or cage in an open bed vehicle, the kennel or cage must be double tethered to prevent the kennel from moving. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to leave any animal in an unattended motor vehicle or transport an animal in any motor vehicle without adequate ventilation. Temporary or permanent medical injury, distress or death caused to an animal in a vehicle regardless of ventilation shall be considered cruelty. 
(9)  Knowingly or unjustifiably exposes any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that it may be eaten by an animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose, on his own property, common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances, nor shall any person in any other manner whatsoever intentionally poison any animal other than rats. 
(10)  Individuals, institutions or corporations who trap domestic animals or wildlife in humane traps are responsible for monitoring the traps and ensuring the safety of the animals trapped until they are removed by the agency or a certified wildlife removal company or agency. Failure to monitor the wellbeing of the trapped animals resulting in injury or death of the trapped animal whether intentional through negligence shall be unlawful and considered cruelty to animals. 
(11)  Inures any animal belonging to another person. 
(12)  Mistreats any living animal by any act or omission whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused to or permitted upon the animal. 
(13)  Causes or procures to be done any person any act enumerated in this subsection. 
(b)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report the injury or death to the animal to the animal's owner, if the identity of the owner is apparent. If the owner cannot be ascertained or located, such motor vehicle operator shall report the accident to IPAS or the city police department. 
(c)  No person shall color, dye, stain, or otherwise change the natural color of baby chickens, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits; nor shall any person possess for the purpose of sale any chickens, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits which have been so colored. 
(d)  Ponies used at concessions consisting of a wheel like device to which they are attached must be given sufficient resting time. Resting time shall be one-half hour after working one hour. 
(e)  Any occurrence of animal cruelty, even if not specifically enumerated in this section, may be enforced in accordance with the authority, definitions, provision and procedures that are currently set forth in R.S. 14:102 through R.S. 14:102.7 and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(f)  No one previously convicted of cruelty to an animal shall be issued an animal establishment or kennel permit, or be permitted to adopt a pet pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No one convicted for a second time of cruelty to an animal shall be issued an animal establishment or kennel permit, or be permitted to adopt a pet pursuant to the provision of this chapter, nor own or keep an animal in his care, harbor an animal, act as custodian for an animal, or permit an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-28. - Minimum standards of care for animals. 
    Shelter and care. 
(a)  A shelter must be sanitary, of sound construction, and provide adequate protection from the cold and heat. The shelter must be placed in a dry area free of debris, feces, and standing water. It must have at least three solid sides and a solid, immovable, weatherproof roof, have a solid sanitary floor that sits at least 1.5 inches off of the ground, be adequately ventilated, provide adequate light, and provide shelter from wind, rain, sun and the elements at all times. Suitable drainage must be provided so that water is not standing in or around the shelter. 
(b)  A shelter must be large enough for the animal to stand, turn around, and lie down without touching the sides or top of the shelter. 
(c)  All areas where animals are kept shall be cleaned regularly so that fecal matter is disposed of so not to attract insects or rodents, become unsightly or cause objectionable odors. For cats and dogs, floors of animal housing areas should be made of an impervious material to facilitate cleaning and drainage. Sealed concrete is ideal. 
(d)  If multiple animals are present in one location, each animal must have a separate and clean food bowl. Each animal must have access to shelter and the owner must meet all standards as detailed in this section. 
(e)  When outdoor temperatures reach freezing levels, all cats, except feral and community cats, dogs and companion animals (excluding wild, exotic and ferocious animals) must be moved indoors or to an area that provides shelter from the weather. All cats, except feral and community cats, and dogs must be moved indoors for their safety for the duration of an extreme weather advisory issued for a specific time period by the NOAA's National Weather Service including but not limited to: hear[heat], tornado, tropical storm or hurricane. Animals must remain indoors and provided care for the duration of the advisory unless being walked on a leash by their owner, guardian or custodian. 
(f)  No dog or cat shall wear a muzzle unless the owner is present or the dog or cat is under veterinary care. 
(g)  If the agency determines upon inspection that an animal owner or keeper is not in compliance with the provision of this section, the agency shall provide written notice to the owner or keeper as such. Failure by the owner to comply within five business days of receiving notice shall result in the temporary impoundment of all animals of the offending property(s) by the agency and the issuance of a summons or citation, through the city police, to the owner pursuant to section 5-10. The agency may remove any animal from the property in less than five business days, if the removal is deemed necessary by the agency to protect the health and well-being of the animal. All animals shall be promptly released to the owner or keeper upon a determination by the agency that the owner or keeper has come into compliance with this section or determination by a court that the owner or keeper was not in violation of this section. The owner or keeper shall compensate the agency for the costs of keeping and care of the animal(s) for every day that the animal was in the possession of the agency pursuant to the fee schedule laid out in section 5-22, except that the owner or keeper shall not be required to compensate the agency if a municipal or district court determines that the keeper or owner was not in violation of this section. 
(h)  Tethering. It shall be unlawful to tether a dog, except as follows: 
(1)  The tether is attached to the dog by means of a suitable, properly fitted collar or harness not exceeding two inches in width. Choke or prong collars are not permitted. The tether must have a swivel on both ends. 
(2)  The tether provides access to adequate space for the dog to move about freely and cannot become entangled in such a way that would prevent the dog's mobility or cause strangulation. 
(3)  At minimum, the tether should be five times the length of the dog from the tip of nose to the tip of the tail and tether must all[allow] the dog to lie down with its head flat on the ground and provide an additional 12 inches of slack. 
(4)  The tether is made of a durable lightweight material that will not cause unnecessary stress on the dog. The tether shall not weigh more than three percent of the dog's total body weight. Thick changes[chains] and other heavy lines are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-29. - Soiling of public and private property by animals. 
(a)  If any public or private property is soiled or contaminated by an animal, whether such nuisance shall take place in the presence of the owner or keeper or not, or if the owner or the keeper is a minor, the parent or guardian thereof shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. This section shall not apply in a designated off leash area of "dog park" in which the owner or keeper, or parents or guardian thereof, shall abide by the regulations imposed by the management of such area, which shall include, but not be limited to immediate cleanup and proper disposal of animal waste by the owner or keeper, or parent or guardian thereof. 
(b)  Any person, who is in violation of this section, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and no less than three, seven-hour days of community service, including but not limited to trash clean up duties. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-30. - Animal establishment standards. 
(a)  No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining, and subsequently maintaining, a valid permit in compliance with this section. In the event any person shall own or operate more than one facility, they shall be required to obtain a permit for each facility. 
(b)  Applications for such permits shall be made to the department on application forms provided by same. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the department shall promptly investigate the applicant and the facilities sought to be permitted, to determine if they are in compliance with provisions and requirements of this chapter. The director shall issue or deny the permit applied for. If the permit is denied, the applicant shall be given written reasons for such denial. 
(d)  Each permit shall be initially effective from the date of issuance through December 31 of the year of issuance. 
(e)  Each permit shall be renewed annually and an application for renewal shall be filed with the department between October 1 and December 1. Renewed applications shall be effective from January 1 through December 31 of the following year. 
(f)  Permittees must comply with the standards and regulations adopted by the department based on standards set forth in Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The department may amend such standards and regulations from time to time for purposes of public health and safety and the protection of animals. The standards and regulations shall be amended only after allowing permittees an opportunity to be heard on the proposed amendments. Notice of said hearing shall be mailed to each permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing date and at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the amendment. The notice shall set forth the amendment in its entirety and shall advise of the date, time and purpose of the hearing and the effective date of the amendment. 
(g)  The department shall provide a copy of applicable standards and regulations with each permit application. Each applicant shall acknowledge, in his application, receipt of said standards and regulations. 
(h)  A representative of the department shall have the right of entry, at reasonable hours, upon the premises of permittees and into all areas thereof where animals are kept and maintained, for inspection to ascertain whether the permittee is in compliance with the provision of this chapter and the standards and regulations established under same. Failure of any owner to comply with said provisions, standards, and regulations, or allow reasonable entry and inspection by the animal services department representative shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's permit. 
(i)  If, upon inspection, department representatives determine that a permittee is in violation of this chapter, the department shall advise said permittee in writing of the violation and shall inform the permittee that his failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 14 days of receipt of said notice shall constitute grounds for removal of all animals from the premises or area subject to violation. If the permittee fails to comply within said period, IPAS representatives may proceed to remove the animals from said premises or area. Extended periods for compliance may be granted by the department for good cause shown. In the event it shall become necessary for the department to remove any animal as provided herein, it shall return the animals to the permittee upon termination of the violation for which the animals were removed unless the director determines that the violation justifies revocation of the permittee's permit. Such return, however, shall be contingent upon payment by the permittee of fees incurred by the removal as established by section 5-22. Removed animals will become the property of the department 14 days after removal unless the violation is terminated and the fees incurred are paid or an extension is granted by the director. In the event that such an extension is granted, failure to terminate the violation and pay all boarding fees incurred, including fees for the period of the extension, by the end of said extension shall result in forfeiture of the seized animals to the department. The director may, however, waive all or any portion of the boarding fees incurred under this section for good cause shown. 
(j)  If the owner disagrees with the decision of the director to revoke the permit, he may appeal that decision to the Plaquemine City Court. The owner must be present or legally represented at the hearing or any right to the appeal will be deemed waived and the ruling of the director will be final. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-31. - Commercial livery stables, prohibited. 
    Commercial livery stables are prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-32. - Impoundment of dogs and cats; disposition, identification and classification. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director to seize and impound any at large stray dog or cat not tagged with the current official vaccination and license tags. Any dog or cat so seized and impounded shall be held for a period of at least five working days during which time the owner may reclaim the dog or cat. The director may also seize and impound tagged dogs which are at large in violation of section 5-38. Any tagged dog which is impounded shall be held for a period of five working days during which time the owner may reclaim the dog. To reclaim an impounded dog or cat, the owner must pay redemption and board fees as provided in section 5-22, and provide satisfactory proof of ownership. If the dog or cat is not legally vaccinated and licensed, the owner shall also be required to obtain the requisite licensing and vaccination from a veterinarian and provide proof of such to IPAS within five days of release. 
(b)  Any dog or cat impounded by the department and not reclaimed by the owner within the prescribed time limits may be placed for adoption as a pet, transferred to a rescue facility, or humanely euthanized. A good faith attempt to notify the owner shall be made first if the name of the owner is known. Upon notification, the owner shall have five working days from such notice to redeem the animal after which it may be disposed of by euthanization, placement for adoption or transfer to a rescue facility. If upon notification the owner does not wish to reclaim the animal and signs a release of his rights therein, the animal may be disposed of immediately. 
(c)  The director may order the timely euthanasia for any animal lawfully taken into custody at the animal shelter which, in the opinion of the director, is necessary by reason of age or physical condition of the animal or as is required for other humane reasons. The director, with the concurrence of a veterinarian, may order the timely euthanasia for any animal lawfully taken into custody at the animal shelter which, in the opinion of the director, is appropriate by reason of the animal's temperament. 
(d)  Owners of unwanted animals may bring the animals to the animal shelter and release them to be disposed of at the discretion of the director by placing the animal for adoption as a pet, transferring the animal to a rescue facility, or humanely euthanizing the animal. Should an owner want to redeem an animal which has been released, all impoundment, board, vaccination, and license fees as applicable, must be paid. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the director to seize any domesticated animal, in addition to dogs and cats, found to be at large, and any non-domesticated (wild) animal that is a potential public health hazard, a nuisance, or is sick or injured. The seizure of any non-domesticated (wild) animal shall be at the discretion of the IPAS, with consideration being given to the safety and welfare of the seizing officer. 
(f)  Domesticated animals other than dogs and cats will held for a period of at least five working days during which time they may, after payment of impoundment and board fees, be claimed by their owners. If the owner does not claim any such animal, the animal may be disposed of at the discretion of the director. 
(g)  Non-domesticated animals may be relocated or humanely euthanized at the discretion of the director. 
(h)  Any person adopting an unsprayed or unneutered animal from the department must sign an agreement to have the animal spayed or neutered within six months of age. The department shall perform follow up investigations to confirm compliance with this section, and failure to comply shall constitute a waiver of all rights of the adopting party in and to the animal, returning full custody of the animal to the department and shall further constitute forfeiture of all fees paid by said party in connection with the adoption. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-33. - Animals which bite or scratch persons. 
(a)  If any person shall report to the police department, sheriffs office, Iberville Health Unit or IPAS that a dog or cat has bitten or scratched him or any other person, when such bite or scratch has broken the skin, the director shall direct the owner of the dog or cat to confine it for a ten-day observation period in the rabies observation cages maintained on the premises of IPAS or, should the owner prefer, in an established veterinary hospital. The agency on its own authority or if ordered by the director, may extend the length of the quarantine period. 
(b)  When an owner chooses to confine his dog or cat within a veterinary hospital, the owner shall have 12 hours from the time of the bite or scratch to do so. The animal must be confined in the parish. The owner shall advise the director of which veterinary hospital the dog or cat will be confined in and shall advise the veterinarian that the dog or cat is to be placed under observation for biting or scratching. If the dog or cat is not confined within 12 hours, the director may contact local law enforcement to issue a citation to the owner for the dog or cat shall be apprehended and confined by the department. 
(c)  Each veterinarian caring for a dog or cat quarantined for biting or scratching shall submit a report to the director as to the health status of the dog or cat observed by him at the end of the ten-day observation period. 
(d)  If any dog or cat dies during the ten-day observation period, whether at the veterinary hospital or at the animal shelter, the director shall have the head of such dog or cat submitted to the state department of health and human resources laboratory or other approved facility for examination for rabies. 
(e)  If any dog or cat placed under observation for biting or scratching has been injured or becomes sick, in such a state that its recovery is seriously in doubt, or if the sickness of such dog or cat endangers the health of other animals or persons, the director shall have said dog or cat humanely euthanized and its head submitted to the department of health and human resources laboratory of other approved facility for examination for rabies. 
(f)  In cases where a bite wound or scratch, which has broken the skin, is on the head or neck of the victim, the director may humanely euthanize the animal to expedite test results to permit the rapid determination of the need for rabies post exposure prophylaxis. The rabies vaccination status of the animal should be evaluated in making this decision. The director may consult with the state public health veterinarian to authorize the humane euthanization of the animal prior to the expiration of the ten-day observation period. 
(g)  Home confinement for observation of a dog or cat involved in a bite or scratch may be allowed, at the discretion of the director, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dog or cat is currently licensed and vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine. 
(2)  The owner was in compliance with the applicable leash or confinement and restraint requirements of this chapter at the time of the bite. 
(3)  The confinement and conditions thereof have specific approval of the bitten or scratched party, or his proper legal representative, as evidenced by a signed, written agreement, which agreement shall hold the director, parish and city harmless for any loss or damage whatsoever which may result from the allowance of such confinement. 
(4)  The dog or cat is examined by a licensed veterinarian after the bite or scratch and written certificate by said veterinarian that the animal appears to be in good health is supplied to the director within 24 hours after the bite or scratch. 
(5)  Immediately upon expiration of the ten-day observation period, a licensed veterinarian shall examine the dog or cat and certify to the director in writing the health and condition of the animal. 
(6)  If the director determines that a dog or cat may be confined at the home of its owner, the owner shall notify the Iberville Health Unit's medical director or IPAS immediately if the animal shows any symptoms of sickness or abnormal behavior or escapes or dies during confinement. Persons having custody shall surrender the carcass of the dog or cat which dies during confinement to IPAS. 
(h)  In order for an animal to remain impounded, the victim must have the bite or scratch verified by a licensed medical doctor or animal control officer. Proof of any doctor visit must be provided to the IPAS. 
(i)  Any doctor, hospital, clinic or other medical facility within the parish that examines and/or treats an animal bite of any nature must notify the IPAS. 
(j)  Any certified enforcement dog belonging to a law enforcement agency is exempt from this requirement of this section. Vaccination status of all enforcement dogs shall be retained by the agency involved. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-34. - Release of dogs or cats impounded for observation; fees. 
(a)  The owner shall also be responsible for redeeming their animal as soon as the quarantine period is over. On the 12th day, the animal becomes the property of IPAS. 
(b)  Any owner redeeming a dog or cat impounded for a ten-day observation period shall pay an impounding fee and board fee as provided in section 5-22. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-35. - Dangerous and vicious dogs. 
(a)  Dangerous dogs. 
(1)  The animal shelter may investigate reported incidents involving dogs that may be dangerous. Upon such investigation, if the director finds the dog to constitute a dangerous dog as defined in this section and section 5-4, said dog shall be so classified. The owner shall receive written notification of the animal control shelter's classification of the animal. A record of the dog will be maintained in the dangerous dog data base and file system at IPAS. 
(2)  Hearing in city court. 
a.  If the owner disagrees with the classification of the director, the district attorney, city attorney, the sheriff, an animal control officer, or other designated representative, in the name of and on behalf of the parish and/or city and without the payment of any costs, shall be authorized to file a petition in the Plaquemine City Court having jurisdiction requesting a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a dog should be declared dangerous. 
b.  Upon the filing of the petition, the city judge shall immediately issue a rule on the owner of the dog to show cause why the dog should not be declared a dangerous dog. This rule shall, at the time of its issuance, be fixed for hearing not later than five days, including Sundays, half-holidays and holidays, from the date of its issuance, and shall be heard by preference over all other matters and cases fixed for the same day and shall be continuously day after day until submitted for adjudication. 
c.  In every case where the dog is established to be a dangerous dog, the court shall enter an order declaring the dog to be a dangerous dog and shall direct the owner of the dog to comply with conditions established for the restraint and confinement of the dog as provided by law and herein. 
d.  The owner of the dog shall be liable to IPAS for the costs and expenses of keeping the dog if the dog is later adjudicated dangerous. 
(3)  The owner of a dog that has been classified as "dangerous" shall abide by the following mandates within 30 days after the dog has been so classified: 
a.  Execute a written acknowledgment of owner's responsibilities prior to the release of the dog, which shall include, but may not be limited to, the following statements: 
1.  Owner agrees and acknowledges that the dog is declared to be a dangerous dog as defined by R.S. 14:102.14; 
2.  Owner is obligated and bound to at all times, while the dangerous dog is on owner's property, to keep the dog indoors or in a secure enclosure; 
3.  The dog may be off owner's property only if it is restrained by a leash which prevents its escape or access to other persons; 
4.  Owner shall post signs around the secure enclosure on owner's property no more than 30 feet apart at each normal point of ingress or egress, which bear the words "Beware of Dog" or "Dangerous Dog" in letters at least three and one-half inches high with said signs being readily visible to any person approaching the secure enclosure; and 
(5)  If the dangerous dog dies, is sold, transferred or permanently removed from Iberville Parish, the owner shall notify IPAS of the changed condition and new location of the dog in writing within two days. 
b.  A microchip will be implanted, at the owner's expense, by IPAS or a licensed veterinarian, if the dog is deemed too aggressive for IPAS to safely handle. If the dog already has a chip, that chip will be registered with IPAS. 
c.  The owner shall immediately notify the animal control shelter when a dangerous dog: 
1.  Is loose or unconfined; 
2.  Has bitten a human being or attacked another animal; 
d.  A dangerous dog must be securely confined indoors or in a securely fenced enclosure and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the dog from coming into contact with either a human being other than the owner or any other animal, and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. The pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of six feet by eight feet or an enclosures not less than 48 square feet. Such pen shall have secure sides, at least six feet in height of sufficient design to prevent the dog from escaping over, under or through the structure. The enclosures shall provide a humane existence for the dog and protection from the elements. The pen shall meet all of the requirements of a dog pen as required in this chapter. The enclosures must be physical in nature, not invisible or electronic. 
e.  The owner shall prominently display a sign at the owner's expense on his premises at all entry points warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. 
f.  A dangerous dog may be off the owner's premises or out of its enclosure only if it is restrained by a substantial leash not exceeding four feet in length and under the control of an adult (person who has attained the age of 18 years). 
g.  The animal control shelter, in its discretion, may require a dangerous dog to be spayed or neutered. 
h.  The animal control shelter, in the exercise of its discretion, shall have the authority to make whatever inspections are deemed necessary to ensure that the provisions recited herein are complied with. 
i.  Prior to a dangerous dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address, and phone number of the new owner to the animal control shelter. Each new owner shall execute a document to be supplied by the animal control shelter, acknowledging that said owner is aware of the "dangerous dog" classification, and that said owner shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
j.  An owner of a dangerous dog shall have the option to have said dog humanely euthanized, at his expense, by IPAS or licensed veterinarian if said owner is unable to comply with the requirements recited herein. 
k.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or possess a dangerous animal on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or building that would allow the animal to exit or escape on its own volition. Screen windows or screen doors alone are considered inadequate. 
l.  IPAS shall have the right to inspect the premises of dangerous animals' enclosures to ensure compliance with this part. 
m.  The owner or keeper shall sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement/clause in favor of the Iberville Parish Council and the City of Plaquemine. 
n.  If IPAS reasonably believes that an owner cannot or will not abide by the requirements of this subsection (a)(3), the dog may be seized. 
(4)  Continuation of declaration as a dangerous dog. Any dog which has been declared a dangerous dog by any agency or department of this parish, another parish, municipality, county, or state shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for the remainder of its life. The person who owns or possesses any dog declared a dangerous dog by any parish, municipality, county, or state government must notify the Iberville Parish Shelter and control department, if so delegated, of the dog's address and restrictions of maintenance, within ten days of moving the animal into the parish. The restrictions and conditions of maintenance of any dog declared dangerous by this parish, another parish, city, county, or state will continue to remain in force while the dog is in the parish and/or city. 
(b)  Vicious dog. 
(1)  A dog will not be classified as "vicious" if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property with the intent to commit a crime or tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or if the dog was defending or protecting its owner from unjustified attack or assault, or was protecting or defending its young or other animals from harm or attack. 
(2)  The animal control shelter may investigate reported incidents involving dogs that may be vicious. Upon such investigation, if the animal control shelter and/or its director finds the dog to constitute a vicious dog as defined in this chapter, said dog shall be so classified. The owner shall receive written notification of IPAS classification of the animal. 
(3)  Any dog that has been classified as "vicious" shall be impounded by the animal control shelter. The animal will be kept at the animal control shelter and placed in rabies quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or held for ten days after the owner's receipt of notification, and then shall be humanely euthanized. 
(4)  Hearing in city court. 
a.  If the owner disagrees with the classification of the director, the district attorney, city attorney, the sheriff, an animal control officer, or other designated representative, in the name of and on behalf of the parish and/or city and without the payment of any costs, shall be authorized to file a petition in the Plaquemine City Court having jurisdiction requesting a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a dog should be declared vicious. 
b.  Upon the filing of the petition, the city judge shall immediately issue a rule on the owner of the dog to show cause why the dog should not be declared a vicious dog. This rule shall, at the time of its issuance, be fixed for hearing not later than five days, including Sundays, half-holidays and holidays, from the date of its issuance, and shall be heard by preference over all other matters and cases fixed for the same day and shall be continuously day after day until submitted for adjudication. 
c.  In every case where the dog is established to be a vicious dog, the court shall enter an order declaring the dog to be a vicious dog and shall direct that the vicious dog be humanely euthanized. 
d.  The owner of the dog shall be liable to IPAS for the costs and expenses of keeping the dog if the dog is later adjudicated vicious. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-36. - Seizure and disposition of dogs which cause death or inflict bodily injury. 
(a)  IPAS may seize any dog which when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, causes the death of or inflicts bodily injury on a human being. Any dog seized pursuant to the provision of the section may be impounded pending the outcome of the hearing held in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The district attorney, city attorney, the sheriff, an animal control officer, or other designated representative, in the name of and on behalf of the parish and/or city and without the payment of any costs, shall be authorized to file a petition in the Plaquemine City Court having jurisdiction requesting a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, causes the death of or inflicts bodily injury on a human being, shall be euthanized. 
(c)  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure provided in section 5-22. 
(d)  A dog determined by the court to have, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, caused the death of or inflicted bodily injury on a human being may be humanely euthanized by IPAS. 
(e)  The owner of the dog shall be liable to IPAS for the costs and expenses of keeping the dog if the dog is later adjudicated to have, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, caused the death or inflicted injury on a human being. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-37. - Impounding or destruction of dogs and cats bitten or scratched by known rabid animals. 
(a)  When a dog or cat has been bitten or scratched by a known rabid animal and the dog or cat is currently vaccinated with an approved rabies serum: 
(1)  The owner shall have the dog or cat examined by a licensed veterinarian and revaccinated. 
(2)  The veterinarian shall submit a written report to the department as to the health of such animal 
(3)  The owner shall place the dog or cat that has been bitten in strict isolation for a 90-day period. 
(4)  The dog or cat may be isolated with a licensed veterinary clinic or at the owner's home with the approval of the director after inspection of the home isolation facility. If the owner elects to isolate the animal on his premises, the director shall inspect the security of the animal without notice at least once each week. If the security of the animal is not as approved by the director, the animal shall be seized and transported to the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter and the owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 5-23 and applicable fees set forth in section 5-22. 
(5)  The owner shall have the dog or cat examined by a licensed veterinarian at the expiration of the 90-day isolation period, and the veterinarian shall submit a written report to the director as to the health of such dog or cat. 
(6)  If the owner of the dog or cat does not desire to have it isolated, he may surrender it to the department for euthanization, after which the head of such animal shall be submitted to the department of health and human resources or another approved facility for analysis. 
(b)  When a dog or cat is bitten or scratched by a known rabid animal and the dog or cat is not currently vaccinated with an approved rabies serum, the owner shall have the dog or cat humanely euthanized by a licensed veterinarian or the department and the head of such animal shall be submitted to the department of health and human resources for analysis; or alternatively, the owner shall have the dog or cat placed in isolation for a period of six months at a licensed veterinary clinic, which shall examine such animal and render a written report on the health thereof to the department. The department shall cause such dog or cat to be humanely euthanized and the head of such animal shall be submitted to the department of health and human resources for analysis. 
(c)  If the dog or cat should become sick during a period of isolation afar being bitten by a known rabid animal, the owner, if the dog or cat is isolated on the owner's premises, or the veterinarian, if the dog or cat is isolated at a veterinary clinic, shall immediately advise the department. The department shall cause such dog or cat to be humanly euthanized and the head of such animal shall be submitted to the department of health and human resources or another approved facility for analysis 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-38. - At-large dogs in the city, prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall suffer or permit any dog in his possession, or kept by him about his premises, to run at large on any unenclosed land, or trespass upon any enclosed or unenclosed lands of another. 
(b)  At large dogs not in compliance with the foregoing shall be subject to impoundment. 
(c)  No dog at large in violation of this section shall be harbored or withheld from animal control officers by any person. 
(d)  Each dog that shall run or otherwise be at large in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense by the owner of such animal. 
(e)  To reclaim an impounded dog, the owner must pay redemption and board fees as provided in section 5-22, and provide satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(f)  The owner shall pay any other incidental costs associated with the animal being at large or impounded, including the costs of containing and impounding the animal. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-39. - Seizure and disposition of animals cruelly treated. 
(a)  When a person is charged with cruelty to animals, said person's animal may be seized by the arresting officer and held pursuant to this section. 
(b)  The seizing officer shall: 
(1)  Notify the owner of the seized animal of the provision of this section by posting written notice at the location where the animal was seized or by leaving it with a person of suitable age and discretion residing at that location within 24 hours of the seizure. 
(2)  Contact the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter to care for any such animal. IPAS shall retain custody of the animal or find a suitable location for the animal to be kept. 
(3)  Photograph the animal within five days after posting of the notice of seizure and shall cause an affidavit to be prepared in order to document its condition in accordance with R.S. 15:436.2. 
(c)  The seized animal shall be held by the custodian provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this section for a period of five consecutive days, including weekends and holidays, after such notice of seizure is given. Thereafter, if a person who claims an interest in such animal has not posted bond in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, the animal may be humanely disposed of by transfer to a rescue facility, adoption or euthanasia. 
(d)  A person claiming an interest in any animal seized pursuant to this section may prevent the disposition of the animal as provided for in subsection (c) of this section by posting a bond with the Iberville Parish Animal Shelter within five days after receiving notice of such seizure in an amount sufficient to secure payment for all reasonable costs, incurred in the boarding and treatment for any seized animal for a 30-day period commencing on the date of initial seizure. Such bond shall not prevent the department, agency, humane society or other custodian of the animal from disposing of the animal in accordance with subsection (c) of this section at the end of the 30-day period covered by the bond, unless the person claiming an interest posts an additional bond for such reasonable expenses for an additional 30-day period. In addition, such bond shall not prevent disposition of the animal for humane purposes at any time, in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the department, agency, humane society or other custodian of the animal as authorized by the court in accordance with the current rate for board and on the condition of the animal after examination by a licensed veterinarian. 
(e)  Upon a person's conviction of cruelty to animals, it shall be proper for the court, in its discretion, to order the forfeiture and final determination of the custody of any animal found to be cruelly treated in accordance with this section and the forfeiture of the bond posed pursuant to subsection (d) of this section as part of the sentence. The court may, in its discretion, order the payment of any reasonable or additional costs incurred in the boarding or veterinary treatment of any seized animal prior to its disposition, whether or not a bond was posted by the defendant. In the event of the acquittal or final discharge without conviction of the accused, the court shall, on demand, direct the release of any animal held in custody to the owner thereof and order the return of the bond posted pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, less reasonable administrative costs. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the euthanasia of any seized animal, at any time, whether or not any bond was posted, if a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal is not likely to survive and is suffering, as a result of any physical condition. In such instances, the court, in its discretion, may order the return of any bond posted, less reasonable costs, at the time of trial. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-40. - Importation of dogs and cats by public carrier. 
(a)  No dog or cat four months of age or older shall be delivered in the city from out of state by any public carrier unless there is a certificate of a licensed veterinarian at the point of shipment accompanying the dog or cat and the bill of lading therefore, showing that the dog or cat is in good health and has been currently vaccinated for rabies within six months of the date of such delivery. 
(b)  All dogs or cats less than four months of age brought into the city from out of state by a public carrier shall be accompanied by a health certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian at place of shipment origin. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 5-41. - Commerce in live animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, barter, exchange, lease, rent, donate or display a live animal on a roadside, public right of way, sidewalk, street, parkway or any other public property or any property dedicated to public use, a commercial parking lot, or at an outdoor special sale, swap meet, flea market, fair, parking lot sale or similar event, regardless whether the event is authorized by the property owner. This section does not apply to sales on privately owned property with the permission of the property owner by humane societies, animal welfare groups and other nonprofit organizations sponsoring animal adoption events. It further does not apply to any activity undertaken by the department of animal services. 
(Ord. No. 369, 10-10-17) 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, repealed art. II, §§ 5-16-5-22, 5-26-5-29, 5-36-5-38, which pertained to dogs, and derived from the 1967 Code, §§ 4-10-4-14; Ord. No. 955, adopted May 12, 1981; and Ord. No. 003, adopted Aug. 14, 1990. 

Secs. 5-42-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    At large shall mean off the premises of the owner of the animal and not under the control of the owner or his agent or representative. 
    Owner shall include any person who shall harbor or permit an animal to remain or to be lodged and fed within his house, or his premises. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-52. - Keeping of hogs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any hog or pig within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-6) 
Sec. 5-53. - Raising and keeping restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain any cow, horse, mule, goat or other livestock on any uncovered parcel of land, unless such parcel of land shall have a minimum area of one acre for one such livestock, and one-fourth acre for each additional animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain any cow, horse, mule, goat or other livestock unless he shall have a minimum area of one acre for one such livestock. If such livestock is kept in or confined by a building or structure, such as a stable, barn, shed, or pen, there must be at least 200 feet to the nearest point of an actual residence or building used for human habitation, restaurant, cafe or other public eating place, or church, school or hospital. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or lead across the property of another party any cow, horse, mule, goat or other livestock without first obtaining actual consent of the registered land owner which the livestock is to cross. 
(Ord. No. 819, 9-8-70) 
Sec. 5-54. - Prohibition on horseback riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to horseback ride within the city limits without a permit. A person must obtain a permit from the city clerk, which will be issued without charge. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1, 4-24-73; Amend. of 8-28-90) 
Sec. 5-55. - Running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any domestic fowl, horse, mule, cow, ox, sheep, goat, hog, cattle or stock of any kind to roam at large within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1; Ord. No. 858, § 3, 4-24-73) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17. 
Secs. 5-56-5-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, repealed div. 2, §§ 5-64-5-66, which pertained to impoundment of livestock, and derived from the 1967 Code, §§ 4-2, 4-3. 

Secs. 5-64-5-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BEES AND BEEHIVES 

Sec. 5-81. - Keeping or maintaining generally. 
    The keeping of bees or the operation or maintenance of beehives within the city is hereby prohibited, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 215, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-82. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meanings: 
    Apiary: The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location. 
    Beekeeper: A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees. 
    Beekeeping equipment: Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors. 
    Colony or hive: An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including brood, combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by the bees. 
    Honey bee: All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera species. 
    Tract: A contiguous parcel land under common ownership. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-83. - Conduct declared unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-84. - Hive registration. 
(a)  All honey bee colonies shall be registered annually with the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry. 
(b)  A copy of the honey bee colony registration with the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry shall be delivered to the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-85. - Hive type. 
    All honey bee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth-type hives with removable frames, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-86. - Fencing of flyways. 
(a)  In each instance in which any colony is situated within 25 feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep bees or to operate or maintain hives or colonies on any tract within 300 feet of a municipal public playground or a building used exclusively as a regular public library or school. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-87. - Water. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available to the bees at all time during the year so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet watering bowls, bird baths or other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet contact. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-88. - Queens. 
    All colonies shall be maintained with marked queens. In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition toward swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly requeen the colony with another marked queen. Queens shall be selected from European stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-89. - Colony densities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies on any tract within the city, based upon the size or configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated: 
(1)  One-quarter acre or less tract size-Two colonies. 
(2)  More than one-quarter acre but less than one-half acre size-Four colonies. 
(b)  For each two colonies authorized under subsection (a), there may be maintained upon the same tract one nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one (1) standard nine and five-eighths-inch depth ten-frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for management of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within 30 days after the date is acquired. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-90. - Marking hives, presumption of beekeeping. 
(a)  In apiaries the beekeeper shall conspicuously post a sign setting forth his name and telephone number. In addition, the beekeeper's registration yard marker, provided by the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry, shall be posed on a sign within the apiary. 
(b)  Unless marked in accordance with subsection (a), it shall be presumed for purposes of this article that the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise have the present right of possession and control of the tract upon which a hive or hives are situated. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-91. - Inspection. 
    The city inspector shall have the right to inspect any apiary. Where practicable, prior notice shall be give to the beekeeper if he resides at the apiary or if his name is marked on the hives. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 5-92. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $200.00 or not more than 30 days in jail, or both, at the discretion of the judge. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty set forth in subsection (a), upon conviction, the judge shall order the destruction and/or removal of the bees, hives and/or colonies from the city, the beekeeper to bear all costs and expenses of said destruction and/or removal. 
(Ord. No. 218, 6-14-05) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fair housing, § 8-16 et seq.; defacing buildings, § 9-76; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- State construction code, R.S. 33:1720.21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Building inspector-Office established; appointment; term of office; removal; absence or disability. 
(a)  The office of the building inspector is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building inspector. 
(b)  The building inspector shall be appointed by the mayor and board of selectmen. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be moved from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific charges. 
(c)  During temporary absence or disability of the building inspector the appointing authority shall designate an acting building inspector. 
(Code 1967, § 5-4) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and structures. 
(Code 1967, § 5-5) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same-Right of entry. 
    The building inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1967, § 5-6) 
Secs. 6-4-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-16. - State uniform construction code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the constructions, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, the state uniform construction code as set forth in R.S. 40:1728. 
(Code 1967, § 5-1; Ord. No. 116, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 228, 3-14-06) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt building code by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq.; state construction code, R.S. 33:1720.21 et seq. 
Sec. 6-16.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 230, adopted March 14, 2006, repealed § 6-16.1, which pertained to the adoption of the National Fire Prevention Code and was derived from Ord. No. 117, adopted Feb. 9, 1999. 
Sec. 6-17. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the City of Plaquemine. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the City of Plaquemine. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-18. - Fees. 
    Permit and inspection fees under the National Building Code shall be as presently prescribed or as hereafter prescribed from time to time by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Code 1967, § 5-3) 
Sec. 6-19. - Fire limits established. 
    The fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows: From Seminary Street on the east to Federal and Ferdinand Streets on the west; from Bayou Plaquemine on the north to Haase Street on the south. 
(Code 1967, § 5-7) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish fire limits, R.S. 33:4741. 
Sec. 6-20. - Deposit required with demolition permit. 
(a)  Any owner, person, contractor, corporation, partnership, or any other entity which has acquired a demolition permit from the city, through the city inspector, is required to deposit with the city inspector the sum of $500.00 prior to the commencement of any demolition work. Upon inspection and approval by the city inspector and selectmen for the district, that the demolition is complete and the property is cleaned and cleared, the city inspector is authorized to return the deposit of $500.00 to the owner, person, contractor, corporation, partnership, or any other entity. 
(b)  The owner, person, contractor, corporation, partnership, or any other entity shall perform the demolition work within 30 days from receipt of the demolition permit. 
(Ord. No. 002, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 131, 9-29-99) 
Sec. 6-20.1. - Permits. 
(a)  A permit shall be obtained before any work is started. 
(b)  A permit shall be obtained for alterations, additions or change out of a major component of any original installation. Alterations and additions shall include any change in involving an extension to the system, a change in the arrangement, type or purpose of the original installation, a change in size or any relocation. 
(c)  All applications shall be made on forms supplied by the city inspector's office and shall contain all information requested thereon. 
(d)  A copy of plans and/or specifications shall be attached to the permit application, unless specifically waived by the city inspector. 
(e)  A permit shall not be issued to anyone other than persons designated by the owner or owner of a firm. 
(f)  A permit issued shall be construed to be only a license to proceed with the work and shall not be interpreted as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this Code, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the city inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans and/or specifications or construction or of violations of this code. Any permit issued shall become invalid if work is terminated for a period of six months. An extension of up to 90 days may be granted by the city inspector where circumstances warrant. 
(g)  Failure to effect substantial completion of the work within the time permitted under the permit shall result in penalties as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 241, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 6-20.2. - Garbage disposal dumpster required. 
    All construction waste must be hauled off. Burning of construction waste is prohibited. During construction and/or substantial exterior renovation, the owner shall, at the owner's expense, have a garbage disposal dumpster located on the lot, parcel and/or structure for the deposit of refuse during the construction and/or substantial exterior renovation of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 249, 7-10-07) 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS FOR CONVENIENCE STORES FOR ROBBERY DETERRENCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 065, adopted Aug. 23, 1994, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 6-21-6-26. In order to provide for better classification and to facilitate the indexing, reference and use of their new material, the editor has designated §§ 6-21-6-26 as a new Art. II, Div. 2. 

Sec. 6-21. - Title. 
    The following sections of the Plaquemine Code of Ordinances, comprising sections 6-21 through 6-26, may be known as the "Standards for Convenience Stores for Robbery Deterrence." 
(Ord. No. 065, 8-23-94) 
Sec. 6-22. - Definitions. 
    As used in sections 6-21 through 6-26, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Convenience store shall mean a commercial enterprise or business establishment which is: 
(1)  Engaged in the retail sale of goods, merchandise, or other articles of value, including, but not limited to, prepared and/or prepacked foods and beverages; 
(2)  If at any time during the day or night such store is attended by no more than two employees; and 
(3)  Less than 4,000 square feet in size. 
    Owner or principal operator shall mean the individual(s), corporation, partnership or joint venture or other group enterprise having possession of the premises upon which the convenience store is operated. 
    Employee shall mean a person who works on the premises of the convenient store and engages in the retail sale of goods, merchandise, services or other articles of value and has access to the cash register, whether or not that person is also the owner. 
    Department shall mean the Plaquemine Police Department. 
    Parking lot shall mean the property provided by the convenience store for employee or customer parking for transaction of business. 
    Sales transaction area shall mean any area in which retail employees are actively engaged in the retail sale of groceries or gasoline in exchange for payment. 
    Sheriff's office shall mean the Iberville Parish Sheriff's Office. 
(Ord. No. 065, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 134, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 6-23. - Security measures at convenience stores. 
(a)  All convenience stores shall be equipped with the following security devices during any period of time that the establishment is open for business to the general public: 
(1)  A time-delay safe or other cash containment receptacle that is bolted to or recessed in the floor, installed in the wall or counter, or weighing at least 500 pounds, that is equipped with a drop slot or other means for depositing currency, checks, coins and the like directly into the body of the safe and which limits employee access to surplus cash receipts; 
(2)  A conspicuous notice at all doors which are used for purposes of ingress and egress which states that the cash register contains $50.00 or less and that the safe on the premises is not accessible to employees on duty; 
(3)  Conspicuous height markers affixed to the vertical frame of all doors that are used for purposes of ingress and egress, which provide clear measurement markings at the half-foot and foot level, measured from the floor, for use in assisting suspect identification; 
(4)  Sufficient exterior lighting to illuminate the entire principal parking area and walkways, including the front of the store, restroom, and all points of ingress and egress regularly used by customers and employees, so as to permit clear visibility of objects and individuals in said areas; 
(5)  If a line of sight exists, it shall not be obstructed by window signage, window tinting and interior lighting so as to permit a clear, unobstructed view of the cash register and transaction area from inside or outside the building and the adjoining street; 
(6)  A 35mm security camera system or its photographic equivalent capable of creating an image equal to that of a 35mm camera that records and is capable under normal lighting and operating conditions of producing a reasonable photographic image on film or tape of persons at or near the sales transaction area. The camera system shall be: 
a.  Positioned to provide photographic coverage of all register locations in use and to minimize tampering by customers, employees or criminal offenders; 
b.  Maintained on a routine basis not to exceed every six months to ensure that the camera system contains a full roll of film or sufficient tape and is working properly at all times; verification of such maintenance, including test photographs produced when the system is installed or maintained, retained on the premises and made available for periodic inspection by the department or sheriff's office during all hours in which the convenience store is open; 
i.  Defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this subsection by failing to have in operation a security camera system or its photographic equivalent that a representative of the convenience store, upon acquiring knowledge or good reason to believe that its security camera system or its photographic equivalent is not working and/or operating, reports that fact or belief in writing to the police department. 
ii.  Time to repair. It shall be the duty and obligation of the convenience store to repair, replace and/or put back in operation its security camera system or its photographic equivalent within 24 hours of it reporting to the police department as set forth in subsection (a)(6)b.i. above. 
c.  Capable of continuous operation or activation by a remote triggering device such as a concealed button or bait clip, which will then automatically take a series of at least 24 photographs; and 
d.  Capable under normal lighting and operating conditions of recording and producing a recognizable color, retrievable, enlargeable and reproducible photographic image on file or tape of persons at or near the sales transaction area. Such photographic image shall be of sufficient clarity to provide for suspect identification in a departmental of sheriff's office investigation or criminal proceeding. 
(b)  The requirements set forth in this section shall not apply to operations which conduct their business exclusively by means of a pass-through device with U.L. level II bullet-resistant enclosures, as long as the store does not experience an armed robbery. If such a robbery occurs the business shall install a camera as required by this section within 30 days of the robbery. 
(c)  All convenience stores shall install security cameras of a type and number approved by the department or the sheriff's office, no later than March 1, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 065, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 083, 12-12-95) 
Sec. 6-24. - Robbery deterrence training. 
(a)  All owners or principal operators of convenience stores shall conduct, provide or cause to be conducted an employee safety and robbery deterrence training program recommended by the department or sheriff's office, which all employees must attend within the first 90 days of their employment. Said training program shall include the following subjects: 
(1)  Definition of the crime of robbery as distinguished from other forms of retail theft, fraud, or shoplifting; 
(2)  Robbery and personal assault deterrence measures, including, but not limited to, cash management and use and operation of store security devices; 
(3)  Conduct in the event of a robbery; including, but not limited to, suspect identification techniques; 
(4)  Postrobbery procedures, including, but not limited to, emergency notification; and 
(5)  Employee violence avoidance. 
(b)  Documentation verifying that each employee at the convenience store has received the required training shall be maintained and made available for inspection by the department or sheriff's office upon demand. Such documentation shall include: 
(1)  The name of the employee; 
(2)  The date of the employee's first date of employment; and 
(3)  The date of the most recent training class attended by the employee. 
(c)  Employees who have received robbery deterrence training within one year preceding the enactment of these standards are exempt from repetitive training. 
(Ord. No. 065, 8-23-94) 
Sec. 6-25. - Penalties. 
    Any owner who fails to implement the requirements of these standards or who violates the requirements of sections 6-21 through 6-26 shall be required to pay the city a civil fine of up to $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 065, 8-23-94) 
Sec. 6-26. - Attorney's fees. 
    If suit is brought for injunctive relief on behalf of the city or department and the city or department prevails, then the city or department shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 065, 8-23-94) 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR BARS, TAVERNS, COCKTAIL LOUNGES, LOUNGES, AND CLUB ONLY FACILITIES 

Sec. 6-27. - Title. 
    The following sections of the Plaquemine Code of Ordinances, comprising sections 6-27 and 6-28, may be known as the "Standards for Bars, Taverns, Cocktail Lounges, Lounges, and Club Only Facilities." 
(Ord. No. 130, 9-29-99) 
Sec. 6-28. - Definitions. 
(a)  Restaurant and/or restaurant establishment shall be defined as an establishment. 
(1)  Which operates a place of business whose purpose and primary function is to take orders for and serve food and food items. 
(2)  Which may serve alcoholic beverages in conjunction with meals; 
(3)  Which serves food on all days of operation; 
(4)  Which maintains separate sales figures for alcoholic beverages; 
(5)  Which operates a fully equipped kitchen used for the preparation of uncooked foods for service and consumption of such foods on the premises; and 
(6)  Which grosses 60 percent of its average monthly revenue from the sale of food items, and nonalcoholic beverages. 
a.  For new restaurant establishments without prior business experience on which to determine the gross revenue from the sale of the items in paragraph (a)(6) of this section, the mayor and board of selectmen may issue temporary occupational license, which shall be valid for 60 days to allow the restaurant to make such determination. 
(b)  Bar , tavern , cocktail lounge , lounge and/or club only facility shall be defined as an establishment: 
(1)  Which operates a place of business whose purpose and primary function is to serve alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Which is equipped with a permanent wet bar with nonmovable sink and a back bar or similar equipment for public display and to inform the public of brands and flavors offered for sale; 
(3)  Which is staffed by a bartender whose primary duty is to open and/or prepare beverage alcohol products for consumption on the premises by paying customers, or prepared with an appropriate lid or cover on the container for take out service. 
(Ord. No. 130, 9-29-99) 
Sec. 6-29. - Standards. 
    Each separate bar, tavern, cocktail lounge, lounge, and club only facility shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  It must be a physically separate noncontiguous facility. 
(2)  It must have separate and independent beverage preparation areas. 
(3)  It must prepare, dispense and sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(4)  It must have a person whose primary duty is tending bar on duty while the lounge or facility is open for business and has a permanently affixed wet bar facility including plumbing and sinks. 
(5)  It must have an area of not less than 1,000 square feet. 
(6)  It must meet all state and local health and zoning requirements as set forth by the state, parish, and city. 
(7)  It must meet all state and local fire requirements as set forth by the state, parish, and city. 
(Ord. No. 130, 9-29-99) 
Sec. 6-30. - Permits, penalties. 
(a)  Prior to operation of a bar, tavern, cocktail lounge, lounge, and club only facility, the owner or lessee must obtain a permit from the city inspector. 
(1)  The permit fee shall be $500.00. 
(b)  Any owner or lessee who fails to implement the requirements of these standards or violates the requirements of these sections shall be required to pay the city a civil fine of up to $5,000.00. 
(c)  If suit is brought for injunctive relief on behalf of the city and the city prevails, then the city shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 130, 9-29-99) 
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code, R.S. 33:1720.21 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. Nos. 228 and 229, both adopted March 14, 2006, repealed § 6-31, which pertained to the adoption of the Standard Plumbing Code and was derived unamended from the original codification. 
Sec. 6-32. - Sewer connections. 
(a)  Every house shall be separately and independently connected with the city sewer, except in cases where there are two buildings on the same lot. In that case the sewer connection of the one may be connected with that of the other. Where several buildings adjoin each other, side owner or owners of same may connect all of them on their own responsibility to the street by special permission from the plumbing inspector. 
(b)  Before issuing a permit to any person to connect to the public sewer, a cash deposit of $25.00 shall be placed with the cashier of the city light and water plant to insure that all work shall be done in accordance with this Code, the deposit less fees to be returned after work has been finally approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(c)  No person in the plumbing business, or property owner shall cause, permit or make any connection to any soil, waste or water pipe or any pipe connected thereto, before the person so doing the work shall have first obtained a permit from the plumbing inspector to do same. The mere fact that said work has been done will be considered sufficient to hold and render the person in the plumbing business or property owner amenable to this section. 
(d)  All foul or waste or liquid refuse shall be carried into the sewer in each and every building connected with the sewerage system. This includes the discharge from all water closets, sinks, bathtubs, washstand, laundry tubs, dentists' and surgeons' sinks, and cuspidors and foul refuse from manufactories when small in amount. The mayor and board of selectmen reserves the right, however, to require other means of removal in cases where such manufacturing wastes should overload or damage the sewerage system in any way. 
(e)  All cesspools, vaults and earth closets shall be disinfected and filled up with earth or cinders well rammed, on all premises where water closets are connected to the sewer. 
(Code 1967, §§ 12-4-12-7) 
Cross reference- Sewerage system, § 21-26 et seq. 
Sec. 6-33. - House drains. 
(a)  When a house drain passes through a wall, it shall be separately and independently connected with the city sewer, except in cases where there are two buildings on the same lot. In that case the sewer connection of the one may be connected with that of the other. Where several buildings adjoin each other, the owners of same may connect all of them on their own responsibility in one sewer line across the rear of buildings or through an open space to the street by special permission from the plumbing inspector. 
(b)  Where two or more buildings have access to an open alley, they may be connected in one sewer line, where, in the judgment of the inspector conditions warrant the same being done. In such cases the pipe shall not be less than six inches in diameter. 
(Code 1967, § 12-17) 
Sec. 6-34. - Grade of house drains. 
    The house drain must in every part have a downward inclination toward the public sewer, of not less than one-quarter of an inch in one foot. The house sewer will, as far as possible have a depth of three and one-half feet to the top of the pipe where it crosses the property line, and must be provided with a full sized cleanout at or near the property line. 
(Code 1967, § 12-18) 
Sec. 6-35. - Laying of house sewers. 
    Where the soil is of a satisfactory character, that portion of the house sewer between the public sewer and a point located by plumbing inspector, the pipe which shall be PVC Johns Manville rubber pipe with rubber joint, must be laid with the hub and uphill, and filled with G-K Compound or equal; the joints shall be rubber joints. The house sewer shall be laid with perfect alignment and not less than 12 inches cover and deviation from a straight run shall be as hereinafter provided for. Where the house sewer passes through a closed covered alley (one or both ends closed by door or gate), or where it passes less than two feet from the foundation walls of any brick, concrete or stone building, pipe underground shall be extra heavy cast iron, and shall extend at least two feet outside of building before connection with the pipe, which shall be PVC Johns Manville rubber pipe with rubber joint. The pipe can be used under detached sheds in yards where such shed is open on one side. 
(Code 1967, § 12-19) 
Sec. 6-36. - Sewer to property line. 
(a)  In connecting to the city sewer, a six-inch line shall be laid to the property line, and a six-inch "Y" branch shall be laid just inside the property line. 
(b)  The "Y" branch cap shall be carefully removed so as not to injure the "Y." 
(c)  Under no condition shall anyone "cut-in" to the public sewer but all connections shall be made through a "Y" left in the public sewer. 
(Code 1967, § 12-20) 
Sec. 6-37. - Soil pipes under buildings. 
    No drain or sewer shall pass under a building of brick, concrete or building other than residence, unless approved by the plumbing inspector. Where permitted at all it shall be of extra heavy cast-iron pipe. 
(Code 1967, § 12-21) 
Sec. 6-38. - Pipes defined. 
    That portion of the main drain extending from a point five feet outside the house line to the property line is defined as the house sewer. The house drain is defined as the horizontal pipe inside of building to which are connected soil and waste pipes. Soil pipe is defined as the pipe receiving the discharge from water closets. Waste pipes are defined as pipes receiving the discharge from any fixtures other than water closets. 
(Code 1967, § 12-22) 
Sec. 6-39. - Cast-iron pipes, where used. 
    Where the ground in which the house sewer is laid is of such a nature as to endanger any considerable or harmful settlement, the plumbing inspector may require the use of extra heavy cast-iron pipe with properly caulked joints. Where the house sewer is exposed above the ground it shall be heavy cast-iron pipe. 
(Code 1967, § 12-23) 
Sec. 6-40. - Securing and caulking pipe. 
    The house drain may be run along foundation walls, or laid under lowest floor of building, and must in such cases be hung with iron hangers not less than one-eighth of an inch in thickness, fastened to the floor joists, or fastened to the wall with wrought-iron hooks or straps one-eighth of an inch in thickness, with screws or wrought nails one fastener or hanger for each length of cast-iron pipe, or if galvanized pipe every eight feet; and on vertical lines it shall be firmly supported on each floor, and at its base shall rest on a firm bed of brick or stone. When it is not possible to run or fasten the cast-iron pipe as above directed, terra cotta pipe may be run in a trench, cut to uniform grade. No wrought-iron pipe will be allowed underground for soil or drainage. All joints in cast-iron pipe shall be filled with oakum and one inch of lead, hand-caulked as to make them gas and watertight, no joints to be painted until inspected. 
(Code 1967, § 12-24) 
Sec. 6-41. - Stacks and "Y's." 
(a)  All soil, waste and vent pipes must be as direct as possible, and connections to the vertical stacks shall be made with "Y's" and one-eighth bends or sanitary tees. Where stacks terminate in cellars, or in ground connections of vertical stacks with horizontal soil and waste pipes shall be made with one-eighth bends and "Y's" provided with cleanouts. 
(b)  Changes in direction of horizontal soil sewer and waste shall be made with "Y's" or one-eighth bends and "Y's" provided with cleanouts at ends. No one-quarter bends will be allowed except a long sweep bend (sample to be submitted and approved) with cleanouts not more than two feet above bend. Sanitary "T's" or crosses shall not be used on horizontal lines, except for vents. Double hubs are prohibited in all cast-iron soil and waste pipes, but may be used on vent pipes. 
(Code 1967, § 12-25) 
Sec. 6-42. - Cleanouts. 
    Cleanouts shall be easy of access in all cases where practical, and shall be placed at each change in direction of soil and waste lines, when more than one-eighth turn is made in the line; and in long lines of horizontal soil waste pipes or sewer, every 50 feet, and at the foot of all stacks, when over ten feet from a cleanout along a horizontal line. A cleanout "Y" shall be placed inside the lot line, and shall be not less than six inches in diameter. 
(Code 1967, § 12-26) 
Sec. 6-43. - Soil pipe. 
    Soil pipes shall never be less than four inches in diameter. If more than eight water closets discharge into it, the soil pipe must be five inches in diameter; and in buildings where more than 15 and up to 45 closets connect, it shall be six inches in diameter. 
(Code 1967, § 12-27) 
Sec. 6-44. - Size of stacks and number of fixtures. 
(a)  No stack shall be less than two inches in diameter, except the following to wit: Where two washstands are installed in a sanitary cross on one stack, the waste not over eight feet in length and the vent not over 15 feet in length; where a single washstand, the waste pipe of which is not more than 20 feet in length, with not more than one 45-degree bend in the pipe; or where any fixture has not more than eight feet of waste to the main house sewer or stack. In these cases they may be one and one-half inches in diameter. Traps and branch waste pipes shall not be less than the following sizes: 
(1)  Washstands: One-and-three-quarter-inch trap, one-and-one-half-inch waste, six feet and 12 feet of vent. Washstands, one-and-one-quarter-inch traps, one-and-one-quarter-inch waste, eight feet and 20 feet of vent. 
(2)  Kitchen sink: One-and-one-half-inch trap, one-and-one-half-inch waste, eight feet and 20 feet of vent. 
(3)  Pantry tubs: One-and-one-half-inch trap, one-and-one-half-inch waste, eight feet and 20 feet of vent. 
(4)  Urinals: One-and-one-half-inch trap, one-and-one-half-inch waste, eight feet and 20 feet of vent. 
(5)  One or two laundry tubs: One-and-one-half-inch trap, one-and-one-half-inch waste, eight feet and 20 feet of vent. 
(6)  Set of three laundry tubs: Two-inch trap, two-inch waste, eight feet and 20 feet of vent. 
(7)  Slop sinks: Two-inch trap, two-inch waste and vent. 
(8)  Slop sinks: Three-inch trap, three-inch waste and vent and two-inch revent. 
(b)  Wherever a stack exceeds the lengths specified in the above schedules, whether waste or vent, the entire stack and not a part must be of a size larger. 
(Code 1967, § 12-28) 
Sec. 6-45. - Number of fixtures allowed on vertical stacks. 
    The number of fixtures allowed on vertical stacks shall be: 
Size Number 4" 8 closets and twice as many lavatories, baths, urinals or small sinks 5" 15 closets and twice as many lavatories, baths, urinals or small sinks 6" 45 closets and twice as many lavatories, baths, urinals or small sinks 8" 200 closets and twice as many lavatories, baths, urinals or small sinks 11/2" 2 lavatories 2" 8 lavatories 21/2" 12 lavatories 3" 36 lavatories 4" 72 lavatories 2" 8 sinks, baths or urinals 21/2" 12 baths, sinks or urinals 3" 12 baths, sinks or urinals 4" 72 baths, sinks or urinals 2" 5 baths and lavatory combinations 21/2" 10 baths and lavatory combinations 3" 20 baths and lavatory combinations 3" 6 pedestal slop sinks 4" 12 pedestal slop sinks 5" 36 pedestal slop sinks  
(Code 1967, § 12-29) 
Sec. 6-46. - Stacks above roof. 
    All soil, waste and vent pipes, shall be carried undiminished in size, to a height of at least nine inches above the roof. Where there are ventilating skylights or dormer windows such pipes shall continue at least nine inches above the top of roofs of said skylights or dormer windows. There shall be no caps, cowls, ventilators nor return bends on the ends of the pipes above the roof. The mouth of all such pipes shall be kept wide open. Iron, brass or copper wire baskets will be permitted to keep out obstructions. Pipes opening within 15 feet of any window shall be carried up and continued above the roof or window. Where required to offset any stack to come within the limits of this section, all work must be done in attic, where practical. The top of any stack shall not terminate less than 24 inches from any wall. 
(Code 1967, § 12-30) 
Sec. 6-47. - Cast-iron pipes, size and weight. 
(a)  All cast-iron soil and waste pipes underground shall be extra heavy. Where the total height of a stack exceeds 40 feet, the 40 feet in height only can be standard; all in excess of 40 feet shall be extra heavy from the ground up to a point exceeding 40 feet. In buildings where the length of the stack is less than above stated, the aforesaid pipes may be standard, and standard fittings and shall extend nine inches through the roof, full size. 
(b)  All soil, waste and vent pipes shall be sound, free from holes, and of uniform thickness, and shall conform to the following weights and depths of hubs: 
Standard 
Size pipe Wt. per ft. Depth of hub Fittings Depth of hub 2"  31/2 lbs. 21/4" 2" 2"  3"  41/2 lbs. 21/2" 3" 21/4" 4"  61/4 lbs. 23/4" 4" 21/2" 5"  81/2 lbs. 3"  5" 23/4" 6" 101/2 lbs. 31/4" 6" 3"   
Extra heavy 
Size pipe Wt. per ft. Depth of hub Fittings Depth of hub 2"  51/2 lbs. 21/2" 2" 2"  3"  91/2 lbs. 21/2" 3" 21/4" 4" 13  lbs. 23/4" 4" 21/2" 5" 17  lbs. 3"  5" 23/4" 6" 331/2 lbs. 31/4" 6" 3"   
(Code 1967, § 12-31) 
Sec. 6-48. - Durham system. 
(a)  Where the Durham system is used for soil, waste or vent pipes, they shall be of standard or extra heavy thickness, lapwelded, galvanized wrought-iron or steel. None but regular recessed cast-iron fittings shall be used on soil and waste lines, but regular fittings may be used on vent lines. 
(b)  Cast-iron fittings need not be galvanized, but must be given a thorough coating of some good protective paint inside and outside. All pipes shall be well reamed and threaded so as to insure a close and tight joint. 
(c)  With the exception of conditions set forth above, the same rules which govern the installation of cast-iron pipe and fittings shall govern the installation of Durham system. 
(Code 1967, § 12-32) 
Sec. 6-49. - Venting fixtures. 
(a)  Where a fixture is located more than eight feet from one main vent, the vent from such fixture shall be carried through roof, full size or shall enter main stack at least one foot above highest fixture. No trap vent pipe shall be used as a soil or waste pipe. 
(b)  Soil, waste and vent pipes in an extension shall be extended nine inches above the cornice or roof of main building, when otherwise, they would open within 15 feet of the windows of the main house or the adjoining house. 
(c)  In no case shall the waste pipes from the bathtub, basin, tub, sink, urinal or other fixtures be connected with a water closet trap, bowl, flush pipe or lead bend, but must enter the line through a proper fitting. 
(Code 1967, § 12-33) 
Sec. 6-50. - Trapping of fixtures. 
    The waste pipe of every sink, basin, bath, water closet, urinal and each set of wash trays or other fixtures must be separately and effectually trapped and independently connected with the soil or waste lines, and the trap shall be near as practicable to the fixture which it serves. In no case shall a trap be more than two feet from the fixture, except where not more than three wash trays or washstands are set together; when same may have one-and-one-half-inch connections to trap at end of fixture, or where specially provided for in the rules. 
(Code 1967, § 12-34) 
Sec. 6-51. - Lead bends. 
    Lead bends for water closets shall not be less than four inches in diameter, nor less than six pounds in weight per lineal foot. 
(Code 1967, § 12-35) 
Sec. 6-52. - Connecting refrigerators. 
    The drain pipe for refrigerators shall not be directly connected with the soil or waste pipe, or with the drain or sewer. It shall discharge into an open pan, with air space between the pan and the refrigerator, this pan to be trapped and counter vented before entering a waste pipe. Waste from refrigerators in residences need not be connected to sewers as above specified, unless required by owner or agent of the property. 
(Code 1967, § 12-36) 
Sec. 6-53. - Bar counter sinks. 
    Sinks under bar counters, and in all such as pumps, refrigerators, etc.; in a bar, may be connected indirectly through a deep cast-iron sink with extra heavy cast-iron trap and waste, or to a catch basin properly trapped and vented, otherwise a slop sink properly trapped and vented must be installed not more than 35 feet from the bar sink. 
(Code 1967, § 12-37) 
Sec. 6-54. - Unused openings. 
    All openings left in soil, waste or vent pipes for any purpose and not used in finishing shall be securely caulked up with iron plugs. If lead pipe, the opening shall be wiped. Cement joints are prohibited inside of buildings. 
(Code 1967, § 12-38) 
Sec. 6-55. - Breaking in joints. 
(a)  Whenever it becomes necessary to remove part of the cast-iron soil or waste pipe to obtain an opening, or for other purposes and both ends are permanently fastened an insertable joint of approved pattern shall be used. 
(b)  No holes will be allowed to be cut in any cast-iron or wrought-iron pipe or sewer connection for any purpose that cannot be properly closed by plugs. Where it is necessary to open a pipe the pipe broken shall be removed and a cleanout put in, that it may be accessible for future use. 
(Code 1967, § 12-39) 
Sec. 6-56. - Waste pipe, size. 
    The waste pipe to receive the discharge from more than 12 sinks, baths, wash basins, wash tubs, urinals or similar fixtures, shall not be less than three inches in diameter. Waste pipes to receive the discharge from two to eight sinks, tubs or similar fixtures shall not be less than two inches in inside diameter, and lead branches not less than one and one-half inches, and not over six feet in length. 
(Code 1967, § 12-40) 
Sec. 6-57. - Traps, kind and sizes. 
(a)  No trap with trap screw will be allowed under floor. All small traps two inches or less must have trap screws. Four-inch iron traps shall have cleanouts securely caulked into the hub. Traps having deep water-seals not less than two inches, of common "P," "S" or drum pattern, shall be used. No further traps will be allowed unless first approved by the plumbing inspector. One-and-one-quarter-inch traps will be allowed for basins only, and escutcheons must be left loose until inspected. No trap screws shall be required on basin traps. 
(b)  Brass bushings will be used on nickel-plated traps only, and soldered nipples or brass concave bushings on lead traps. In either case bushings or nipples must be accessible to the outside. 
(Code 1967, § 12-41) 
Sec. 6-58. - Acids. 
    Where acids are used, a special permit may be obtained for the use of terra cotta pipe, where the work is not of sufficient permanency to permit the use of enameled iron or lead pipes. 
(Code 1967, § 12-42) 
Sec. 6-59. - Lead joints and ferrules. 
(a)  All connections of lead, soil, waste and vent pipes shall be made by means of wiped joints. All connections of lead with cast-iron pipes shall be made with heavy brass drawn or cast ferrule, of the same size as the lead pipe, put in the hub of the branch of the iron pipe and caulked with lead. The lead pipe shall be attached to the ferrule by a wiped joint. Connections of lead with wrought-iron pipe shall be made by means of brass soldering nipple screwed into the wrought-iron pipe and wiped on to the lead pipe. No solder unions shall be used except such as come with the fixtures, and no unions shall be used on screw pipe. 
(b)  Brass ferrules shall not be less than the following weights: 
(1)  Two-inch ferrules, four inches long, seven-eighths pound; 
(2)  Three-inch ferrules, four and one-quarter inches long, one and three-eighths pounds; 
(3)  Four-inch ferrules, four and one-half inches long, one and seven-eighths pounds; 
(Code 1967, § 12-43) 
Sec. 6-60. - Lead pipe, size and weight. 
(a)  All lead, soil, waste and vent pipes must be drawn, and of not less than the following weights per lineal foot: 
(1)  One and one-quarter inches, two and one-half pounds. 
(2)  One and one-half inches, three and one-half pounds. 
(3)  Two inches, five pounds. 
(4)  Three inches, five and eleven-sixteenths pounds. 
(5)  Four inches, six pounds. 
(b)  Where a lead waste or vent pipe passes through between the floors, ceiling or other places accessible to rats, such pipes must be encased with sheet tin, copper or galvanized iron. Where lead pipes are used for waste to vent pipes, they shall not be over six feet in length and shall be supported the entire length. 
(Code 1967, § 12-44) 
Sec. 6-61. - Venting and reventing. 
(a)  Each and every trap shall be installed on a continuous waste and vent. Lower fixtures shall be vented at least one foot above the height of the highest fixtures or independently through the roof, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Where two siphon jet washdown or hopper closets with "P" trap only are installed on a four-inch stack, and each is within three feet of the track, the lower closet need not be revented. 
(2)  Where three similar closets are installed, the lowest closet only need be revented. 
(3)  Where closets are to be revented, a fitting shall be inserted in the line as near the closet as practicable, and a two-inch revent taken from there to a point above the highest fixtures. 
(4)  Batteries of water closets shall be vented only by the circuit or loop vent system. 
(5)  Where the return or circuit vent is more than 16 feet apart, an intermediate four-inch vent shall be installed. 
(6)  Where there is a closet along a horizontal line with a closet above or beyond more than eight feet from the vertical stack and not over 16 feet, it shall be revented with a two-inch pipe, the closet shall be vented by a four-inch stack. 
(7)  Where one lavatory is installed near a bathtub and both traps are directly connected to a two-inch stack, the drum trap for the bathtub need not be revented. 
(8)  The center of one-and-one-quarter- and one-and-one-half-inch traps shall not be more than 24 inches from the stack; and of two-inch traps, 30 inches from the stack, unless revented. 
(b)  Crown-vented "S" traps may only be used on new work by special permission, and where the conditions justify it in the plumbing inspector's opinion. No-siphon traps of approved form may be permitted in special cases, where, in the opinion of the inspector, other form of ventilation is impossible. 
(c)  The size of branch vent pipes, except for water closets, which may be two inches, shall not be less than the trap which it serves. A pipe, not exceeding 25 feet in length which ventilates two water closets shall not be less than two inches, in diameter. If the length of the vent pipe exceeds 30 feet, the above diameter shall be increased one inch. If it ventilates more than two closets, it shall have a diameter of not less than three inches. 
(d)  No brick, sheet metal, earthenware, nor any chimney nor pipes placed in a chimney shall be used as a ventilator. 
(Code 1967, § 12-45) 
Sec. 6-62. - Height above roof. 
    Vent pipes shall extend at least nine inches through roof or the single or combined pipes may be connected at least one foot above the highest fixture with the main vertical vent pipe. They may be combined by branching together those which serve several traps, but the areas of the combined pipe shall not be decreased. These vent pipes shall always have a continuous slope upward to avoid collecting water by condensation, and shall return to the main stack below lowest fixture. Vent pipes must be run with as few bends as possible, when combined, vent pipes must be increased in size according to the following table: 
(1)  Two closets may be vented into a two-inch branch; 
(2)  Five water closets may be vented into a three-inch branch vent; 
(3)  Eight baths, basins or similar fixtures may be vented by a two-inch vertical pipe; 
(4)  Twelve closets by a four-inch vertical pipe; 
(5)  Two one-and-one-half-inch traps may be vented by one and one-half-inch pipe, and vent must not exceed 20 feet, and when fixture is not over eight feet from the main vent. When in excess of the above, vent pipes must be increased in size through roof, or enter main stack one foot above the highest fixture. 
(Code 1967, § 12-46) 
Sec. 6-63. - Buildings moved or burned. 
    Whenever a building has been moved to a new location or partially destroyed by fire or other cause, the tests, inspections and inspection fees required for same shall be the same as in the case of new work if so directed by the plumbing inspector. If preliminary inspection, however, shall show that all of such tests and inspections are not necessary, the plumbing inspector shall have the authority to prorate the inspection fees required, as in his judgment seems proper. 
(Code 1967, § 12-47) 
Sec. 6-64. - Fixtures; basis of calculation. 
    In calculation of the relations of basins, baths and similar fixtures toward water closets, it shall be reckoned that 12 basins, baths and similar fixtures shall be equal to one closet. 
(Code 1967, § 12-48) 
Sec. 6-65. - Branch vent. 
    The term "branch vent" applies to all vent pipes located between the fixtures and the point where the vent joins into the main vertical stack or vent, and no rubber connections will be permitted on waste or vent pipes. 
(Code 1967, § 12-49) 
Sec. 6-66. - Soil pipes above roofs. 
(a)  Soil pipes shall be carried full size and extended above roof, as provided in this article. 
(b)  All closets shall be of glazed earthenware, or of enameled iron inside and outside, or siphon jet, washdown, or short hopper, enameled inside only pattern, and supplied with water from special tanks or cisterns which shall hold not less than six gallons of water when up to the level of the overflow pipe, the water of which shall not be used for any other purposes. Where premises are connected with the sewerage system all water closets must be supplied with water of an approved water system. No pan, long hopper plunger, washout or any closet having a direct supply or having unventilated space or the walls of which are not flushed at each discharge shall be used. 
(c)  The minimum size of tanks for hopper closets shall be 17 inches by nine inches by nine inches and shall hold not less than five gallons of water. 
(d)  All hopper closets to have "P" traps, no "S" traps allowed. 
(Code 1967, § 12-50) 
Sec. 6-67. - Brass flanges. 
    All water closets having traps above the floor, using lead connections, must have a brass flange not less than three-sixteenths inch thick, soldered to the lead and bolted to the trap of the closet, the joint being made perfectly tight with a rubber gasket or white lead putty or an approved form of combination iron or brass bend and floor flange may be used. 
(Code 1967, § 12-51) 
Sec. 6-68. - Vent pipes. 
    Vent pipes from all earthenware closets having traps above the floor shall be taken from a point as near the fixtures as possible. 
(Code 1967, § 12-52) 
Sec. 6-69. - Unventilated rooms. 
    Water closets will not be permitted in an unventilated room or compartment, nor enclosed in wooden casings. 
(Code 1967, § 12-53) 
Sec. 6-70. - Strainers. 
    All waste pipes from fixtures, other than water closets, must be provided at the inlet with strong metallic strainers to exclude from such waste pipes all substances likely to obstruct them. 
(Code 1967, § 12-54) 
Sec. 6-71. - Grease traps. 
(a)  Grease traps shall be used in hotels, restaurants and places where a large amount of cooking is done. If practicable they shall be placed in the ground, and they shall be of sufficient size properly covered, wrapped and vented. When placed in the ground they shall be constructed of concrete or brick laid in cement mortar. When grease traps are located more than eight feet from a fixture, said fixture shall be separately trapped and vented. A two-inch vent may be used for grease traps when they are not over eight feet from the main line, otherwise a three-inch revent must be used. 
(b)  For design see drawing on file in the office of the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1967, § 12-55) 
Sec. 6-72. - Roof flashings or flanges. 
    The termination of all vents passing through the roof shall be carefully flashed with sheet lead weighing two and one-half pounds to the square foot, or with copper. The sleeve of flashing shall be sufficiently long so as to be turned over into top and of vent pipe. When hub of pipe on roof, the sleeves of flashing shall be made to fit outside of hub and top of sleeve turned over into hub and extension piece of one foot caulked in as before prescribed for pipe joints. 
(Code 1967, § 12-56) 
Sec. 6-73. - Separate provisions for sexes and color. 
    In schools, factories and other places where there is a large number of persons there shall be at least one closet to each 20 persons, also one sink or washstand adjoining toilet room accessible to all using the closet with separate provision where both sexes occupy building, and proper proportion must be made for them as to color and sex. 
(Code 1967, § 12-57) 
Sec. 6-74. - Water pipes and shut-off. 
    Each and every water closet and urinal shall have a separate shutoff located near the fixture. 
(Code 1967, § 12-58) 
Sec. 6-75. - Stop cock. 
(a)  There shall be a stop and waste cock, attached to every supply pipe at a point close to where it leaves the ground and sufficiently low and conveniently located that the water may be readily cut off at any time to admit of pipes being drained. 
(b)  Stop cocks, valves, bibs and other appurtenances must be sufficiently strong to resist the pressure and ram of water and all work shall be done in a thorough and substantial manner, with pipes laid so as to admit of their being drained through the stop and waste cocks. 
(c)  Where attic or roof tanks feed directly from the service pipes and are used to supply fixtures, such tanks shall be equipped with substantial ball cocks of approved pattern. 
(Code 1967, § 12-59) 
Sec. 6-76. - Fixtures installed below street levels. 
    No water closet or other fixtures shall be installed in any basement, cellar or area the top of which closet or fixture is below the level of the natural grade in the streets abutting said property; provided however, a permit will be issued conditioned that the owner or owners take all risk of damages that may result from water setting back into the premises from the main sewers; and in order to prevent as much as possible the setting back of water, the owner is hereby required at his own risk and cost, to put in a self-acting or other valve in all cases where the back flow from the sewer is to be apprehended, and it shall be the duty of the owner to keep said valve in order, and he shall be responsible for its action in all cases. This valve must be arranged so as to not interfere with the operation of the plumbing system above the street level. 
(Code 1967, § 12-60) 
Sec. 6-77. - Ejector ventilated. 
    The soil or waste pipe leading from an ejector or other appliance for raising sewage or other waste matters to the street sewer shall, where a water closet or water closets are installed, be ventilated by a vent pipe not less than four inches in diameter. When fixtures other than water closets are installed the waste pipe shall be ventilated by a vent pipe of the same diameter as the waste pipe. Soil vents, vents and revents for ejector systems shall be installed according to the provisions of this chapter governing soil waste, vent or revent pipes. The pump into which the above wastes discharge shall be approved size to accommodate the discharge of all wastes entering same and shall be constructed with a cast iron receiving tank, with airtight iron cover. Where ejectors are being installed in buildings where the gravity system of sewerage is also in use, the two systems must be separately and independently ventilated as prescribed in this chapter for soil, vent and waste pipes. 
(Code 1967, § 12-61) 
Sec. 6-78. - Water service connections. 
(a)  All service pipes shall be round and uniform of galvanized iron, lead or copper, free from cracks, seams, slivers, scales grooves, scratches or other defects and shall extend from the main to the property line and in all cases well beyond the curbline and shall have a stop cock located between the property line and the main as near as possible to the property line. 
(b)  Pipe shall be of drawn or annealed seamless tubing 99.99 percent pure, completely deoxidized. Purity shall be determined by electrolytic analysis, silver counting as copper. It shall have a minimum tensile strength of 30,000 pounds per square inch with an elongation of 25 percent in four inches. Each tube shall withstand without showing weakness or defects an internal hydrostatic pressure sufficient to subject the material to a fiber stress of 6,000 pounds per square inch, determined by the following formula and experiments of the "Copper and Brass Research Association." 
STANDARD WEIGHTS AND DIMENSIONS OF LEAD WATER SERVICE PIPE REQUIRED BY THE CODE 
Size inside 
Diameter inches Weight pounds 
per ft. 1/2 2.0 5/82.75  3/4 3.5  
_____ B = PD WHERE 
2t  
S-Allowable unit stress in pounds per square inch (6,000). 
P-Pressure per square inch. 
D-Internal diameter in inches. 
t-Thickness of walls in inches. 
STANDARD WEIGHTS AND DIMENSIONS FOR COPPER TUBING 
REQUIRED BY THIS CODE 
L.S.P. 
Nominal 
Size 
inches O.D. 
inches Tolerance 
Plus or 
Minus 
inches Thickness 
of Walls 
B.W.G. Thickness 
of Walls 
inches Tolerance 
Plus or 
Minus Weight 
Pounds 
per Ft. Tolerance 
Plus or 
Minus Test 
Pressure 
Pounds 
Sq. Inch 1/2  .625 .0025 18 .049 .0025  .343 5% 1140 3/4  .875 .003  16 .065 .003   .640 5% 1040 1 1.125 .003  16 .065 .003   .838 5%  780 11/4 1.375 .0035 16 .065 .003  1.04  5%  630 11/2 1.625 .004  15 .072 .0035 1.36  5%  580 2 2.125 .005  14 .083 .004  2.06  5%  520  
(c)  All fittings shall be brass of the compressive flange or ring type, free from flaws or other imperfections and shall be made of good tough new metal of at least 83 percent copper qualitative analysis. They shall be able to withstand a hydraulic pressure of 200 pounds. 
(d)  Lead pipe shall be of weight and quality known as extra strong as reflected by the following table and specifications. All joints shall be of the wiped or flange variety. The material used in manufacturing the lead pipe shall have a tensile strength not less than 2,200 pounds per square inch and an elastic limit not less than 1,00) pounds per square inch. The allowable unit working stress shall be one-fourth the elastic limit or 250 pounds per square inch. The weight of lead shall be considered .4106 pounds per cubic inch. 
1\4.75 
11/4\6.00 
11/2\7.5 
13/4\8.5 
2\9.00 
(e)  No one except a person employed by the town shall under any circumstances, tap the mains of said town, run the service pipe from the main to the property line and install the stop cock at main. 
(f)  All service connections shall be installed subject to inspection by the plumbing inspector and covered by permit. 
(g)  Whenever there is new construction of a residence or house, the residence or house shall be required to construct and install a cutoff valve as close to the residence as possible. The valve installed on the new residence, house and/or property shall be governed by ANSI-ASSE 1018-1986 Standards. All existing houses which are determined to be in need of repair by the city inspector, such repairs required to protect the safety and health of the city, shall be required to install a cutoff valve at least two feet from the city water meter. All water service pipes and/or lines, for domestic use, shall not be greater than three-quarter-inch, unless otherwise authorized by mayor and director of utilities. 
(Code 1967, § 12-62; Ord. No. 063, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 124, 8-24-99) 
Sec. 6-79. - Water meters leveled prior to final inspection. 
    The water meter for any new construction connected to the city's water service shall be leveled prior to final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 183, 4-8-2003) 
Secs. 6-80-6-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 6-86. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do plumbing work in the city, other than a plumber licensed under the laws of the state, and who shall have first obtained a license from the city. If a firm or corporation desires to do plumbing work it must have an employee or employees licensed as above stated. The fee for the original license of the city for the trade of plumbing and the fee for out-of-town applicants for a temporary license shall be as set by the city from time to time. 
(b)  All persons to do plumbing work shall first appear at the office of the inspector and obtain a sewer and water permit. Said applicant will pay the fees and will conform to the rules and regulations of the city as to sewerage and water connections. 
(Code 1967, § 12-1; Amend. of 5-23-89) 
Sec. 6-87. - Application. 
    Notice in writing, upon blanks furnished at the office of the plumbing inspector, properly filled out, stating clearly the location and kind of work, the name of firm, shall be given to the inspector at his office by the contractor, builder or plumber, in all cases of new work, the remodeling of old work or in any and all cases in which repairs involve the removal of fixtures. 
(Code 1967, § 12-2) 
Sec. 6-88. - Special permit. 
    Where additional fixtures are required, or alterations are to be made, which cannot be practically constructed in accordance with all provisions of this article, a special permit, in writing, may be issued by the plumbing inspector for such work, if, in his judgment, the conditions require it. Such additions or alterations shall be of a character that will make the plumbing system in the building as a whole conform to the spirit of the sanitary requirement rules. 
(Code 1967, § 12-3) 
Sec. 6-89. - Permit, inspection fees. 
(a)  Permits. All fees must be paid prior to the issuance of any permit. A double fee shall be assessed if permit is not obtained prior to starting work. Such permit and inspection fees shall be as set by the city from time to time. 
(1)  Reasons for rejections: 
a.  Failure to meet code requirements. 
b.  No municipal number or subcontractors identifying sign. 
c.  Lockouts. 
d.  Failure to call for an inspection upon completion of job. 
e.  Failure to correct rejections within ten working days of a rejection date. 
(b)  Minimum inspection fees. Where gas piping or gas fixtures are installed independently of other plumbing work or by a different contractor, there shall be a minimum inspection fee. Any vented gas fixtures which are installed must be inspected regardless of whether the gas piping has been previously inspected and passed or not, and there shall be a minimum inspection fee. 
(Ord. No. 1070, 2-14-89) 
Editor's note- The fees referenced above are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 6-90-6-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 6-96. - Inspector's decision; appeal. 
    The plumbing inspector is to be judge of the quality of the material and workmanship, and the construing of the provisions of this article as to their meaning. Should any difference of opinion arise, appeal as to his decision must be made at once, in writing to the mayor and board of selectmen, stating full particulars of disputed points clearly; otherwise, his judgment will govern. 
(Code 1967, § 12-11) 
Sec. 6-97. - Qualifications of workmen. 
    All plumbing work shall be done by competent workmen for each particular class of work and the plumbing inspector may stop any workman from doing any class of work in which he is found to be incompetent. 
(Code 1967, § 12-10) 
Sec. 6-98. - Condemned plumbing. 
    Whenever any plumbing fixtures in any building are condemned by the plumbing inspector on account of their foul, unwholesome, imperfect or unsanitary condition, they shall be replaced by such apparatus as is required by this article. 
(Code 1967, § 12-9) 
Sec. 6-99. - Rough-in certificate; final inspection certificate. 
    The plumber may obtain a certificate of sewer connection and "rough-in" certificate when the water test is completed. He must, within ten days after the setting of the fixtures, obtain from the plumbing inspector a final inspection certificate, stating that such work has been inspected and that it conforms to the regulations governing same. Failure on the part of a plumber to observe this rule will preclude his obtaining any further permits to do work. 
(Code 1967, § 12-12) 
Sec. 6-100. - Notification of inspection. 
    The plumbing inspector must be notified when the work is begun and when the work is roughed in and is ready for inspection. All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. Notice of final inspection shall not be sent until the work is entirely ready for thorough inspection. 
(Code 1967, § 12-13) 
Sec. 6-101. - Time for inspection; certificate of approval; reinspection, fee. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work the plumber shall so advise the plumbing inspector, who shall, within one-half working day, inspect the work. Should the work meet the requirements of this article as to both design and workmanship, the inspector shall furnish to the plumber a certificate of approval. 
(b)  In the event the work does not meet the requirements of this article in every way, the work shall be disapproved. Upon correction of defects the plumber shall apply for a reinspection for which there shall be an additional charge of $2.00 for each reinspection. The inspector may, at his option waive the reinspection charge if in his opinion the plumber has been conscientious in his work. 
(Code 1967, § 12-14) 
Sec. 6-102. - Testing work. 
(a)  In buildings over one story in height plumbing work must be tested by the water test in the presence of the plumbing inspector; the test shall include all sewer, soil, waste and vent pipes, lead branches, ferrules and traps, when under floor, and hopper traps above floor. In buildings over eight stories in height, the inspector may allow the work to be tested in sections, shall it be deemed advisable, provided no section less than three stories be tested at one time. Terra cotta pipe may be tested by passing through them a ball one-half inch less in diameter than the diameter of the pipe. No plumbing work shall be operated until these tests have been made and certificates issued. 
(b)  The plumber may turn on the water after the connection is competed to test out his work, but must leave the stop cock closed when he has finished his work, unless specially authorized in writing to leave it turned on by the plumbing inspector. 
(c)  When the work is complete a peppermint test satisfactory to the plumbing inspector may be made. This test to be made within five days after the setting of fixtures. 
(Code 1967, § 12-15) 
Sec. 6-103. - Fees. 
    A fee of $2.25 for each connection shall be withheld by the plumbing inspector when deposit is returned, which fee shall cover roughing in and final inspections during the progress and upon completion of the work. All other inspections shall be paid for at $2.00 per inspection and shall also be deducted from the deposit. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16) 
Secs. 6-104-6-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code, R.S. 33:1720.21 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-115. - Adoption of National Fuel Gas Code. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2006 edition of the National Fuel Gas Code, which shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 229, 3-14-06) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt building code by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq.; State construction code, R.S. 33:1720.21 et seq. 
Sec. 6-116. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Coated and wrapped pipe is iron or steel pipe which has been thoroughly cleaned, painted with asphalt, or pitch and wrapped with burlap, asbestos felt or other suitable protective covering. 
    House piping is the gas pipe from the gas meter outlet to the gas burning appliance or appliances. 
    Service line is the gas pipe from the town's main to the meter location. 
(Code 1967, § 8-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-117. - Interference with gas system. 
    No one except the city shall at any time turn on any valve or cock or in any way tamper or make any connection with any gas main, meter, meter connection or gas service pipe between the main and the meter. User however, may turn off gas by main jet valve in case of emergency. 
(Code 1967, § 8-2) 
Sec. 6-118. - Property owner's responsibility. 
    No property owner shall cause, or permit, any installation, construction, reconstruction or repair of any gas house piping in the city and its gas service territory before the person so doing the work shall have first obtained a permit from the gas inspector to do same; and the mere fact that the work has been done will be considered sufficient to hold and render the property owner amenable to this rule. 
(Code 1967, § 8-9) 
Sec. 6-119. - Only approved appliances to be installed. 
(a)  All gas appliances shall be of a design and construction approved as to safety by the American Gas Association, except such apparatus as said association does not accept for test and approval, and such apparatus not so accepted must be of a design and construction set forth in specifications of the Bureau of Standards of the United States Department of Commerce. 
(b)  All gas burning appliances shall be provided with a lever handle stop cock located in the riser above the floor and below the union at the appliance. 
(c)  In all buildings used for commercial purposes, the connections to gas burning appliances shall be of rigid metal. In private residences portable heating appliances may be connected with flexible tubing not over six feet in length and approved by the American Gas Association, provided there is no cock on the portable heating appliance. 
(d)  No gas burning appliance or any portion thereof coming in direct contact with gas flames or hot gas shall be placed less than ten inches from any woodwork or wooden lath and plaster partition, unless metal shields are provided, securely attached and so placed as to preserve an air space of not less than one inch between such shield and partitions. Where such shields are provided the ten-inch clearance above specified may be reduced to six inches. 
(Code 1967, § 8-11) 
Sec. 6-120. - Materials. 
(a)  All gas house piping shall be of best quality wrought iron, black or galvanized steel, copper or brass, free from all defects. The use of secondhand or reconditioned pipe is forbidden. 
(b)  Such part of said pipe as is laid under or upon the surface of the ground shall be galvanized or coated and wrapped, as the term coated and wrapped is herein defined. Such part of said pipe as is laid in or touching any material corroding or tending to corrode, iron or steel pipe, such as cinders, cinder concrete, etc., shall be coated and wrapped. 
(c)  Stops and house cocks on gas house piping shall be ground key type with lever handle. 
(d)  Gas fittings for piping three inches in diameter or smaller shall be galvanized or black malleable iron, copper or brass, but cast iron fittings are permitted for piping for a diameter greater than three inches. 
(e)  On concealed piping no bushings, unions or running threads are to be used, but faced bushings are permitted on exposed piping. When piping is cut for repairs, it shall be reconnected with right and left threaded couplings. Three-way valves and the use of cement for repairing the pipe and fittings are forbidden. 
(Code 1967, § 8-12) 
Sec. 6-121. - Size and length of pipe. 
(a)  The following rules shall govern the size and length of runs of pipe to be used in piping buildings and structures; minimum diameter of supply line from meter to kitchen in houses and flats and apartments of: 
(1)  Less than six rooms, in inches; 
(2)  Six to nine rooms, one and one-half inches; 
(3)  Nine to 12 rooms, one inch; 
(4)  For houses containing 12 rooms and more, or where conditions are unusual, consult the inspector. 
(b)  The diameter of branch supply pipes to all cooking ranges, stoves and water heaters (circulating, instantaneous, storage and automatic) shall be one commercial size larger than the inlet connection of the appliance served thereby. 
(c)  No piping laid underground shall be less than one inch in diameter and all such underground piping shall be drained to an accessible siphon drip. 
(d)  Pipe serving hot air furnaces, boilers and gas burning appliances using burners having two or three air mixers shall be not less than one and one-half inches in diameter, larger installations to be based on the same ratio. 
(e)  Greater length of pipe of various sizes allowed for gas house piping. 
_____No. of 1/2" 
Openings _____1/2" 3/4" 1" 11/4" 11/2" 2" _____1 20 60 100 150 200 300 2 10 50 80 150 200 300 3 - 40 70 150 200 300 4 - 30 60 120 200 300 5 - - 50 100 170 300 7 - - 40 90 140 300 9 - - 30 70 120 275 11  - - - 50 100 250 15  - - - 30 70 225 20  - - - - 50 190  
(f)  In applying the foregoing table the following rules shall prevail: 
(1)  One radiant heater outlet equals one half-inch opening; 
(2)  One gas log or other grate fire equals one half-inch opening; 
(3)  One kitchen range equals two half-inch openings; 
(4)  One gas water heater equals one half-inch opening, unless larger than half-inch opening is required for heater; 
(5)  One three-quarter-inch outlet shall be considered as equivalent to three one-half-inch outlets and a one-inch outlet as equivalent to five one-half-inch outlets. 
(g)  All gas piping must be reamed free of burrs. 
(h)  When extensions to house piping are made, the provisions hereof providing greatest length of pipe or various sizes allowed must be complied with. 
(i)  Gas must not be supplied from a smaller pipe to a larger pipe. 
(j)  All branch outlet pipes shall be taken from the top or sides of main supply lines and never from below. 
(Code 1967, § 8-13) 
Sec. 6-122. - Drips and supports. 
(a)  All house piping shall be graded to a drip located in an accessible place. Where possible house piping will be drained away from meter and the drip placed at the far end of the main supply line. Otherwise drip will be placed at meter location and pipe graded to same. The diameter of drips shall be not less than that of the pipe to which attached and of a length at least six times said diameter. No drip less than four inches long shall be installed. 
(b)  All house piping shall be secured and fastened to floor joints or sills either with galvanized pipe straps or pipe hooks or with perforated pipe straps. 
(c)  The maximum spacing of supports for piping shall be: 
(1)  1/2-inch pipe ..... 6 feet 
(2)  3/4-inch or 1-inch pipe ..... 8 feet 
(3)  11/2-inch or larger pipe (horizontal) ..... 10 feet 
(4)  1-inch or larger pipe (vertical) each floor joist. 
(d)  When it is necessary in running pipe to cross through wood joists or beams, such joists or beams shall never be notched more than one-fifth of the depth of the timber and such notching shall be in no case further from the point of support of the timber than one-sixth of the total unsupported span thereof. Whenever possible, the piping should run so that only timbers having the shortest spans shall be cut. 
(Code 1967, § 8-14) 
Sec. 6-123. - Flues, vents and regulators. 
(a)  When more than one gas burning appliance is connected with the same flue, the diameter of such flue must be at least equal of the combined diameter of the vent outlets of such appliances. No more than three appliances shall be connected to the same flue. 
(b)  Gas furnaces and gas fire water heaters must be provided with vent and flue connections having a diameter at least as large as the vent connections on the appliance and such vent must extend to open air at least two feet above roof and terminate with a screened cap. 
(c)  All vents to gas burning appliances shall be installed in the manner required by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(d)  All gas burning appliances having pilot burners must be provided with down draft devices between the fixture and the vent. 
(e)  Central heating plants and automatic gas steam radiators must be provided with a gas regulator set ahead of meter to regulate the flow of gas to the appliance. Central heating boilers must have an automatic temperature or pressure control on the boiler itself, connecting to a quick acting or snap acting gas valve in the supply line to the boiler. A gas pressure regulator or governor requiring access to the atmosphere for successful operation, should be vented to the outer air, or into a combustion chamber adjacent to a constantly burning pilot. 
(f)  When air or oxygen under pressure is used in connection with gas supply, effective means shall be provided to prevent the air or oxygen from going back into the gas piping. 
(Code 1967, § 8-15) 
Sec. 6-124. - Tests, inspection and certificate of inspection. 
(a)  When gas house piping has been installed in a building or structure, whether the same be new construction, repairs or extensions, the same must be inspected and tested in the presence of the gas inspector or one of his assistants and a certificate of inspection issued as herein provided and an inspection tag attached to such piping by said inspector. Such test shall be made by closing all openings and subjecting all the piping to air pressure that will support a column of mercury ten inches in height. If this column of mercury is supported by the air pressure for at least 15 minutes, the piping shall be considered tight and in compliance with this article. 
(b)  No fire test or water test shall be permitted on gas house piping and water tested piping will be condemned as faulty. 
(c)  When the system of piping and all extensions thereto have been completed and all openings firmly closed, the person installing such piping shall make the test above provided, and if the piping is found tight, shall make application for test to the gas inspector. Upon such application the said inspector or one of his assistants will inspect the piping and shall witness the test, and if the piping is found tight and the work done is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, then such inspector or assistant shall issue and deliver a certificate in substantially the following form: 
No.________ 
    This is to certify that I have inspected and witnessed the test of the gas piping in __________ Building No. _____ Street, and certify that the same is installed in compliance with the City's Gas Ordinance. 
Gas Inspector 
By _____ 
(d)  Any additional gas piping or outlets installed, after the above certificate has been issued, must be reported for inspection and tested in the same manner as pipe originally installed. 
(Code 1967, § 8-16) 
Sec. 6-125. - Meter location. 
(a)  The house piping shall be extended to the meter location designated by the distributor of gas and a swing joint provided for connecting house piping to the meter outlet. 
(b)  No gas meter shall be installed or maintained under the floor of any building or structure unless there is suitable ventilation, and in any such installation an opening at least two feet square in the foundation or skirting within two feet of the meter shall be provided and maintained. 
(c)  No gas meter shall be installed and maintained in a small unvented or confined space. 
(d)  When more than one meter is required to serve consumers in one building or structure, the city may set as many meters as there are separate consumers, connecting such meters to one service line. When this is done, the riser pipes serving the several consumers shall be extended to within 18 inches and within the same enclosure as the meter location and shall not be scattered, but shall drop together in alignment and at least three inches apart to the place where the meters are to be set. 
(Code 1967, § 8-17) 
Sec. 6-126. - Butane or other commercial gas. 
(a)  Any consumer, who on July 8, 1947, was using butane or other commercial gas and whose system was piped with three-quarter-inch pipe, or smaller, shall upon converting to natural gas, follow the procedure outlined below. 
(b)  A one-inch pipe shall be installed from the meter directly to the cooking stove; leaving a one-inch Tee below the floor, from the Tee a one-inch pipe shall be installed to the original point of entry of the butane or other commercial gas system, thus forming a circuit with natural gas feeding in both directions. 
(Code 1967, § 8-18) 
Sec. 6-127. - Violations. 
    Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this article or failing to comply with any order of the gas inspector made pursuant to the powers herein granted to him, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to the penalty prescribed in section 1-13, the gas fitter's license of the offender may be revoked, or both fine and revocation of license may be imposed. 
(Code 1967, § 8-19) 
Secs. 6-128-6-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 6-136. - Gas fitter's bond and license. 
    Every person, upon entering the installation, construction, reconstruction, or repair of any gas house piping in the city and its gas service territory, shall be required to take out a gas plumbing license, the cost of which shall be $50.00 per year for persons residing within the city limits, and for those persons residing outside the city limits there shall be a license cost of $50.00 per job. 
(Code 1967, § 8-8; Res. of 2-14-89) 
Sec. 6-137. - Permits. 
(a)  Before the construction, reconstruction, installation or repair of any gas house piping, suitable plans and specifications of all the work proposed to be done, showing clearly the sizes of pipe, kind of fittings, locations and measurements, made out on blanks furnished by the gas inspector and properly signed by the owner, his agent, or other authorized representative and filed at the office of the inspector. All connections and fixtures shall be neatly drawn in the following manner; in the case of new work or extension of old work, black ink shall be used. In case of old work, red ink shall be used. 
(b)  If the plans are approved by the inspector he will issue a written permit within two days after the application is filed. No change or modification of approved plans will be permitted unless such change or modification be authorized by the owner or agent, submitted to and approved by the inspector and placed on file as in the case of original work; and further no infraction of rules not specially authorized in writing by the inspector, although it may be shown on plan and has passed inspection, will be permitted. The inspector always reserves the right to compel the plumber to rectify any infraction of the rules even though the work has passed inspection and a final inspection certificate issued and the plumber's bond will be held for same. 
(c)  No permit to install, construct, reconstruct or repair any gas house piping shall be issued, except to a licensed plumber or a person licensed to do such work in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  There shall be a minimum charge of $20.00 per job for the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1967, § 8-10; Amend. of 2-14-89) 
Secs. 6-138-6-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 6-146. - Gas inspector-Appointment. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen shall appoint a competent person as gas inspector. 
(Code 1967, § 8-3) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 6-147. - Same-Duties and powers generally; right of entry. 
    The gas inspector and his assistants are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to inspect and supervise the installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all house gas piping, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus now or hereafter to be placed in or in any manner directly attached to any building or structure within the city and its gas service territory. The gas inspector and his assistants shall be subject to the orders and directions of the mayor and board of selectmen and they are hereby vested with full authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time in the discharge of their duties herein imposed. 
(Code 1967, § 8-4) 
Sec. 6-148. - Same-Duties specified; monthly report required. 
    It shall be the duty of the gas inspector to receive all applications for connection, to pass on and approve or reject plans submitted, to issue permits for all plumbing work, extensions, or change in location of fixtures; to sign and issue all notices, to keep a daily record of all applications received, plans approved and all other matters which may pertain thereto, to investigate all alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter and to file complaints when necessary, and to make a monthly report of his operations to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Code 1967, § 8-5) 
Sec. 6-149. - Same-To decide controversies. 
    The gas inspector shall decide all controversies which may arise under this article, and in so doing shall be subject to the control and direction of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1967, § 8-7) 
Sec. 6-150. - Notice of defects; failure to comply with notice; certificate of inspection to be furnished gas service department. 
(a)  The gas inspector shall inspect as often as necessary all houses in the course of erection, alteration or repair and to inspect any plumbing of any character already in use which he may have reason to believe is out of repair or is imperfect. 
(b)  The inspector shall give the owner or agent in charge of any building written notice of any defects in his plumbing or fixtures or changes or repairs necessary and such owner or agent shall within five days after such notice make necessary changes or repairs. If the owner or agent fails to comply with this notice, the gas inspector may order the gas service department to turn off the gas and it shall not thereafter turn the gas on again until the gas inspector has certified that such defects have been repaired or removed. 
(c)  The gas inspector shall furnish the gas service department with a copy of each certificate of inspection. The department shall not turn gas into any new or altered or repaired system of gas until such certificate has been received. 
(Code 1967, § 8-6) 
Secs. 6-151-6-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Flood hazards in subdivisions, § 18-38. 

Sec. 6-163. - Proposed construction to be consistent with need to minimize flood damage. 
    The building inspector when reviewing applications for building permits, including the plans and specifications for the proposed construction, will review all building permits applications to determine if the proposed construction is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 1, 4-18-73) 
Sec. 6-164. - Recommendations for construction in flood hazard areas. 
    The building inspector shall review all building permit applications to determine if the site of the proposed construction is reasonably safe from flooding and to make recommendation for construction in all locations which have flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 2, 4-18-73) 
Sec. 6-165. - Standards for proposed construction. 
    The building inspector in reviewing all applications for construction in flood hazard locations within the city shall require that any such proposed construction must: 
(1)  Be designed and anchored to prevent the flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure or portions of the structure due to flooding; 
(2)  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Provide adequate drainage in order to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(5)  Locate public utilities and facilities on the site in such a manner as to be elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, such utilities and facilities including sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 3, 4-18-73) 
DIVISION 2. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Sec. 6-166. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Manage the waters of the city and balance the diverse uses of the waters and waterfront; 
(2)  Maintain and improve bayou bank public access and water quality; and 
(3)  Continue to support opportunities for recreational fishing and recreational boating. 
(Ord. No. 160, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 217, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 6-167. - Finding of fact. 
    Bayou Plaquemine constitutes one of the most important areas in the city. It provides economic and social benefits to the city, state and the United States of America. The continued health of the waterfront along Bayou Plaquemine is vital to maintaining the city's economy and the welfare of its citizens as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 160, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 217, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 6-168. - Piers. 
(a)  Private piers, wharves, mooring pilings, bulkheads, and buoy installations shall be connected to the property line of the landowner. The private piers and/or wharf shall extend no more than ten feet into Bayou Plaquemine. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, private, recreational piers shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  The use of the pier is limited to the residents of the waterfront property and their guests; 
(2)  A building permit for the private, recreational pier shall not be issued without: 
a.  A dated written statement from the landowner that the adjoining property owners were notified of the proposed recreational pier with a sample copy of any letter used for notification; 
b.  Written approval or equivalent from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries and the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources; 
c.  A site visit by the city inspector, or his designee with any appropriate comments; and 
d.  The submission of a plan/sketch/plat of the proposed pier to the city inspector. 
(3)  The pier may have no detached piling, buoy or other device for the mooring of boats. 
(4)  A building permit for a private, recreational pier shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 160, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 217, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 6-169. - Bayou bank protection works. 
(a)  All bayou bank protection works are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The location and design of the structures shall be approved by the United States [Army] Corps of Engineers; 
(2)  The composition of fill materials shall be acceptable to the United States [Army] Corps of Engineers and the city inspector; 
(3)  Groins and fill material may not extend beyond the natural bayou bank at mean low water and shall tie into the structure or bayou bank of adjoining properties; 
(4)  Structures built parallel to the bayou bank may not extend beyond the natural bayou bank at mean high water mark except to achieve a stable slope behind the structure; 
(5)  Natural drainage areas may not be obstructed, and the design of each bayou bank protection works shall provide for the passage of water and be approved by the city inspector; 
(6)  The applicant shall obtain a grading permit, which will be subject to approval by the city inspector, after consultation with the city's designated engineer; 
(7)  The applicant shall obtain a building permit for any structures included in the project; 
(8)  Vegetation shall be used for erosion control, if feasible; 
(9)  If it is demonstrated that vegetation will not be an effective means of erosion control, an alternative may be used in the following order of preference: 
a.  Riprap and materials similar to riprap that are composed of loose, permeable components; 
b.  Bulkhead or similar structural control measures; 
(10)  Existing damaged bulkhead and walls may be replaced with new bulkheads within 18 inches of the old structure without regard to the priority ranking listed in subparagraphs (8) and (9) of this subsection; 
(11)  A buffer management plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city inspector before any trees are cleared along the bayou bank to increase sunlight for vegetation used in erosion control; and 
(12)  Structural measures for erosion control may be used if the applicant demonstrates to the city that nonstructural measures are not feasible at the site. 
(b)  All retaining structures and landfills for the purpose of creating land beyond the natural bank shall be subject to special exception approval, in addition to the following provisions: 
(1)  The structures and fill shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The structures and fill shall be permitted only if evidence submitted demonstrates that there is no other practical method to permit the anticipated use through the creation of land. 
(Ord. No. 160, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 217, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 6-170. - Specific properties subject to this division. 
    The immovable properties identified by municipal addresses 58930 Bayou Road 58380 Bayou Road shall specifically be controlled, regulated and subject to this division as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 217, 6-14-05) 
Secs. 6-171-6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRICAL GENERATING WINDMILLS AND LIKE STRUCTURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Building code, § 6-16; plumbing code, § 6-31; gas code, § 6-115. 

Sec. 6-181. - National Electrical Code adopted; controlling regulation for construction, maintenance and operation. 
    There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, maintenance and operation of electrical generating windmills, including permits and penalties, that certain electrical code known as the National Electrical Code, articles 445 and 702, pertaining to generators and optional standby systems respectively, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and from January 1, 1981, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction, maintenance and operation of all electrical generating windmills or like structures within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19-1, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 6-182. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in this article, it shall be held to mean the city. 
(b)  Wherever the word "windmill" is used in this article, it shall be held to mean any structure or device incorporating the use of wind or atmospheric conditions to produce electrical current. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19-6, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 6-183. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
    In the construction, operation and maintenance of any windmill, the owner and constructor must comply with all state and/or federal regulations applicable. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19-5, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 6-184. - Permit and fee. 
(a)  Permit required. Prior to construction of any windmill within the municipality, the builder must obtain a municipal permit. 
(b)  Issuance. No permit shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this section shall be paid. 
(c)  Fee. The permit fee shall be $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19-7, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 6-185. - Enforcement by city inspector. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city inspector for the municipality to enforce all laws relating to the construction, maintenance or operation of windmills. 
(b)  The city inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter and inspect any such windmill at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19-8, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 6-186. - Installation by licensed electrical contractor required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed electrical contractor to install or hookup any electrical components of said windmills. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 19-3, 1-27-81) 
Sec. 6-187. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  Height regulations. The following shall apply to the height of windmills: 
(1)  No windmill shall exceed 60 feet above ground at its highest point. 
(2)  No windmill blade shall be operated within ten feet from the ground. 
(b)  Location to property lines. No windmill, or any part thereof, shall be constructed within ten feet of any property line. 
(c)  Square footage. No windmill shall occupy in excess of 25 percent of the square footage of the owner's contiguous property. 
(d)  Towers. All towers or supports for windmills shall be constructed to resist horizontal wind pressures and wind loads on all surfaces exposed, in compliance with Section 906.6 of the National Building Code of 1976 and as amended. All towers or supports for windmills shall be constructed to withstand 110 mile per hour winds. There shall be no roof or front yard installations. 
(e)  Power lines. No windmill, or any part thereof, shall be constructed within 25 feet of any existing power line. 
(Ord. No. 950, §§ 19-2, 19-4, 19-9, 19-10, 1-27-81) 
Secs. 6-188-6-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS 

Sec. 6-200. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Display surface means the surface made available by the structure either for direct mounting of letters and decorations, or for the mounting of facing material intended to carry the entire advertising message. 
    Electric sign means an electrically illuminated sign which employs incandescent lamps, electric-discharge tubing, fluorescent lamps, or combinations thereof, and has words or symbols designed to convey information or attract attention. Signs on which the lights do not form a portion of the display surface are not considered to be electric signs. 
    Freestanding and/or ground sign means a sign which is an independent structure and which is not attached to or located above a building or similar structure. 
    Major thoroughfare means any public street, expressway, freeway or highway in the city. 
    Off-premises outdoor advertising means any outdoor sign, display, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard or any other thing which is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of which advertising or information content is visible from any place on the main travel way of any major thoroughfare in the city. 
    On-premises outdoor advertising means any outdoor sign, display, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard or any other thing which is designed to advertise activities carried out on the premises where sign is located. 
    Outdoor display structure means any fabricated sign, including its structure and display surface, located outside of building or similar structures, to convey information or attract attention for advertising purposes. 
    Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects more than 15 inches from the wall or building. 
    Roof sign means a sign which is attached to and located above a building or similar structure. 
    Sign, as used in the provisions of this article, shall be interpreted to include "outdoor display structures." 
    Temporary sign means a sign for which the intended length of use will not exceed six months, as described in subsection 6-202(d). 
    Wall sign means a sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects not more than 15 inches from the wall or building. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 9-25-84) 
Sec. 6-201. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Except as permitted by the provisions of paragraph (b), signs and outdoor display structures shall not be erected, attached to, suspended from or supported on buildings or structures, or latched, until a permit is issued by the city inspector. The permit shall relieve the city of all liabilities and damages incurred by signs. 
(b)  All applications shall be made on forms supplied by the city inspector's office and shall contain all information requested thereon. 
(c)  A copy of plans and/or specifications, including but not limited to the size, illumination, and height, shall be attached to the permit application, unless specifically waived by the city inspector. The city shall have ten days to review the sign application. In the event the city rejects the application for the sign permit, the basis for the rejection shall be submitted in writing to the applicant. 
(d)  A permit shall not be issued to anyone other than persons designated by the owner or owners of a firm. 
(e)  A permit issued shall be construed to be only a license to proceed with displaying the sign and shall not be interpreted as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this Code, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the city inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans and/or specifications or construction or of violations of this Code. 
(f)  Permits are not required for: 
(1)  On-premises wall signs less than ten square feet in area. 
(2)  On-premises projecting signs having a display surface less than two and one-half square feet in area. 
(3)  Ground signs used for advertising the sale or rental of property upon which the sign is located and having a display surface less than 25 square feet in area. 
(4)  Off-premises temporary signs. 
(g)  The exemption from a permit shall not relieve the owner or person in control of the sign from erecting and maintaining the sign in a safe condition. 
(h)  Cost of permits: 
(1)  Off-premises signs, $2.00 per square foot. 
(2)  On-premises signs, $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 035, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 242, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 6-202. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Signs prohibited in residential and C-6 commercial districts. No off-premises outdoor advertising display, sign or billboard shall be permitted in any area zoned residential or C-6 commercial. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial zones. Off-premises outdoor advertising displays, signs or billboards may be constructed, erected and maintained only in commercial and industrial zoned areas. 
(c)  Conformance with National Building Code. Construction of all signs shall conform to section 1600 of the National Building Code. 
(d)  Temporary signs: 
(1)  Political signs will be permitted on public right-of-way or servitudes 90 days from the date of qualification for election to the public office and will be removed within seven days from final election. No political signs shall be permitted along the railroad right-of-way, the state right-of-way and the city right-of-way from the intersection of Bayou Road and Louisiana Highway 1 North and South to the northern boundary of the city limits. 
(2)  For sale, lease and rent signs will be removed after sale, lease or rent is terminated. 
(3)  Miscellaneous event signs will be removed within 48 hours after the event. 
(e)  Restrictions of locations: 
(1)  Signs shall not obstruct components of means of egress. 
(2)  Signs shall not reduce light and ventilation of windows required by the provisions of article VI of the National Building Code. 
(3)  Signs shall not block the use of windows or access panels required for access through exterior walls by the provisions of section 804 of the National Building Code. 
(4)  Signs shall not block the access to roofs required by the provisions of section 807.3 of the National Building Code. 
(5)  Roof signs shall not prevent access from one area of a roof to another area. 
(6)  Signs shall not obstruct the movement of motorized fire department equipment on public ways. 
(7)  No off-premises outdoor advertising structure shall be located in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or physically interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic. 
(f)  Spacing of signs. Property facing on any major thoroughfare and all other property which is zoned so as to permit the construction and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the following spacing restrictions: 
(1)  For the purpose of these regulations, each side of the major street shall be considered separately. 
(2)  V-type or back-to-back signs on the same structure with an angle between them of not more than 90 degrees shall be considered one sign. 
(3)  On any major thoroughfare, no two off-premises outdoor advertising structures shall be spaced less than 500 feet apart. 
(4)  The maximum distance between sign structures shall be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement between points directly opposite the signs and shall apply only to structures located on the same side of the highway. 
(Ord. No. 009, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 035, 12-8-92) 
Sec. 6-203. - Size of signs. 
(a)  The maximum area of the face of any one off-premises sign shall be 32 square feet with a maximum height of 12 feet from ground level. 
(b)  When two off-premises signs are placed back-to-back or V-type on the same structure with an angle between them of not more than 90 degrees, each sign facing shall conform to the maximum size limitations. Except as hereafter provided, two signs shall be permitted in any one facing provided they are on the same structure and only one side or one sign is visible at a time. 
(c)  The maximum area of the face of any on-premises sign: 
(1)  Ground sign shall be one square foot per 200 square feet of parking area. Not to exceed 1,000 square feet. It shall not exceed 40 feet in height above ground level. Construction of said sign shall conform to section 1603.2 of the National Building Code. 
(2)  Wall signs attached to the exterior walls of buildings or structures shall not extend more than 15 inches from the wall or structural member to which they are attached. 
a.  Electric wall signs shall not exceed one-fifth of the size of the front facing wall. 
b.  Nonelectric wall signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the surface of the wall to which they are attached. 
(d)  Projecting signs: 
(1)  No larger than 32 square feet. 
(2)  Projecting signs that are located over a street, alley, public place or public way shall not extend beyond an imaginary line perpendicular to a point located two feet from curb line, between building line and curb line. 
(3)  The lower edge of projecting signs shall be not less than seven feet above the curb level. 
(e)  Roof signs: 
(1)  The length is not to exceed one-half total length of front face of building. The height is not to exceed one-fourth total height of building. 
(2)  Roof signs that are located above, or supported on the top of, buildings or structures shall be constructed of noncombustible materials. 
(3)  Cappings, decorations, lettering and moldings are permitted to be of combustible materials. 
(4)  The display portion of roof signs shall be not less than four feet above the roof of the building or structure on which the sign is located. The space below the display surface, except for the supports and related structural members, shall be open, without lattice or slats. 
(5)  Walkways required for maintenance of signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials. 
(6)  Roof signs shall not project beyond the exterior walls of buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 4, 9-25-84; Res. of 12-11-85) 
Sec. 6-204. - Illuminated signs. 
(a)  Illuminated signs shall conform to the provisions of the standards listed for electric signs in article XVIII of the National Building Code. 
(b)  Electric signs shall be supported, attached, anchored, braced or guyed as required for the type of sign. 
(c)  No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that simulates any emergency light or device shall be permitted as part of any sign. Flashing devices shall not be permitted upon a sign; however, illuminated signs which indicate such customary public service as time, date, temperature or other similar information shall be permitted. 
(d)  External lighting, such as flood lights, thin line and goose neck reflectors are permitted, provided the light source is directed on the face of the sign and is effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed into any portion of the main travel way of the major thoroughfare. 
(e)  No sign shall be permitted to project into the direct line of vision of any official traffic-control signal from any point in a moving traffic lane of any major thoroughfare within 660 feet of approaching such signal. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 5, 9-25-84) 
Sec. 6-205. - Signs not permitted to remain or to be erected. 
    The following signs shall not be permitted to remain or be erected: 
(1)  Signs which are obsolete, including billboards that have been blank for six months, structures not meeting construction standards, out-of-date political billboards and advertising of defunct businesses, and signs or structures which have been erected without a building permit having been issued therefor and thus are illegal. 
(2)  Signs which are illegal under state laws or regulations. 
(3)  Signs which are not clean and in good repair. 
(4)  Signs that are not securely fixed on a substantial structure. 
(5)  Signs which attempt or appear to attempt to regulate, warn or direct the movement of traffic which interferes with, imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device. 
(6)  Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(7)  Signs which are not consistent with the standards in this article. 
(8)  Signs located on public property, unless placed thereon under lease arrangements or otherwise permitted by legal authority. 
(9)  Signs placed on any utility poles, state traffic-control poles or telephone poles next to, adjacent and/or on a major thoroughfare. 
a.  Signs, as used in this subsection, shall include off-premises outdoor advertising and temporary political signs. 
b.  The effective date of this subsection shall be the first month after the 1987 general election. 
(Amend. of 9-8-87) 
Sec. 6-206. - Enforcement of this article. 
(a)  Authority of building director. The building director is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this article. Upon presentation of proper credentials, he or his authorized representative may enter any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this article. 
(b)  Order of removal; notice; appeal. The building director may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this article. He shall give ten days' notice in writing to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure or premises on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance. He may remove a sign at cost to the owner immediately, and without notice, if in his opinion the sign presents an immediate threat or danger to the safety of the public. Any owner, so notified may within ten days file a written request for appeal to the mayor and board of selectmen, which shall be heard at their next meeting. 
(c)  Discontinuance and removal. In the absence of just compensation, all existing nonconforming signs, billboards and advertising matter, according to the provisions of this article, shall be discontinued and removed within five years from the effective date of this article. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or by both. 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 7, 9-25-84) 
Secs. 6-207-6-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS AND ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code, R.S. 33:1720.21 et seq. 

Sec. 6-300. - Electrical contractor defined. 
    An electrical contractor shall be any person who procures an agreement to service, alter, or install an electrical system or equipment. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-301. - Requirements for license. 
(a)  Before a license shall be granted to any person, firm or corporation, such person, firm or corporation shall apply to the building official for a license and the applicant, if a person, or if a corporation, one of its officers or representatives, or if a firm, one of the members thereof, shall present himself before the city council at the time and place fixed by the city council or mayor of the city. If the council shall find upon due examination that the applicant presenting himself is of good character and has had at least five years' experience in the occupation or business governed by the license for which he is applying, or is a graduate of any trade school or college of recognized standard, or possesses a satisfactory knowledge of electricity and the national laws pertaining to the governing of same and the use and function of electrical appliances and devices for electric light, heat or power purposes, and possesses skill and knowledge in all matters pertaining to the class of business governed by the license of which he is applying, said applicant shall be granted such license on paying fees as herein provided. As to the length of experience mentioned above, at least two affidavits must be submitted to that effect, and these affidavits must be sworn to by reliable persons who have known the applicant for the five-year period. 
(b)  The questions on the examination referred to herein shall be strictly in reference to the current edition of the National Electric Code, the provisions of these ordinances and other strictly fundamental and elementary questions of theory and wiring diagrams. 
(c)  All persons not engaged in the business of electrical contractors shall be granted a license to engage in that class of business without examination, provided the two affidavits described above are furnished. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do electrical work within the city limits of the City of Plaquemine other than an electrician licensed under the laws of the state and who shall have first obtained a license from the city. If a firm or corporation desires to do electrical work, it must have an employee or employees licensed as above stated. The fee for the original license except that, the fee for out-of-town applicants shall be $50.00 per year; except that, the fee for out-of-town applicants shall be $50.00 per permit per job. 
(e)  Notice in writing, upon blanks furnished at office of the city inspector, properly filled out, stating clearly the location and kind of work and the name of firm, shall be given to the inspector at his office by the contractor, builder or electrician in all cases of new work, the remodeling of old work, or in any and all cases in which repairs involve the removal of fixtures. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-302. - Inspection. 
    The city inspector is to be the judge of the quality of the material and workmanship and the construing of the provisions of this article as to their meaning. Should any difference of opinion arise, appeal as to his decision must be made at once, in writing, to the mayor and board of selectmen, stating full particulars of disputed points clearly; otherwise, his judgment shall govern. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-303. - Rough-in certificates; final inspections certificate. 
    The electrician may obtain a certificate of electrical connection and "rough-in" certificate when the electrical test is completed. He must, within ten days after the setting of the electrical line, obtain from the city inspector a final inspection certificate, stating that such work has been inspected and that it conforms to the regulations governing same. Failure on the part of an electrician to observe this rule will preclude his obtaining any further permits to do electrical work. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-304. - Inspection. 
    The city inspector must be notified when the work has begun and when the work is "roughed in" and is ready for inspection. All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. Notice of final inspection shall not be sent until the work is entirely ready for thorough inspection. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-305. - Certificate of approval. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work, the electrician shall so advise the city inspector, who shall, within one-half working day, inspect the work. Should the work meet the requirements of this article as to both design and workmanship, the city inspector shall furnish to the electrician a certificate of approval. 
(b)  In the event the work does meet the requirements of this article in every way, the work shall be disapproved. Upon correction of defects, the electrician shall apply for a reinspection for which there shall be an additional charge of $5.00 for each reinspection. The city inspector, may at his option, waive the reinspection charge if in his opinion the electrician has been conscientious in his work. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-306. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees shall be as set by the board of selectmen from time to time. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Editor's note- The fees formerly set forth in § 6-306 were deleted by an ordinance adopted Oct. 9, 2001. Such fees are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 6-307. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
    For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations relating to the performance of electrical work and the operation of electrical apparatus and the conduct of business by those engaged in such work, including the examining and licensing therefore, the National Electrical Code, particularly the most current edition thereof, prepared and recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and the whole thereof, three copies of which have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the city, and the code is hereby incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, and further those regulations, rules and directives from the director of utilities which are filed in the office of the director of utilities and incorporated herein by reference; and from the date on which this amendment shall take effect the provisions of the National Electrical Code, except insofar as they are deleted, modified or amended by other provisions of this chapter or those regulations, rules and directives from the director of utilities, shall control and regulate the performance of electrical work and the operation of electrical apparatus within the city. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87; Ord. No. 118, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 6-308. - Violations, penalties. 
    Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this article or failing to comply with any order of the city inspector made pursuant to the powers herein granted to him shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to the penalty prescribed in section 1-13, the electrician's license of the offender may be revoked, or both fine and revocation of license may be imposed. 
(Amend. of 2-10-87) 
Sec. 6-309. - Out-of-town contractors not affected. 
    Any out-of-town electrical contractors or general contractors to which these provisions apply who have been obtaining licenses and permits at the same fees and costs of in-town contractors for a period of at least five years prior to the enactment of this article shall be permitted to continue to receive license and fees for in-town contractors. 
(Amend. of 3-10-87) 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 6-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 327, adopted Nov. 13, 2012, repealed § 6-310, which pertained to mobile home improvement, and derived from Ord. No. 095, adopted Dec. 17, 1996; and Ord. No. 286, adopted Sept. 8, 2009. 
Sec. 6-311. - Repair sidewalks. 
    Whenever a business and/or residence constructs a parking lot and/or driveway, which will cross an existing sidewalk, it shall be required that the business and/or residence demolish the existing sidewalk. It shall be further required that the business and/or owner of the residence reconstruct the sidewalk with reinforcement to be able to support ordinary vehicular traffic, at the business and/or owner of the residence expense. 
(Ord. No. 179, 3-19-03) 
Secs. 6-312-6-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 339, arts. 1-5, adopted Oct. 8, 2013, enacted new provisions, but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. X, §§ 6-351-6-354, 6-361, 6-371-6-377, 6-381-6-384, 6-391-6-396, was at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Sec. 6-351. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Louisiana has in statute R.S. 38:84 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 1, § A, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-352. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of City of Plaquemine are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 1, § B, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-353. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 1, § C, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-354. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 1, § D, 10-8-13) 
Secs. 6-355-6-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 6-361. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See "Flood elevation study." 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See "Regulatory floodway." 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "Area of special flood hazard." 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 2, 10-8-13) 
Secs. 6-362-6-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-371. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of City of Plaquemine. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § A, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-372. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Iberville Parish and all Incorporated areas," dated November 6, 2013, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated November 6, 2013, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § B, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-373. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § C, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-374. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § D, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-375. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § E, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-376. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § F, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-377. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 3, § G, 10-8-13) 
Secs. 6-378-6-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6-381. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The mayor and/or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 4, § A, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-382. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Department of Transportation and Development, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 6-372, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 5. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 4, § B, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-383. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 6-392(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 6-382(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 4, § C, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-384. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subs 6-383(b) of this division have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 6-353). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in subsections 6-384(a)-(i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 4, § D, 10-8-13) 
Secs. 6-385-6-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 6-391. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 5, § A, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-392. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 6-372, (ii) subsection 6-382(8), or (iii) subsection 6-393(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 6-383(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the longitudinal structural I beam of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The bottom of the longitudinal structural I beam of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 6-383(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 5, § B, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-393. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 6-352, 6-353, 6-354 of this article. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of sections 6-373, 6-383, and the provisions of division 5 of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 6-372 or subsection 6-382(8) of this article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 5, § C, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-394. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 6-372, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 6-383 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 5, § D, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-395. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 5, § E, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 6-396. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, for each violation. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a new violation. In addition, the violator shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent City of Plaquemine from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 339, Art. 5, § F, 10-8-13) 
Chapter 7 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Louisiana Homeland Security and Emergency Assistance and Disaster Act, R.S. 29:721 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Local organization created. 
    There is hereby created a local organization for civil defense, pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 29:608. 
(Code 1967, § 2-15) 
Sec. 7-2. - Appointment of director. 
    The local organization for civil defense shall have a director who shall be appointed by the state director of civil defense upon the recommendation of the mayor and board of selectmen, and who shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of such local organization for civil defense subject to the direction and control of the mayor and board of selectmen under the general direction and control of the governor and the state civil defense agency. The director shall execute and enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the state director under the state civil defense agency. 
(Code 1967, § 2-16) 
Sec. 7-3. - Procurement of supplies and equipment. 
    When the federal or state government or any agency or officer thereof shall offer this city service, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for purposes of civil defense, the director, with the consent of the mayor and board of selectmen, may accept such offer and is authorized to receive such aid and assistance. 
(Code 1967, § 2-17) 
Sec. 7-4. - Preparation of civil defense plan. 
    The director of civil defense is authorized and directed to prepare a detailed plan for civil defense operation in this city and to recruit and train personnel in accordance with the plan to the end that when disaster strikes, each member of this local organization will know his part and his duty. 
(Code 1967, § 2-18) 
Sec. 7-5. - Use of facilities of existing departments. 
    The director of civil defense is hereby authorized to utilize the services of equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of this city to the maximum extent practicable and the officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies are directed to cooperate and extend such services and facilities to the mayor and the director upon request. 
(Code 1967, § 2-19) 
Chapter 8 - CIVIL RIGHTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Louisiana Equal Housing Opportunity Act, R.S. 51:2601 et seq. 

Sec. 8-16. - Policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 1-22-80) 
Sec. 8-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Discriminatory housing practice: An act that is unlawful under sections 8-19, 8-20 or 8-21. 
    Dwelling: Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family: Includes a single individual. 
    To rent: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 2, 1-22-80) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-18. - Application of prohibitions. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) and section 8-22, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in section 8-19 shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by subsection (b). 
(b)  Nothing in section 8-19 other than subsection (c) shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented, without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection 8-19(3); but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional assistance necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(c)  For the purpose of subsection (b), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 3, 1-22-80) 
Sec. 8-19. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    As made applicable by section 8-18 and except as exempted by sections 8-18(b) and 8-22, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion or national origin; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion or national origin; 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(4)  To represent to any person, because of race, color, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 4, 1-22-80) 
Sec. 8-20. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, leases, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 8-18(b). 
(Ord. No. 943, § 5, 1-22-80) 
Sec. 8-21. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 6, 1-22-80) 
Sec. 8-22. - Exemption. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 7, 1-22-80) 
Sec. 8-23. - Interference, coercion or intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections 8-18, 8-19, 8-20 or 8-21. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 8, 1-22-80) 
ARTICLE III. - CUSTOMER SERVICE OBLIGATIONS FOR CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Consumer Choice for Television Act, R.S. 45:1361 et seq. 

Sec. 8-24. - Service standards. 
(a)  Enforcement of service standards. A cable franchise authority may enforce the customer service standards set forth in paragraph (c) of this section against cable operators. The franchise authority must provide affected cable operators 90 days' written notice of its intent to enforce the standards. 
(b)  Construction of article not to prevent or prohibit certain standards or laws. Nothing in this article should be construed to prevent or prohibit: 
(1)  A franchising authority and a cable operator from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in paragraph (c) of this section; 
(2)  A franchising authority from enforcing, through the end of the franchise term, pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in paragraph (c) of this section and are contained in current franchise agreements; 
(3)  Any state or any franchising authority from enacting or enforcing any customer protection law to the extent not specifically pre-empted herein; or 
(4)  The establishment or enforcement of any state or municipal law or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed, or address matters not addressed by, the standards set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(c)  Customer service standards. Effective March 14, 1994, a cable operator shall be subject to the following customer service standards: 
(1)  Cable system office hours and telephone availability: 
a.  The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect-call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
1.  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
2.  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
b.  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
c.  The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
d.  Under normal operating conditions the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
e.  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
(2)  Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operation conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
a.  Standard installations will be preformed within seven business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
b.  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the cable operator will begin work on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known if equipment available. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after the notification of the service problem. 
c.  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
d.  An operator may not normally cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment unless a reasonable reason by the franchisee is given for the failure to maintain the appointment. If an appointment is canceled, the franchisee shall make every reasonable effort to reschedule the appointment with the customer as soon as reasonably possible. 
e.  If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(3)  Communications between the cable operators and cable subscribers: 
a.  Notifications to subscribers: 
1.  The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
i.  Products and services offered; 
ii.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
iii.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
iv.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
v.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
vi.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office. 
2.  Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to the subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the cable operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required in the preceding paragraphs. 
b.  Billing: 
1.  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly alienate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
2.  In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
c.  Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either: 
1.  The customer's next billing cycle following the resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
2.  The return of equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
d.  Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(4)  Definitions. The following definitions apply to these provisions: 
a.  Normal business hours: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
b.  Normal operating conditions: Those service conditions which are within the control of the operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
c.  Service interruptions: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
(Ord. No. 056, 12-14-93) 
Chapter 9 - CRIMINAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Title 9 of Ord. No. 1017-A, adopted Dec. 11, 1984, being not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been codified as superseding former Ch. 9 of the Code, which pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from provisions presumably enacted at the time of the original codification; from Ord. No. 855, adopted Dec. 12, 1972; Ord. No. 875, adopted June 25, 1974; and Ord. No. 953, § 11-5, adopted Feb. 24, 1981; and from the following sections of the city's 1967 Code: 
1967 Code Section 1967 Code Section 11-1-11-21 11-89 11-31-11-41 11-90 11-43-11-46 11-92 11-48-11-56 11-104 11-58-11-78 11-105 11-80-11-84 11-108-11-111 11-86 11-114 11-87 11-117  
Cross reference- Serious traffic offenses, § 20-277. 
State Law reference- Louisiana Criminal Code, R.S. 14:1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Short title. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known as the "Plaquemine Criminal Code." The provisions hereunder may be referred to or cited either as articles of the Criminal Code or as sections of the Code of Ordinances. Thus article 1 of the "Plaquemine Criminal Code" may also be referred to or cited as "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana." 
(b)  Whenever reference is made herein to a section of the Code of Ordinances the same shall also relate to the corresponding article of the Criminal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:1. 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter the terms enumerated shall have the designated meaning: 
    Another refers to any other person or legal entity, including the state or any subdivision thereof. 
    Anything of value must be given the broadest possible construction, including any conceivable thing of the slightest value, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private, and including transportation, telephone and telegraph services, or any other service available for hire. It must be construed in the broad popular sense of the phrase, not necessarily as synonymous with the traditional legal term "property." In all cases involving shoplifting the term "value" is the actual retail price of the property at the time of offense. 
    Dangerous weapon includes any gas, liquid or other substance or instrumentality which, in the manner used, is calculated or likely to produce death or greatly bodily harm. 
    Foreseeable refers to that which ordinarily would be anticipated by a human being of average reasonable intelligence and perception. 
    Person includes a human being from the moment of fertilization and implantation and also includes a body of persons, whether incorporated or not. 
    Property refers to both public and private property, movable and immovable, and corporeal and incorporeal property. 
    Public officer, public office, public employee, or position of public authority means and applies to any executive, ministerial, administrative, judicial or legislative officer, office, employee or position of authority, respectively, of the state or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or of any agency, board, commission, department or institution of the state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. Unless otherwise specified, local references are to those who function in the city or parish. 
    State means the State of Louisiana, or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of said state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. 
    Whoever in a penalty clause refers only to natural persons insofar as death or imprisonment is provided, but insofar as a fine may be imposed, "whoever" in a penalty clause refers to any person. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:2, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:2. 
Sec. 9-3. - Interpretation. 
    The sections of this chapter cannot be extended by analogy so as to create crimes not provided for herein; however, in order to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law, all of its provisions shall be given a genuine construction, according to the fair import of their words, taken in their usual sense, in connection with the context, and with reference to the purpose of the provision. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:3, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:3. 
Sec. 9-3.1. - Conduct made criminal under several articles; how prosecuted. 
    Prosecution may proceed under either provision, in the discretion of the city prosecutor, whenever an offender's conduct is criminal according to a general article of this Code and also according to a special article of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:4. 
Sec. 9-4. - Lesser and included offenses. 
    An offender who commits an offense which includes all the elements of other lesser offenses may be prosecuted for and convicted of either the greater offense or one of the lesser and included offenses. In such case, where the offender is prosecuted for the greater offense, he may be convicted of any one of the lesser and included offenses. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:5, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:5. 
Sec. 9-5. - Civil remedies not affected. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall affect any civil remedy provided by the law pertaining to civil matters, or any legal power to inflict penalties for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:6, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:6. 
Sec. 9-6. - Crime defined. 
    A crime is that conduct which is defined as criminal in this chapter or under the duly enacted legislation of another political jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:7, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:7. 
Sec. 9-7. - Criminal conduct. 
    Criminal conduct consists of: 
(1)  An act or a failure to act that produces criminal consequences, and which is combined with criminal intent; 
(2)  A mere act or failure to act that produces criminal consequences, where there is no requirement of criminal intent; or 
(3)  Criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:8, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:8. 
Sec. 9-8. - Criminal consequences. 
    Criminal consequences are any set of consequences prescribed in the various sections of this chapter or in the acts of the legislature of this state as necessary to constitute any of the various crimes defined therein. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:9, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:9. 
Sec. 9-9. - Criminal intent. 
    Criminal intent may be specific or general: 
(1)  Specific criminal intent is that state of mind which exists when the circumstances indicate that the offender actively desired the prescribed criminal consequences to follow his act or failure to act. 
(2)  General criminal intent is present whenever there is specific intent, and also when the circumstances indicate that the offender, in the ordinary course of human experience, must have adverted to the prescribed criminal consequences as reasonably certain to result from his act or failure to act. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:10, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:10. 
Sec. 9-10. - Criminal intent; how expressed. 
    The definitions of some crimes require a specific criminal intent, while in others no intent is required. Some crimes consist of criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. However, in the absence of qualifying provision, the terms "intent" and "intentional" have reference to "general criminal intent." 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:11, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:11. 
Sec. 9-11. - Criminal negligence. 
    Criminal negligence exists when, although neither specific nor general criminal intent is present, there is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender's conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful person under like circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:12, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:12. 
Sec. 9-12. - Infancy. 
    Those who have not reached the age of ten years are exempt from criminal responsibility. However, nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction of juvenile courts as established by the constitution and statutes of this state. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:13, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:13. 
Sec. 9-13. - Insanity. 
    If the circumstances indicate that because of a mental disease or mental defect the offender was incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong with reference to the conduct in question, the offender shall be exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:14, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:14. 
Sec. 9-14. - Intoxication. 
    The fact of an intoxicated or drugged condition of the offender at the time of the commission of the crime is immaterial, except as follows: 
(1)  Where the production of the intoxicated or drugged condition has been involuntary, and the circumstances indicate this condition is the direct cause of the commission of the crime, the offender is exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(2)  Where the circumstances indicate that an intoxicated or drugged condition has precluded the presence of a specific criminal intent or of special knowledge required in a particular crime, this fact constitutes a defense to a prosecution for that crime. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:15, 12-11-85) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 3; operating a vehicle while intoxicated, § 20-277; operating a vehicle under the influence of alcoholic beverages, § 20-278. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:15. 
Sec. 9-15. - Mistake of fact. 
    Unless there is a provision to the contrary in the definition of a crime, reasonable ignorance of fact or mistake of fact which precludes the presence of any mental element required in that crime is a defense to any prosecution for that crime. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:16, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:16. 
Sec. 9-16. - Mistake of law. 
    Ignorance of the provisions of this chapter or any criminal statute is not a defense to any criminal prosecution. However, mistake of law which results in the lack of an intention that consequences which are criminal shall follow is a defense to a criminal prosecution under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the offender reasonably relied on the act of the law-making body in repealing an existing criminal provision, or in otherwise purporting to make the offender's conduct lawful; or 
(2)  Where the offender reasonably relied on a final judgment of a competent court of last resort that a provision making the conduct in question criminal was unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:17, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:17. 
Sec. 9-17. - Justification; general provisions. 
    The fact that an offender's conduct is justifiable, although otherwise criminal, shall constitute a defense to prosecution for any crime based on that conduct. This defense of justification can be claimed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the offender's conduct is an apparently authorized and reasonable fulfillment of any duties of public office; 
(2)  When the offender's conduct is a reasonable accomplishment of an arrest which is lawful under the code of criminal procedure; 
(3)  When for any reason the offender's conduct is authorized by law; 
(4)  When the offender's conduct is reasonable discipline of minors by their parents, tutors or teachers; 
(5)  When the crime consists of a failure to perform an affirmative duty and the failure to perform is caused by physical impossibility; 
(6)  When any crime, except murder, is committed through the compulsion of threats by another of death or great bodily harm, and the offender reasonably believes the person making the threats is present and would immediately carry out the threats if the crime were not committed; or 
(7)  When the offender's conduct is in defense of persons or of property under any of the circumstances described in sections 9-18 through 9-20. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:18, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:18. 
Sec. 9-18. - Use of force or violence in defense. 
    The use of force or violence upon the person of another is justifiable when committed for the purpose of preventing a forcible offense against the person or a forcible offense or trespass against property in a person's lawful possession; provided, that the force or violence used must be reasonable and apparently necessary to prevent such offense, and that this section shall not apply where the force or violence results in a homicide. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:19, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:19. 
Sec. 9-19. - Aggressor cannot claim self-defense. 
    A person who is the aggressor or who brings on a difficulty cannot claim the right of self-defense unless he withdraws from the conflict in good faith and in such a manner that his adversary knows or should know that he desires to withdraw and discontinue the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:21, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:21. 
Sec. 9-20. - Defense of others. 
    It is justifiable to use force or violence or to kill in the defense of another person when it is reasonably apparent that the person attacked could have justifiably used such means himself, and when it is reasonably believed that such intervention is necessary to protect the other person. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:22, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:22. 
Sec. 9-21. - Principals. 
    All persons concerned in the commission of a crime, whether present or absent, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, aid and abet in its commission, or directly or indirectly counsel or procure another to commit the crime, are principals. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:23, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:24. 
Sec. 9-22. - Accessories after the fact. 
(a)  An accessory after the fact is any person who, after the commission of a criminal offense, shall harbor, conceal or aid the offender, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe that he has committed a breach of law, and with the intent that he may avoid or escape from arrest, trial, conviction or punishment. 
(b)  An accessory after the fact may be tried and punished notwithstanding the principal may not have been arrested, tried, convicted or amenable to justice. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:24, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:25. 
Sec. 9-23. - Criminal conspiracy. 
(a)  Criminal conspiracy is the agreement or combination of two or more persons for the specific purpose of committing any crime; provided, that an agreement or combination to commit a crime shall not amount to a criminal conspiracy unless, in addition to such agreement or combination, one or more of such parties does an act in furtherance of the object of the agreement or combination. If the intended basic crime has been consummated, the conspirators may be tried for either the conspiracy or the completed offense, and a conviction for one shall not bar prosecution for the other. 
(b)  Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit any crime shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the same manner as for the offense contemplated by the conspirators, but such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine, or one-half of the longest term of imprisonment prescribed for such offense, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:26, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:26. 
Sec. 9-24. - Attempt. 
(a)  Any person who, having a specific intent to commit a crime, does or omits an act for the purpose of and tending directly toward the accomplishing of his object is guilty of an attempt to commit the offense intended; and it shall be immaterial whether, under the circumstances, he would have actually accomplished his purpose. 
(b)  Mere preparation to commit a crime shall not be sufficient to constitute an attempt, but lying in wait with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, or searching for the intended victim with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime shall be sufficient to constitute an attempt to commit the offense intended. 
(c)  An attempt is a separate but lesser grade of the intended crime, and any person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a crime, although it appears on the trial that the crime intended or attempted was actually perpetrated by such person in pursuance of such attempt. 
(d)  Whoever attempts to commit any crime shall be fined and/or imprisoned in the same manner as for the offense attempted and such fine and/or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine or one-half of the longest term of imprisonment prescribed for the offense so attempted, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:27, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:27. 
Sec. 9-25. - General penalty provision. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of crimes set forth in this article, where a penalty is not specifically set forth, shall subject the offender to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than six months in jail. 
(b)  In lieu of any imprisonment authorized under the provisions of the foregoing section, the judge, at his discretion, may allow the defendant to perform community service work, not exceeding 30 eight-hour days. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1020, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1-13. 
Secs. 9-26-9-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Offenses, affecting law enforcement, R.S. 14:108 et seq.; offenses affecting organized government, R.S. 14:113 et seq. 

Sec. 9-36. - Resisting an officer. 
(a)  "Resisting an officer" defined. Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(b)  "Obstruction of" defined. The phrase "obstruction of," as used herein, shall, in addition to its common meaning, signification and connotation, mean: 
(1)  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; 
(2)  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is incarcerated in jail; 
(3)  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer; 
(4)  Congregates with others on a public street and refuses to move on when ordered by the officer. 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of resisting an officer shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9-108, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer, § 20-282. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108. 
Sec. 9-36.1. - Flight from an officer. 
    No driver of a motor vehicle shall intentionally refuse to bring a vehicle to a stop knowing that he has been given a visual and audible signal to stop by a police officer when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the driver has committed an offense. The signal shall be given by an emergency light and a siren on a vehicle marked as a police vehicle. 
    Whoever commits the crime of flight from an officer shall be fined not less than $150.00, nor more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108.1. 
Sec. 9-37. - False personation. 
(a)  Defined. False personation is the performance of any of the following acts with the intent to injure or defraud, or to obtain or secure any special privilege or advantage: 
(1)  Impersonating any public officer or private individual having special authority by law to perform an act affecting the rights or interests of another, or the assuming, without authority, of any uniform or badge by which such officer or person is lawfully distinguished; or 
(2)  Performing any act purporting to be official in such assumed character. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of false personation shall be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:112, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:112. 
Sec. 9-38. - Interference with constable or police officer. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the constable or any member of the city marshal, police force or sheriffs office in the discharge of his duties by abuse, force or threatening language, or in screening from him the object of his search. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of interfering with a constable, police officer, sheriff's deputy, or city marshal shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9-108.2, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-39. - Obstruction of fire prevention. 
(a)  Interference prohibited. It shall be unlawful to interfere with fire prevention by the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Defacing or destroying fire warning notices or posters; 
(2)  Injuring, destroying, removing or in any manner interfering with the use of any tools, equipment, towers, buildings or telephone lines used in the detection, reporting or suppression of fire. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever is found guilty of committing these acts shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1002, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 10; obstruction of firemen, § 20-83. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:206. 
Sec. 9-40. - False alarm. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make, turn in or report a false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance. 
(b)  Penalty. Whoever is found guilty of any of the above shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1003, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:96; criminal mischief, R.S. 14:59. 
Sec. 9-41. - False report of crime. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make to or file with the police authorities any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever is found guilty of reporting false crimes shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1004, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59. 
Sec. 9-42. - Simple escape. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an escape. The crime of escape is the intentional departure of a person from lawful custody of an officer or from any place where he is lawfully detained by any officer. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of simple escape shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:110, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer, § 20-282. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:110. 
Sec. 9-43. - Jumping bail. 
(a)  Defined. Jumping bail is the intentional failure to appear at such time and place as designated by the judge or committing magistrate who has fixed the amount of bail bond. The fact that no loss shall result to any surety or bondsman is immaterial. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of jumping bail, when the bail is assure the presence of the defendant for those cases defined as misdemeanor in this chapter, shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:110.1, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 110.1. 
Sec. 9-44. - Misrepresentation during booking. 
(a)  Misrepresentation during booking is the misrepresentation of or refusal by a person being booked to provide his name, age, sex, residence or Social Security number to any law enforcement officer or official who is booking him pursuant to a lawful arrest or the refusal of such person to submit to fingerprinting or photographing. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of misrepresentation during booking shall be imprisoned for not more than six months or fined not more than $500.00, or both, provided that any such sentence shall be made to run concurrently with any other sentence. 
(Ord. No. 024, 7-14-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:133.2. 
Sec. 9-45. - Falsification of drug tests. 
(a)  (1)  No person who submits to court-ordered drug testing, either after arrest for an offense and as a condition of pretrial release or after conviction of, or plea of guilty to, an offense and as a condition of probation, shall intentionally falsify or alter or attempt to falsify or alter the results of such a drug test by the substitution of urine or other samples or specimens or the use of any device in order to obscure or conceal the presence of a substance of which the test is administered to detect. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver a substance or device designed or intended solely to falsify or alter drug test results. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:133.3. 
Secs. 9-46-9-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses against the person, R.S. 14:29 et seq. 

Sec. 9-55. - Battery defined. 
    Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another; or the intentional administration of a poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:33, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Simple battery of a police officer, § 9-65; simple battery of a school teacher, § 9-66. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:33. 
Sec. 9-56. - Simple battery. 
(a)  Defined. Simple battery is a battery committed without the consent of the victim. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits a simple battery shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:35, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Simple battery of a police officer, § 9-65; simple battery of a school teacher, § 9-66. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35. 
Sec. 9-57. - Assault defined. 
    Assault is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:36, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:36. 
Sec. 9-58. - Simple assault. 
(a)  Defined. Simple assault is an assault committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits a simple assault shall be fined not more than $200.00, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:38, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, R.S. 14:38. 
Sec. 9-59. - Aggravated assault. 
(a)  Defined. Aggravated assault is an assault committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits an aggravated assault shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 10 17-A, § 9:37, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:37. 
Sec. 9-60. - Negligent injuring. 
(a)  Defined. Negligent injuring is the inflicting of any injury upon the person of another by criminal negligence. 
(b)  Presumption evidence. The violation of a statute or, ordinance shall be considered only as presumptive evidence of such negligence. 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of negligent injuring shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:39, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, R.S. 14:39, 
Sec. 9-61. - Vehicular negligent injuring. 
(a)  Defined. Vehicular negligent injuring is the inflicting of any injury upon the person of another when caused by the offender operating a motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft or other means of conveyance, and: 
(1)  The operator is under the influence of alcoholic beverages; or 
(2)  The offender's blood alcohol concentration is 0.10 percent or more by weight based upon grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of blood. 
(b)  Presumptive evidence. The violation of a statute or ordinance shall be considered only as presumptive evidence of negligence as set forth in paragraph (a). 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of vehicular negligent injuring shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:39.1, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Operating a vehicle while intoxicated, § 20-277; reckless driving, § 20-279. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:39.1. 
Sec. 9-62. - Intimidation by officers. 
(a)  Defined. Intimidation by officers is the intentional use, by any law enforcement officer or other person charged with the custody of parties accused of a crime or violation of a municipal ordinance or state law, of threats, violence or any means of inhuman treatment designed to secure a confession or incriminating statement from the person in custody. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of intimidation by officers shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:40,12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40. 
Sec. 9-63. - Terrorizing. 
(a)  Defined. Terrorizing is the intentional communication of information, known by the offender to be false, that the commission of a crime of violence is imminent or in progress or that a circumstance dangerous to human life exists or is about to exist, and thereby causing any person to be in sustained fear for his or another person's safety, causing evacuation of a building, a public structure or a facility of transportation, or causing other serious disruption to the public. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the offense of terrorizing shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:40.1, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40.1. 
Sec. 9-64. - False imprisonment. 
(a)  Defined. False imprisonment is the intentional confinement or detention of another without his consent and without proper legal authority. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of false imprisonment shall be fined not more than $200.00, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:46, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:46. 
Sec. 9-65. - Simple battery of a police officer. 
(a)  "Battery of a police officer" defined. Battery of a police officer is a battery committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe that the victim is a police officer acting in the performance of his duty. 
(b)  "Police officer" defined. For the purpose of this section, "police officer" shall include commissioned police officers, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, marshals, correctional officers and constables. 
(c)  Penalty. Whoever commits the crime of battery of a police officer shall be fined not more than $500.00 and imprisoned for not less than 15 days nor more than six months in the parish jail without benefit of suspension of sentence. 
(Amend of 2-23-88, § 9:35.2; Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
Cross reference- Battery defined, § 9-56; simple battery generally, § 9-56. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:34.2. 
Sec. 9-66. - Simple battery of a school teacher. 
(a)  "Battery of a school teacher" defined. Battery of a school teacher is a battery committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe that the victim is a school teacher acting in the performance of employment duties. 
(b)  "School teacher" defined. For the purposes of this section, "school teacher" shall include any teacher or instructor, administrator, staff person or employee of any public or private elementary, secondary, vocational, technical, training, special or post secondary school or institution. 
(c)  Penalty. Whoever commits the crime of a battery of a school teacher shall be fined not more than $500.00 and imprisoned no more than 15 days nor more than six months in the parish without benefit of suspension of sentence. 
    The court, in its discretion, may suspend imposition of the sentence and place the defendant on probation with the condition that he shall serve two days in jail or perform five days of community service work. Failure to successfully complete the community service work, as determined by the supervisor of the program to which he is assigned, shall result in revocation of probation and imposition of the 15-day term. 
(Amend of 2-23-88, § 9:35.2) 
Cross reference- Battery defined, § 9-56; simple battery generally, § 9-56. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:34.3. 
Sec. 9-67. - Stalking. 
(a)  Stalking is the willful, malicious and repeated following or harassing of another person, accompanied by the making of a credible threat, with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear of death or serious bodily injury. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of stalking may be imprisoned for not more than six months or fined not more than $500.00 or both. 
(c)  Any person who commits the offense of stalking, when there is a temporary restraining order or an injunction in effect against the offender prohibiting the offender from committing acts which otherwise constitute the crime of stalking against the victim in the criminal proceeding, shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than ten days and not more than six months and fined not more than $500.00 or both. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Harassing means engaging in a knowing and willful pattern of conduct directed at a specific person which seriously alarms, annoys or distresses the person and which serves no legitimate purpose. The conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause substantial emotional distress to the person. 
(2)  Pattern of conduct means a series of acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing an intent to conflict a continuity of emotional distress upon the person. Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning of pattern of conduct. 
(3)  Credible threat means a threat made with the apparent ability to carry out the threat so as to cause the person who is the target of the threat reasonably to fear for his or her safety. The threat must be against the life of or to cause great bodily injury to a person. 
(Ord. No. 032, 9-8-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40.2. 
Sec. 9-68. - Simple battery of a child welfare worker. 
(a)  (1)  Simple battery of a child welfare worker is a battery, other than an aggravated battery, committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe the victim is a child welfare worker working in the performance of employment duties who has presented proper identification. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, "child welfare worker" shall include any child protection investigator, family services worker, foster care worker, adoption worker, any supervisor of the above, or any person authorized to transport clients for the agency. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of simple battery of child welfare worker shall be fined not more than $500.00 and imprisoned for not less than 15 days nor more than six months without benefit of suspension of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35.1. 
Sec. 9-69. - Assault on a school teacher. 
(a)  (1)  Assault on a school teacher is an assault committed when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe the victim is a school teacher acting in the performance of his duties. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, "school teacher" means any teacher, instructor, administrator, staff person, or employee of any public or private elementary, secondary, vocational-technical training, special, or post secondary school or institution. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of assault on a school teacher shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:38.2. 
Sec. 9-70. - Interference with the custody of a child. 
(a)  Interference with the custody of a child is the intentional taking, enticing, or decoying away of a minor child by a parent not having a right of custody, with intent to detain or conceal such child from a parent having a right of custody pursuant to a court order or from a person entrusted with the care of the child by a parent having custody pursuant to a court order. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense that the offender reasonably believed his actions were necessary to protect the welfare of the child. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of interference with the custody of a child shall be fined not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. Costs of returning a child to the jurisdiction of the court shall be assessed against any defendant convicted of a violation of this section, as court costs as provided by the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
Cross reference- For identical provisions, see § 9-157. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:45.1. 
Sec. 9-71. - Violation of protective orders. 
(a)  Violation of protective orders is the willful disobedience of a preliminary or permanent injunction or protective order issued pursuant to R.S. 9:361 et seq., R.S. 9:372, R.S. 46:2131 et seq., Children's Code article 1564 et seq., or Code of Civil Procedure article 3604 after a contradictory court hearing, or the willful disobedience of a temporary restraining order or an ex parte protective order issued pursuant to R.S. 9:361 et seq., R.S. 9:372, R.S. 46:2131 et seq., Children's Code article 1564 et seq., or Code of Civil Procedure article 3604 if the defendant has been given notice of the temporary restraining order or ex parte protective order by service of process as required by law. A defendant may also be deemed to have been properly served if tendered a certified copy of a temporary restraining order or ex parte protective order by any law enforcement officer who has been called to any scene where the named defendant is present. Such service of a previously issued temporary restraining order or ex parte protective order if noted in the police report shall be deemed sufficient evidence of service of process and admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(b)  On a conviction for violation of protective orders which does not involve a battery to the person protected by the protective order, the offender shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(c)  Whoever is convicted of the offense of violation of a protective orders where the violation involves a battery to the person protected by the protective order, and who has not been convicted of violating a protective order or of an assault or battery upon the person protected by the protective order within the five years prior to commission of the instant offense, shall be fined not more than $500.00 and imprisoned for not less than 14 days nor more than six months. At least 14 days of the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this paragraph shall be without benefit of probation, parole, or suspension of sentence. If a portion of the sentence is imposed with benefit of probation, parole, or suspension of sentence, the court shall require the offender to participate in a court-approved domestic abuse counseling program as part of that probation. 
(d)  If, as part of any sentence imposed under this section, a fine is imposed, the court may direct that the fine be paid for the support of the spouse or children of the offender. 
(e)  Law enforcement officers shall use every reasonable means, including, but not limited to, immediate arrest of the violator, to enforce a preliminary or permanent injunction or protective order obtained pursuant to R.S. 9:306, R.S. 9:372, R.S. 46:2131 et seq., Children's Code article 1564 et seq., or Code of Civil Procedure article 3604 after a contradictory court hearing, or to enforce a temporary restraining order or ex parte protective order issued pursuant to R.S. 9:306, R.S. 9:372, R.S. 46:2131 et seq., Children's Code article 1564 et seq., or Code of Civil Procedure article 3604 if the defendant has been given notice of the temporary restraining order or exparts protective order by service of process as required by law. 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to limit the affect of any other criminal remedy or civil remedy. 
(g)  "Instant offense" as used in this section means the offense which is before the court. 
(h)  An offender ordered to participate in a domestic abuse counseling program under the provision of this section shall pay the cost incurred in participating in the program, unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. Failure to make payment under this subsection shall subject the offender to revocation of probation. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 196, 12-16-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:79. 
Sec. 9-72. - Battery of a school or recreation athletic contest official. 
(a)  (1)  Battery of a school or recreation athletic contest official is a battery committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe the victim is a school athletic or recreation contest official. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, "school athletic contest official" means any referee, umpire, coach, instructor, administrator, staff person, or school or school board employee of any public or private elementary and secondary school while actively engaged in the conducting, supervising, refereeing, or officiating of a school sanctioned interscholastic athletic contest. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, "recreation athletic contest official" means any referee, umpire, coach, instructor, administrator, staff person, or recreation employee of any public or quasi public recreation program while actively engaged in the conducting, supervising, refereeing, or officiating of a sanctioned recreation athletic contest. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever commits the crime of battery of a school or recreation athletic contest official shall be fined not more than $500.00 and imprisoned not less than 48 hours nor more than six months without benefit of suspension of sentence, except as provided in paragraph (2). 
(2)  The court, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of the sentence and place the offender on probation with the condition that he shall perform five days of community service work. Failure to successfully complete the community service work, as determined by the supervisor of the program to which is assigned, may result in revocation of probation. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:34.3. 
Sec. 9-73. - Domestic abuse battery. 
(a)  Domestic abuse battery is the intentional use of force or violence committed by one household member upon the person of another household member without the consent of the victim. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Household member means any person of the opposite sex presently living in the same residence or living in the same residence within five years of the occurrence of the domestic abuse battery with the defendant as a spouse, whether married or not. 
(2)  Community service activities as used in this section may include duty in any morgue, coroner's office, or emergency treatment room of a state-operated hospital or other state-operated emergency treatment facility, with the consent of the administrator of the morgue, coroner's office, hospital, or facility. 
(c)  On a first conviction, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the offender shall be fined not less than $300.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be imprisoned for not less than ten days nor more than six months. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
(1)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve two days in jail and participate in a court approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence; or 
(2)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform four eight-hour days of court approved community service activities and participate in a court approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence. 
(d)  On a conviction of a second offense, notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than $750.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months. At least 48 hours of sentence imposed shall be served without benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of sentence of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
(1)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve 15 days in jail and participate in a court approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence; or 
(2)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform 30 eight-hour days of court approved community service activities and participate in a court approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence. 
(e)  (1)  For purposes of determining whether a defendant has a prior conviction for violation of this section, a conviction under this section or a conviction under the laws of any state or an ordinance of a municipality, town, or similar political subdivision of another state which prohibits the intentional use of force or violence committed by one household member upon another household member of the opposite sex presently or formerly living in the same residence with the defendant as a spouse whether married or not, shall constitute a prior conviction. This determination shall be made by the court as a matter of law. 
(2)  For purpose of this section, a prior conviction shall not include a conviction for an offense under this section if committed more than ten years prior to the commission of the crime for which the defendant is being tried, and such conviction shall not be considered in the assessment of penalties hereunder. However, periods of time during which the offender was incarcerated in a penal institution in this or any other state shall be excluded in computing the ten-year period. 
(f)  An offender ordered to participate in a domestic abuse prevention program required by the provisions of this section shall pay the cost incurred in participation in the program. Failure to make such payment shall subject the offender to revocation of probation, unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. 
(g)  This subsection shall be cited as the "Domestic Abuse Child Endangerment Law." When the state proves, in addition to the elements of the crime as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, that a minor child 12 years of age or younger was present at the residence or any other scene at the time of the commission of the offense, of the sentence imposed by the court, the execution of the minimum mandatory sentence provided by subsection (b), (c), or (d) of this section, as appropriate, shall not be suspended. 
(h)  Any crime of violence, as defined by R.S. 14:2(13), against a person committed by one household member against another household member shall be designated as an act of domestic violence. 
(i)  If the victim of domestic abuse battery is pregnant and the offender knows that the victim is pregnant at the time of the commission of the offense, the offender shall be required to serve a minimum of 30 days without benefit of suspension of sentence for a first conviction. Upon a second conviction, the offender shall be imprisoned for not less than six months without benefit of suspension of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 197, 12-16-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:34.5. 
Sec. 9-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses against property, R.S. 14:51 et seq. 

Sec. 9-75. - Simple criminal damage to property. 
    Simple criminal damage to property is the intentional damaging of any property of another without the consent of the owner. Whoever commits the crime of simple criminal damage to property shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 101 7-A, § 9:56, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56. 
Sec. 9-76. - Defacing buildings. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deface any building or property within the city by making signs or figures thereon without the consent of the owner, or draw obscene signs or figures or write any indecent or obscene word, words or sentences on any building, room, hall closet, wall or fence where exposed to public view. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of defacing buildings shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:56.1, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 9-77. - Criminal mischief. 
(a)  Criminal mischief is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Tampering with any property of another, without the consent of the owner, with the intent to interfere with the free enjoyment of any rights of anyone thereto, or with the intent to deprive anyone entitled thereto of the full use of the property. 
(2)  Giving of any false alarm of fire or notice which would reasonable result in emergency response. 
(3)  Driving of any tack, nail, spike or metal over one and one-half inches in length into any tree located on lands belonging to another, without the consent of the owner, or without the later removal of the object from the tree. 
(4)  The felling, topping or pruning of trees or shrubs within the right-of-way of a state highway, without prior written approval of the assistant secretary of the department of transportation and development who supervises the office of highways of that department or his representative, provided prior written approval is not required for agents or employees of public utility companies in situations of emergency where the person or property others is endangered. 
(5)  Giving of any false report or complaint to the chief of police, or his officers, or to any officer of the law relative to the commission of, or an attempt to commit, a crime. 
(6)  Throwing any stone or any other missile in any street, avenue, alley, road, highway, open space, public square, or enclosure, or throwing any stone, missile, or other object from any place into any street, avenue, road, highway, alley, open space, public square, enclosure, or at any train, railway car, or locomotive. 
(7)  Taking temporary possession of any part or parts of a place of business, or remaining in a place of business after the person in charge of such business or portion of such business has directed such person to leave the premises and to desist from the temporary possession of any part or parts of such business. 
(8)  The communication to any person for the purpose of disrupting any public utility water service, when the communication causes any officer, employee, or agent of the service reasonably to be placed in sustained fear for his or another person's safety, or causes the evacuation of a water service building, or causes any discontinuance of any water services. 
(9)  The discharging of any firearm at a train, locomotive or railway car. 
(10)  Placing graffiti upon immovable or movable property, whether publicly or privately owned, without the consent of the owner, by means of the use of spray paint, ink, marking pens containing a nonwater soluble fluid, brushes, applicators, or other materials for marking, scratching, or etching. "Graffiti" includes, but is not limited to, any sign, inscription, design, drawing, diagram, etching, sketch, symbol, lettering, name, or marking placed upon immovable or movable property in such a manner and tin such a locations to deface the property and be visible to the general public. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of criminal mischief shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:59, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59. 
Sec. 9-78. - Destruction, defacing or removal of posted signs. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall intentionally and without authority destroy, deface or remove posted sign or signs designating or purporting to designate the boundary lines of immovable property. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:63.2, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-79. - Entry on or remaining in places or land after being forbidden. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall without authority go into or upon or remain in or attempt to go into or upon or remain in or upon any structure, watercraft or any other movable or immovable property which belongs to another after having been forbidden to do so either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by any owner, lessee or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purposes of this section, the above-mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable or immovable property at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:63.3, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Trespass generally, Ch. 13, Art. III; unlawful entry onto premises, § 13-37; failure to leave premises, § 13-38. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.3. 
Sec. 9-79.1. - Aiding and abetting others to enter or remain on premises where forbidden. 
(a)  No person shall incite, solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate, or procure any other person to go into or upon or to remain in or upon any structure, watercraft, or any other movable which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries, and bridges, or any part, portion, or area thereof, knowing that such other person has been forbidden to go or remain there, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by the owner, leases, or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. 
    For the purposes of this section, the above mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or part, portion, or area thereof, at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonable expected to be seen. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer investigating a complaint that the provisions of this section are being or have been violated or any such officer making any arrest for violation of the provisions of this section, is hereby vested with authority to require any person involved in such investigation or arrest to identify himself to such officer. Upon demand of such officer, the person involved shall inform the officer of his true name and address. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provision of subsection (a) or subsection (b) above shall be fined not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.4. 
Sec. 9-80. - Misdemeanor theft. 
(a)  Defined. Theft is the misappropriation or taking of anything of a value of less than $100.00 which belongs to another, either without the consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations. An intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be the subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of misdemeanor theft shall be imprisoned for not more than six months or may be fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:67, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67. 
Sec. 9-81. - Unauthorized use of a movable. 
(a)  Defined. Unauthorized use of a movable is the intentional taking or use of a movable which belongs to another either without the other's consent, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representatives, but without any intention to deprive the other of the movable permanently. The fact that the movable so taken or used may be classified as an immovable, according to the law pertaining to civil matters, is immaterial. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of unauthorized use of a movable having a value of $1,000.00 or less shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:68, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68. 
Sec. 9-82. - Illegal possession of stolen things. 
(a)  Defined. Illegal possession of stolen things is the intentional possessing, procuring, receiving or concealing of anything of value which has been the subject of any robbery or theft under circumstances which indicate that the offender knew or had good reason to believe that the thing was the subject of one of these offenses. 
(b)  Penalty. When the value of the stolen thing is less than $100.00, the offender shall be imprisoned for not more than six months, or may be fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(c)  Defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section committed by means of possessing, that the accused, within 72 hours of his acquiring knowledge or good reason to believe that a thing was the subject of robbery or theft, reports that fact or belief in writing to the district attorney in the parish of his domicile. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:69, 12-11434) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:69. 
Sec. 9-83. - Issuing worthless checks. 
(a)  Defined. Issuing worthless checks is the issuing, in exchange for anything of value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with intent to defraud, of any check, draft or order for the payment of money upon any bank or other depository knowing at the time of the issuing that the offender has not sufficient credit with the bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation. This provision shall not apply to payments on installments contracts or open accounts. 
(b)  Presumptive evidence of intent to defraud. The offender's failure to pay a check, draft or order, issued for value, within ten days after notice of its nonpayment upon presentation has been deposited by certified mail in the United States mail system, addressed to the issuer thereof either at the address shown on the instrument or the last known address for such person shown on the records of the bank upon which such instrument is drawn, or within ten days after delivery or personal tender of the written notice to the issuer by the payee or his agent shall be presumptive evidence of his intent to defraud. 
(c)  Restitution. In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed under this section, the court may, at its discretion, order as part of the sentence restitution in the amount of the check or checks. 
(d)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of issuing worthless checks shall be imprisoned for not more than six months, or may be fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:71, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:71. 
Sec. 9-84. - Illegal posting. 
(a)  Defined. Illegal posting is the posting or the placing and/or maintaining of posted signs on property by anyone other than: 
(1)  The owner or his duly authorized agent or representative; 
(2)  The lessee or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of illegal posting shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, and imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:63.1, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-85. - Leased movables; obtaining by false representation; failing to return or surrender; penalties. 
(a)  No person leasing a movable shall obtain or retain possession of the moveable by: 
(1)  Making a false statement or false representation of a material fact, where such false statement or false representation is made with the intent to obtain or retain possession of the movables; or 
(2)  Intentionally failing to return or surrender the movable when obligated under the terms of the lease or after expiration or cancellation of the lease. The lessee's failure to return or surrender the movable within 15 calendar days or the number of days for which the movable was leased, whichever is less, after the date written notice requesting return, or surrender of the movable was delivered or tendered to lessee's last known address, shall be presumptive evidence that the failure to return or surrender the movable was intentional. In order for the presumption to arise, the written notice must be sent by the lessor, the district attorney or the city prosecutor by means of registered or certified mail. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months or both. 
(c)  When a defendant is convicted of violating subparagraph (a)(2) and the notice requirements of subparagraph (a)(2) are complied with, a court shall order, in addition or in lieu of the penalty in subsection (b), upon proof established by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant pay restitution to the victim for all acknowledged appropriate fees assessed for intentional failure to return or surrender the leased movable after the agreed rental period or lease term or in the amount of lost profit resulting from the defendant's failure to return or surrender the movable as stated under the terms of the lease, or after the expiration or cancellation of the lease. The court may permit the prosecuting attorney to present evidence of the amount of the victim's lost profits either at the trial of the matter or at the sentencing of the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 025, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 076, 5-23-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:220.1. 
Sec. 9-86. - Institutional vandalism. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of institutional vandalism by knowingly vandalizing, defacing, or otherwise damaging the following: 
(1)  Any church, synagogue, or other building, structure, or place used for religious worship or other religious purpose. 
(2)  Any cemetery, mortuary or other facility used for the purpose of burial or memorializing the dead. 
(3)  Any school, educational facility, Main Street Program building, chamber of commerce office or building, tourist center office or building, governmental office or building, or community center. 
(4)  The grounds adjacent to and owned or rented or occupied by any institution, facility, building, structure or place described in subparagraphs (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(5)  Any personal property contained in any institution, facility, building, structure or place described in subparagraphs (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(6)  Any building owned by the United States, state, city, parish, or a political subdivision of the state, parish or city. 
(b)  Any violation of this law shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 064, 8-9-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:225. 
Sec. 9-87. - Criminal damage to coin operated devices. 
    Criminal damage to a coin-operated device is the intentional damaging of any coin-operated device belonging to another. 
    Coin-operated device means any parking meter, pay telephone, vending machine, money changing machine, or any other coin-activated device designed to accept money for a privilege, service, or product. 
    For purposes of this section, the value of damages shall be determined by the actual cost of repair, or replacement if necessary. 
    Whoever commits the crime of criminal damage to a coin-operated device, when the damage amounts to a value of less than $100.00 shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56.1. 
Sec. 9-88. - Theft of utility service; inference of commission of theft, penalties. 
(a)  Theft of utility service is the misappropriation, taking, or use of any electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications which belongs to another, is held for sale by another, or is being distributed by another, without the consent of the owner, seller, or distributor or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices, or representations. A taking, misappropriation, or use includes the diversion by means of device of any quantity of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications from the wires, cables, pipes, mains, or other means of transmission of such person, or by directly or indirectly preventing a metering device from properly registering the quantity of electricity, gas, water or telecommunications actually used, consumed or transmitted. 
(b)  The trier of fact may infer that there was a misappropriation, taking, or using without the consent of the owner, seller, or distributor, or that there was fraudulent conduct, practices, or representations when: 
(1)  There is on or about any wire, cable, pipe, main, or meter, or the equipment to which said wire, cable, pipe, main, or meter is affixed or attached, any device or any other means resulting in the diversion of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications, or any device or any other means resulting in the prevention of the proper action or accurate registration of the meter or meters used to measure the quantity of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications actually used, consumed, or transmitted, or interfering with the property action or accurate registration of such meter or meters; 
(2)  The person charged had custody or control of the room, structure, or place where such device, other means, or such wire, cable, pipe, main, meter, or equipment affixed or attached thereof was located; and 
(3)  The person charged benefited from the misappropriation of such utility service; or 
(4)  The person charged intentionally supplied false information in applying for such utility service. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of theft of utility service shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.6. 
Sec. 9-89. - Unauthorized entry of a place of business. 
(a)  Unauthorized entry of a place of business is the intentional entry by a person without authority into any structure or onto any premises belonging to another that is completely enclosed by any type of physical barrier that is at least six feet in height and used in whole or in part as a place of business. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unauthorized entry of a place of business shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned with or without hard labor for not more than six years, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:62.4. 
Sec. 9-90. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall without authorization intentionally enter any structure, watercraft or movable. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally enter immovable property owned by another: 
(1)  When he knows his entry is unauthorized; or 
(2)  Under circumstances where he reasonably should know his entry is unauthorized. 
(c)  (1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution pursuant to subsection (b)(2) that the person was unarmed and entered immovable property for the sole purpose of retrieving a dog or livestock. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution pursuant to subsection (b)(2) to show that property was not adequately posted in accordance with subsections (d) or (e), and (f) of this section. 
(d)  In order for forest land to be adequately posted the owner, lessee, or person having the written permission of the owner or lessee shall post the property by any of the following methods: 
(1)  Placing identifying paint marks on trees or posts around the area to be posted. Each paint mark shall be a vertical line of at least eight inches in length, and the bottom of the mark shall be no less than three feet nor more than five feet high. Such paint marks shall be placed no more than 100 feet apart and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the property. 
(2)  Placing signs around the area to be posted at no more than 100 feet apart and at normal points of ingress and egress. The signs shall bear the words "Posted", "No Trespassing", or "No" in letters at least three and one-half inches high and shall be so placed as to be readily visible to any person approaching the property. 
(3)  Constructing a fence around the area to be posted of not less than three-strand wire, or its equivalent, and placing signs that bear the words "Posted", "No Trespassing", or "No" in letters three and one-half inches high at normal points of ingress and egress. 
(e)  In order for any immovable property other than forest land to be adequately posted, including cultivated land, orchards, pasture lands, impoundments, or other immovable property, the owner, lessee, or person having the written permission of the owner or lessee shall post the property by any one of the following methods: 
(1)  Placing identifying paint marks on posts around the area to be posted. Each paint mark shall be a vertical line of at least eight inches in length, and the bottom of the mark shall be no less than three feet nor more than five feet high. Such paint marks shall be placed no more than 1,000 feet apart and at normal points of ingress and egress and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the property. 
(2)  Placing signs around the area to be posted at points no more than 1,000 feet apart and at each normal point of ingress and egress. The signs shall bear the words "Posted", "No Trespassing", or "No" in letters at least three and one-half inches high and shall be so placed as to be readily visible to any person approaching the property. 
(3)  Constructing a fence around the area to be posted of not less than three-strand wire, or its equivalent, and placing signs that bear the words "Posted", "No Trespassing", or "No" in letters at least three and one-half inches high at normal points of ingress and egress. 
(f)  The type of color of the paint to be used for posting shall be prescribed by regulation by the Louisiana Forestry Commission, which shall not select a color that is presently being used by the timber industry in this state to mark land line or property lines. The color of paint prescribed shall not be used on trees or posts for any other purposes. 
(g)  Affirmative defenses to a prosecution pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be: 
(1)  That the entry was by a registered land surveyor, and his personnel, engaged in the "Practice of Land Surveying", as defined in R.S. 37:682, or a person employed by a public utility acting in the course and scope of his employment relating to operation, repair, or maintenance of a public utility facility; or 
(2)  That the entry was by an employee or agent of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry and was for the purpose of locating and suppressing wildfire in accordance with the rules and regulations of the department. 
(h)  Whoever commits the crime of criminal trespass shall be fined not more than $500.00 and/or serve 30 days in jail. 
(i)  Upon a second conviction, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be imprisoned for not more than six months, or shall be fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63. 
Sec. 9-91. - Vehicular trespass. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly enter into or upon the motor vehicle, boat, or aircraft of another, without the consent of its owner or of any person who has a right to possession superior to that of the entrant, when the entrant is not otherwise privileged to do so. 
(b)  "Enter into or upon" means: 
(1)  To open or unlock any door, window, or other access opening of any motor vehicle, boat or aircraft. 
(2)  To be astride of any motor vehicle, boat or aircraft. 
(3)  To be supported by any motor vehicle, boat or aircraft. 
(c)  An entrant is privileged to enter if: 
(1)  He is attempting to render aid or assistance to an ill or injured person. 
(2)  He reasonably believes that the entry is necessary to prevent injury to person or property. 
(3)  He is a state or local law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties. 
(d)  Whoever commits the crime of vehicular trespass shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
Sec. 9-92. - Fraudulent acquisition of a rental motor vehicle. 
(a)  Fraudulent acquisition of a rental motor vehicle is the lease or rental of a motor vehicle from a commercial lessor by the intentional giving or communicating payment information to the commercial lessor relating to how the lessee will pay the rental fee, or part thereof, when the lessee knows or reasonably should know that the payment information is or was false, fraudulent, insufficient, or incorrect. For purposes of this section, incorrect payment information includes but is not limited to the presentation or tender of a credit card or check, when the credit card spending authorization or funds in the checking account are insufficient to cover the payment of the rental vehicle. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section may be imprisoned for up to six months, or fined $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.14. 
Sec. 9-93. - Identity theft. 
(a)  As used in this section the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Personal identifying information" shall include but not be limited to an individual's: 
a.  Social Security number. 
b.  Driver's license number. 
c.  Checking account number. 
d.  Savings account number. 
e.  Credit card number. 
f.  Debit card number. 
g.  Electronic identification number. 
h.  Digital signatures. 
i.  Birth certificate. 
j.  Date of birth. 
k.  Mother's maiden name. 
l.  Armed forces identification number. 
(b)  Identity theft is the intentional use or attempted use with fraudulent intent by any person of any personal identifying information of another person to obtain, whether contemporaneously or not, credit money, goods, services, or anything else of value without the authorization or consent of the other person. 
(c)  (1)  Whoever commits the crime of identity theft when credit, money, goods, services, or anything else of value is obtained which amounts to a value less than $300.00 shall be imprisoned for not more than six months, or may be fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(d)  When there has been a theft by a number of distinct acts of the offender, the aggregate of the amount of the theft shall determine the grade of the offense. 
(e)  In addition to the foregoing penalties, a person convicted under this section may be ordered to make full restitution to the victim and any other person who has suffered a financial loss as a result of the offense. If a person ordered to make restitution pursuant to this section is found to be indigent and therefore unable to make restitution in full at the time of conviction, the court shall order a periodic payment plan consistent with the person's financial ability. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who obtains another's driver's license or other form of identification for the sole purpose of misrepresenting his age. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.16. 
Sec. 9-94. - Theft of motor vehicle fuel. 
(a)  No person shall dispense fuel, including gasoline and diesel, into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle at an establishment in which motor gasoline or diesel is offered for retail sale and leave the premises of the establishment unless the payment or authorized charge for the fuel has been made. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment or both, in accordance with the penalties prescribed in R.S. 14:67. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (1) above, the driver's license of any person violating the provisions of this section shall be suspended upon conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere. Upon a first conviction, the driver's license suspension shall be for a period not to exceed six months. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, the suspension shall be for a period not to exceed one year. Upon conviction, plea of guilty, or nolo contendere, the court shall surrender the driver's license to the department of public safety and corrections for suspension in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.17. 
Sec. 9-94.1. - Theft of the assets of an aged person or disabled person. 
(a)  As used in this section the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  Aged person is any person 60 years of age or older. 
(2)  Disabled person is a person 18 years of age or older who has a mental, physical, or developmental disability that substantially impairs the person ability to provide adequately for his own care or protection. 
(3)  Health care is any expense resulting from medical, personal, residential, or other care provided or assistance received from any adult care facility, adult foster home, adult congregate living facility, nursing home, or other institution or agency responsible for the care of any aged or disabled person. 
(b)  Theft of the assets of an aged person or disabled person is any of the following: 
(1)  The intentional use, consumption, conversion, management, or appropriation of any aged person's or disabled person's funds, assets, or property which is required or designated for such person's health care without his authorization or consent for the profit, advantage, or benefit of a person other than the aged person or disabled person without his authorization or consent. 
(2)  The intentional misuse of an aged or disabled person's power of attorney to use, consume, convert, manage, or appropriate any funds, assets, or property of an aged person or disabled person which is required or designated for such person's health care for the profit, advantage, or benefit of a person other than the aged person or disabled person without his authorization or consent. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of theft or the assets of an aged person or disabled person when the value of the theft equals $300.00 or less may be imprisoned for not more than six months and shall be fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(d)  When there have been a number of distinct acts of theft of the assets of an aged person or disabled person, the aggregate of the values of each act shall determine the grade of the offense. 
(e)  In addition to all other penalties, a person convicted under this section shall be ordered to make full restitution to the victim and any other person who has suffered a financial loss as a result of the offense. If a person ordered to make restitution pursuant to this section is found to be indigent and therefore unable to make restitution in full at the time of conviction, the court shall order a periodic payment plan consistent with the person's financial ability. 
(f)  Any charges made under this section shall be reported as provided in R.S. 14:403.2. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.21. 
Sec. 9-94.2. - Unauthorized removal of shopping cart, basket, or dairy case. 
(a)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to remove a shopping cart, basket, or dairy case belonging to another from the parking area or grounds of any store without authorization therefor. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unauthorized removal of a shopping cart, basket, or dairy case from the parking area or grounds of a store shall be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68.1. 
Sec. 9-94.3. - Unauthorized ordering of goods or services. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to intentionally place an order for any goods or services to be supplied or delivered to another person when all of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The person receiving the goods or services has not previously authorized such an order, does not reside with the person who placed the order, and the goods or services are not being given as a gift to that person. 
(2)  The person receiving the goods or services is required to pay such goods or services, either in advance or upon delivery and has not previously agreed to do so, or is required to return the items to the sender at his expense. 
(3)  The person placing the order for goods or services intends to harass or annoy the person receiving such goods or services. 
(b)  Receipt and use of an item described in this section by the receiver shall constitute an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section. 
(c)  If the person who places the order for the goods or services is told by the customer who receives the goods or services that the customer did not desire the goods or services, the customer is released from any obligation to pay for such goods or services and the providing person shall not be liable under this section. 
(d)  Whoever violates subsection (a) shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(e)  In addition to any other sentence imposed under this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may require the offender to make restitution to the victim for any loss to the victim caused by the offense. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68.6. 
Sec. 9-94.4. - Unlawful playing of video draw poker devices by person under the age of 21; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to play video draw poker devices. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "video draw poker device" means a device, as defined in R.S. 27:301(B)(15), placed in an establishment licensed for operation and regulated under the applicable provisions of R.S. title 27, chapter 6. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $100.00 for the first offense, $250.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for the third offense. 
(d)  A gaming licensee, or a specifically authorized employee or agent of a gaming licensee, may use reasonable force to detain a person for questioning on the premises of the gaming establishment, for a length of time, not to exceed 60 minutes, unless it is reasonable under the circumstances that the person be detained longer, when he has reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated the provisions of this section. The licensee or his employee or agent may also detain such a person for arrest by a peace officer. The detention shall not constitute an arrest. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90.4. 
Sec. 9-94.5. - Unlawful presence of a sexually violent predator. 
(a)  Unlawful presence of a sexually violent predator is: 
(1)  The physical presence of a sexually violent predator on the school property of any public or private, elementary or secondary school, or in any motor vehicle or other means of conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by such school to transport students to or from school or a school-related activity when persons under the age of 18 years are present on the school property or in a school vehicle; or 
(2)  The physical residing of a sexually violent predator within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school. 
(b)  It shall not be a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section if the offender has permission to be present from the superintendent of the school board in the case of a public school or the principal or headmaster in the case of a private school. 
(c)  If permission is granted to an offender to be present on public school property by the superintendent for that public school pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, then the superintendent shall notify the principal at least 24 hours in advance of the visit by the offender. This notification shall include the nature of the visit and the date and time in which the sex offender will be present in the school. The offender shall notify the office of the principal upon arrival on the school property and upon departing from the school. If the offender is to be present in the vicinity of children, the offender shall remain under the direct supervision of a school official. 
(d)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  School property means any property used for school purposes, including but not limited to school buildings, playgrounds, and parking lots. 
(2)  Sexually violent predator means a person defined as such in R.S. 15:541(16). 
(e)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $1,000.00, imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.1. 
Sec. 9-94.6. - Retaliation by a minor against a parent, legal custodian, witness, or complainant. 
(a)  Retaliation by a minor against a parent, legal custodian, witness, or complainant is the willful, malicious, and repeated threats of force against or harassment of a person or his property by a minor under the age of 17 accompanied by an overt act on the part of the minor or by the apparent capability of the minor to carry out the threat or harassment, against a parent, legal custodian, person who filed a complaint against the minor, or a witness in a criminal case in which the minor is the defendant or charged with a delinquency and the minor intends to place that person in a reasonable fear of death, serious bodily injury, or damage to property. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) do not apply if the conduct of the parent, legal custodian, person who filed a complaint against the minor, or a witness in a criminal case in which the minor is the defendant or charged with a delinquency in acting in violation of any criminal law. 
(c)  A minor who violates the provisions of this section shall be placed in the custody of the department of public safety and corrections for a period not to exceed six months. A minimum condition of probation shall be that the offender participate in 40 hours of court-approved community service activities or a combination of 40 hours of court-approved community service and attendance at a court-approved family counseling program by both a parent or legal custodian and the minor. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92.3. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses affecting the public morals, R.S. 14:80 et seq. 

Sec. 9-95. - Prostitution. 
(a)  Definition and prohibition. Prostitution is: 
(1)  The practice by a person of indiscriminate sexual intercourse with others for compensation, and shall be unlawful. 
(2)  The solicitation by one person with the intent to engage in indiscriminate sexual intercourse with the latter for compensation, and shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of prostitution shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:83, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:82. 
Sec. 9-96. - Soliciting for prostitutes. 
(a)  Definition and prohibition. Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing or transporting a person to any place with the intention of promoting prostitution and shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of soliciting for prostitution shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:84, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:83. 
Sec. 9-97. - Letting premises for prostitution. 
(a)  Definition. Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises knowing that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of letting premises for prostitution shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:85, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:85. 
Sec. 9-98. - Gambling. 
(a)  Defined. Gambling is the intentional conducting, or directly assisting in the conducting, as a business, of any game, contest, lottery or contrivance whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of gambling shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:90, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90. 
Sec. 9-99. - Gambling in public. 
(a)  Defined. Gambling in public is the aiding or abetting or participation in any game, contest, lottery or contrivance, in any location or place open to the view of the public or the people at large, such as streets, highways, vacant lots, neutral grounds, alleyway, sidewalk, park, bench, parking lot, or condemned structures, whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit activities authorized under the charitable raffles, bingo and keno licensing law, nor shall it apply to bona fide fairs and festivals conducted for charitable purposes. 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of gambling in public shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:90.2, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90.2. 
Sec. 9-100. - Owner prohibited to rent or let premises for gambling; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally rent, let or permit any premises, building, room or place for the purpose of being used as a place to bet, wager or gamble in any manner whatsoever. A place within the intent of this section shall be considered as used for gambling if anything of value be bet therein for gambling or wagering. 
(b)  Whoever rents or lets premises for gambling shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:90.3, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-101. - Peeping Tom. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall perform such acts as will make him a "peeping Tom" on or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "peeping Tom." 
(b)  Definition. "Peeping Tom," as used in this section, means one who peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, situated on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the "peeping Tom" be upon the premises of the person being spied upon. 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:284, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:284. 
Sec. 9-102. - Vagrancy. 
(a)  Persons guilty of vagrancy. The following persons are and shall be guilty of vagrancy: 
(1)  Habitual drunkards; 
(2)  Persons who live in houses of ill fame or who habitually associate with prostitutes; 
(3)  Able-bodied persons who beg or solicit alms; provided, that this section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious, charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization thereof; 
(4)  Habitual gamblers or persons who for the most part maintain themselves by gambling; 
(5)  Able-bodied persons without lawful means of support who do not seek employment and take employment when it is available to them; 
(6)  Able-bodied persons of the age of majority who obtain their support gratis from persons receiving old age pensions or from receiving welfare assistance from the state; 
(7)  Persons who loaf the streets habitually or who frequent the streets habitually at late or unusual hours of the night, or who loiter around any public place of assembly without lawful business or reason to be present; 
(8)  Persons found in or near any structure, movable, vessel or private grounds without being able to account for their lawful presence therein; or 
(9)  Prostitutes. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of vagrancy shall be fined not more than $200.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:107, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:107. 
Sec. 9-103. - Telephone communications, improper language, harassment. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in or institute a telephone call, telephone conversation or telephone conference with another person, anonymously or otherwise, and therein use obscene, profane, vulgar, lewd, lascivious or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate or harass another person; 
(2)  Make repeated telephone communications anonymously or otherwise in a manner reasonably expected to annoy, abuse, torment, harass, embarrass or offend another, whether or not conversation ensues; 
(3)  Make a telephone call and intentionally fail to hang up or disengage the connection; or 
(4)  Knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(b)  Place of offenses. Any offense committed by use of a telephone as set forth in this section shall be deemed to have committed at either the place where the telephone call or calls originated or at the place where the telephone call or calls were received. 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:106,12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:285. 
Sec. 9-104. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally possess marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or chemical derivatives thereof. 
(b)  Definition. "Marijuana" means all parts of plants of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plants, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(c)  Penalty for possession. Whoever is found guilty of possession of marijuana shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:966, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Possession of hypodermic needles any syringes, § 9-179; drug paraphernalia prohibited, § 9-180. 
State Law reference- Drug offenses, R.S. 40:962 et seq. 
Sec. 9-105. - Criminal neglect of family. 
(a)  (1)  Criminal neglect of family is the desertion or intentional nonsupport: 
a.  By a spouse of his or her spouse who is in destitute or necessitous circumstances; or 
b.  To either parent of his minor child who is in destitute or necessitous circumstances, there being a duty established by this section for either parent to support his child. 
(2)  Each parent shall have this duty without regard to the reasons and irrespective of the causes of his living separate from the other parent. The duty established by this section shall apply retrospectively to all children born prior to the effective date of this section. 
(b)  Whenever a husband has left his wife or minor child or a wife has left her husband or minor child in destitute or necessitous circumstances and has not provided means of support within 30 days thereafter, his or her failure to so provide shall be only presumptive evidence for the purpose of determining the substantive elements of this offense that at the time of leaving he or she intended desertion and nonsupport. The receipt of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) shall constitute only presumptive evidence of necessitous circumstances for purposes of proving the substantive elements of this offense. Physical incapacity which prevents a person from seeking any type of employment constitutes a defense to the charge of criminal neglect of family. 
(c)  Laws attaching a privilege against the disclosure of communications between husband and wife are inapplicable to proceedings under this section. Husband and wife are competent witnesses to testify to any relevant matter. 
(d)  Whoever commits the offense of criminal neglect of family shall be fined not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "spouse" shall mean a husband or wife. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:74.1. 
Secs. 9-106-9-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Illegal carrying of weapons in public buildings, § 9-123. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95. 

Sec. 9-115. - Illegal carrying of weapons. 
(a)  Definitions. Illegal carrying of a weapon is: 
(1)  The intentional concealment of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, on one's person; 
(2)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, at any time by an enemy alien; 
(3)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any tools, or dynamite, or nitroglycerine, or explosives, or other instrumentality customarily used by thieves or burglars, at any time by any person with the intent to commit a crime; or 
(4)  The manufacture, ownership, possession, custody or use of any switchblade knife, spring knife or other knife or similar instrument having a blade which may be automatically unfolded or extended from a handle by the manipulation of a button, switch, latch or similar contrivance. 
(5)  The possession, custody or use of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, by a minor. 
(b)  Penalty for commission; forfeiture of weapon. Whoever commits the crime of illegal carrying of weapons shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. Additionally, the court may order the forfeiture of the weapon in accordance with law. 
(c)  Supervision by parents, etc. The provisions of subparagraph (a)(5) shall not apply to minors in possession, custody or use of firearms while under the supervision of their parent, legal guardian or under adult supervision. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:95, 12-11-84; Amend. of 5-10-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95. 
Sec. 9-116. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  Shooting of firearms within the city. It shall be unlawful to shoot or discharge a gun, pistol, revolver, rifle or other firearm within the city, except in a regularly established rifle or pistol range built and operated under the proper safety precautions. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to members of the federal, state or municipal government authorized to carry such firearms, when acting within the scope of their authority. 
(b)  Definition. Illegal use of weapons or dangerous instrumentalities is the intentional or criminally negligent discharging of any firearm, gun, pistol, revolver, rifle or air gun, or the throwing, placing or other use of any article, liquid or substance where it is foreseeable that it may result in death or great bodily harm to a human being. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the discharge of a firearm at regularly established rifle or pistol range built and operated under the proper safety precautions. 
(c)  Penalty for commission; forfeiture of weapons. Whoever commits the above illegal acts shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. Additionally, the court may order that the weapon be forfeited in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:93, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Illegal use of weapons, R.S. 14:94. 
Sec. 9-117. - Possession of weapons where alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, in any premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed on the premises, except the owner or lessee of the premises, or their employees, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, state police, city police, constables, town marshals or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of their duties. 
(b)  Authority to search. Any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police, city police, constables, town marshals or person vested with police power may search any person found in any place where alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed on the premises, and shall confiscate any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon which such peace officer may find. This search shall be limited to only weapons, unless there is probable cause for a wider search. Any person who enters a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed on the premises does, by the mere fact of entering, consent to a search of his person for any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon while on said premises by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police, constable, town marshal or persons vested with police power without a warrant. 
(c)  Inclusion of parking lots. The phrase "premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed on the premises" shall include all of the licensed premises, including the parking lot. 
(d)  Evidence. Any gun or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon found on any person while on the premises of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed may be used as evidence in court. 
(e)  Penalty for commission; forfeiture of weapon. Whoever commits the crime of possession of a weapon where alcoholic beverages are sold and/or consumed shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. Additionally, the court may order the forfeiture of the weapon in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:95.3, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95.5. 
Sec. 9-118. - Abandoning iceboxes and refrigerators. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock, door, hinge, or other device thereon without first removing the said snap lock, doors, hinges and other devices from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(b)  Penalty. Whoever is found guilty of abandoning iceboxes and refrigerators shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1009, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Abandoned junk, vehicles, etc., § 13-95 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:324. 
Sec. 9-119. - Purchasing or selling gasoline or mineral spirits in glass containers. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or sell gasoline or mineral spirits in glass containers. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1000, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Abandoned junk, vehicles, etc., 13-95 et seq. 
Sec. 9-120. - Possession or sale of fireworks. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or sell fireworks in violation of sections 10-49 through 10-53 of this Code. 
(b)  Penalty. Whoever is found guilty of the possession or sale of fireworks shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1005, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Fireworks, § 10-49 et seq. 
Sec. 9-121. - Possession of firearms at city parks; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a firearm, pellet gun, BB gun or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon on property comprising parks, playgrounds, recreational areas or facilities owned or operated by the city. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1011, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-122. - Model glue; use of; unlawful sales to minors. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "model glue" shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles and which contains one or more of the following volatile solvents: 
(1)  Toluol; 
(2)  Hexane; 
(3)  Trichlorethylene; 
(4)  Aceton[e]; 
(5)  Toluene; 
(6)  Ethyl acetate; 
(7)  Methyl ethyl ketone; 
(8)  Trichlorochthane; 
(9)  Isopropanol; 
(10)  Methyl isobutyl ketone; 
(11)  Methyl cellosolve acetate; 
(12)  Cyclohexanone; or 
(13)  Any other solvent, material, substance, chemical or combination thereof having the property of releasing toxic vapors. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any type of model glue for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system; or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  Sales to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any type of model glue to a minor for any reason whatsoever. 
(d)  Transfer prohibited; exception. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise transfer possession of any type of model glue to any minor for any purpose whatsoever, unless the minor receiving possession of the model glue is the child or ward of and under the lawful custody of the vendor, donor or transferor of the glue. 
(e)  Penalty for violation. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:965, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.1. 
Sec. 9-123. - Illegal carrying of weapon in public building. 
(a)  Prohibitions and exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon in any public building or grounds, except for sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, state police, city police, constables, town marshals, or other persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of their duties. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whoever commits the crime of illegally carrying a weapon in a public building shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. Additionally, the court may order the forfeiture of the weapon or weapons in accordance with law. 
(Ord. of 7-23-85, § 9:95.1) 
Editor's note- An amendment enacted July 23, 1985, added provisions designated as a new § 9-95.1. In order to provide better classification and keep similar provisions together, the editor, at his discretion, has redesignated these provisions as § 9-123. 
Cross reference- For other provisions pertaining to weapons, see the following sections: 9-115, 9-116, 9-117, 9-121. 
Sec. 9-124. - Unlawful use of a laser on a police officer. 
(a)  Unlawful use of a laser on a police officer is the intentional projection of a laser on or at a police officer without consent of the officer when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe the officer is a police officer acting in the performance of his duty and that the officer will be injured, intimidated, or placed in fear of bodily harm. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  Laser means any device that projects a beam or point of light be means of light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation or any device that emits light which stimulates the appearance of a laser. 
(2)  Police officer shall include commissioned police officers, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, marshals, deputy marshals, correctional officers, constables, wildlife enforcement agents, and probation and parole officers. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of unlawful use of a laser on a police officer shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:37.3. 
Secs. 9-125-9-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, Ch. 13; unnecessary noise, § 13-111. 
State Law reference- Abatement of public nuisances, R.S. 13:4711 et seq.; offenses affecting the general peace and order, R.S. 14:103 et seq. 

Sec. 9-133. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  Defined. Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public: 
(1)  Engaging in a fistic encounter; 
(2)  Addressing any offensive, derisive or annoying words to any other person who is lawfully in any street or other public place; or call him by any offensive or derisive name, or make any noise or exclamation in his presence and hearing with the intent to deride, offend or annoy him, or to prevent him from pursuing his lawful business, occupation or duty; 
(3)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; 
(4)  Engaging in any act in a violent and tumultuous manner by any three or more persons; 
(5)  Holding of an unlawful assembly; or 
(6)  Interruption of any lawful assembly of people. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of disturbing the peace shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:103, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:103. 
Sec. 9-134. - Keeping a disorderly place. 
(a)  Defined. Keeping a disorderly place is the intentional maintaining of a place to be used habitually for any illegal purpose. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of keeping a disorderly place shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:104, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:104. 
Sec. 9-135. - Letting a disorderly place. 
(a)  Defined. Letting a disorderly place is the granting of the right to use any premises knowing that it is to be used as a disorderly place or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of letting a disorderly place shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:105, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:105. 
Sec. 9-136. - Demonstrations in or near building housing a court or occupied as residence by judge, juror, witness or court officer. 
(a)  Prohibition. Whoever, with the intent of interfering with, obstructing or impeding the administration of justice, or with the intent of influencing any judge, juror, witness or court officer in the discharge of his duty, pickets or parades in or near a building housing a court of the state, or in or near a building or residence occupied or used by such judge, juror, witness or court officer, or with such intent uses any sound-truck or similar device or resorts to any other demonstration in or near any such building or residence, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:102, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:401. 
Sec. 9-137. - Profanity prohibited; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use indecent, vile, profane or blasphemous language which tends to foreseeably cause a breach of the peace on or near the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other places of public resort. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of using profanity shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:106.1, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-138. - Loitering prohibited for the purpose of engaging in drug related activity, penalty for violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, street, alley, road, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug related activity contrary to any of the provisions of R.S. title 40, chapter 4, part X, sections 961 through 1001; and chapter X-B, sections 1031 through 1036. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or distributor. For purposes of this ordinance, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or distributor" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession, distribution, manufacture or sale of any of the substances referred to in R.S. title 40, chapter 4, part X, sections 961 through 1001; and chapter X-B, sections 1031 through 1036, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as for example only, "needle tracks"; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia as defined in section 9-180; 
(2)  Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his/her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; 
(3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a "lookout"; 
(4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang", or association which has it purpose illegal drug activity; 
(5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion; 
(6)  Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer; 
(7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug related activity; 
(8)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking; 
(9)  The premises involved are known to have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of drug activity; 
(10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, manufacturer or distributor, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be imprisoned for not more than six months and/or be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 106, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 9-139. - Obstructing public passages. 
    No person shall willfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road, or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building, structure, water craft or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both fined and imprisoned. 
    This section shall not be applicable to the erection or construction of any barricades or other forms of obstructions as a safety measure in connection with construction, excavation, maintenance, repair, replacement, or other work, in or adjacent to any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road, or other passageway, nor to the placing of barricades or other forms of obstruction by governmental authorities, or any officer or agent thereof, in the proper performance of duties. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100.1. 
Secs. 9-140-9-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING MINORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Sexual offenses affecting minors, R.S. 14:80 et seq.; offenses affecting the health and morals of minors, R.S. 14:91 et seq. 

Sec. 9-148. - Curfew. 
(a)  There shall be a curfew of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. on Monday through Thursday, and between 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. on Friday through Sunday of each week affecting all minors. 
(b)  The only exceptions to this section shall be those minors who are employed and must be returning from work after curfew hours, and those minors participating in organized recreational activities, such as dances, ballgames, etc., in which cases the minors shall have 30 minutes from the time the activity is concluded within which to be off the streets. The same shall apply to minors who are employed, who shall have 30 minutes from the time they get off work within which to be off the streets. Minors involved in emergency situations shall be excepted from this section. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1014, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 031, 9-8-92) 
Sec. 9-148.1. - Curfew for persons under 17 years of age; school attendance. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the definitions set forth below: 
    Custodian: A "parent" as defined in Louisiana Children's Code, article 116 or a person with "legal custody" as defined in Louisiana Children's Code, article 116 whom the care or supervision of the child has been temporarily and lawfully delegated or assigned. 
    Establishment: Any privately owned place where business is carried on for a profit or any place of amusements or entertainment to which the public is invited. 
    Minor: Any unmarried natural person under 17 years of age who has not been judicially emancipated. 
    Permit: To knowingly allow or knowingly fail to prevent; or the failure to prevent due to lack of reasonable efforts or concern or due to failure to supervise and control. 
    Place of abode: The minor's permanent residence, home or habitation or the place of human habitation where the minor has been lawfully directed or allowed by his custodian to stay for the evening. 
    Public place: Any public street, road, highway, avenue, alley, park, playground, wharf, dock, public building, vacant lot or other public place. 
    Reasonable errand: 
(1)  When a minor is present in a public place, or establishment, pursuant to his custodian's direction, in order to accomplish an emergency mission or a legitimate family function in a normal and customary fashion considering the time of day. 
(2)  When a minor is in transit to or from a point less than 300 feet from the juvenile's place of abode, under his custodian's direction. 
(3)  When a minor remains in a public place or establishment pursuant to his custodian's direction for purpose of the minor's employment in compliance with Louisiana child labor laws. 
(4)  When a minor attends or is in transit to or from associational activities such as religious or school meetings, organized dances, and theater and sporting or organized competitions or similar recreational events, when reasonable and direct travel to and from these activities has to be made during the curfew period, provided the minor, in transit from such an activity, is proceeding directly to his place of abode. 
    Remain: To unnecessarily tarry, stay, loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play. 
(b)  Remaining on public places during school hours; refusal to give information to peace officers: 
(1)  Unless accompanied by his custodian, it shall be unlawful for any minor, whether on foot or in or on a vehicle, to remain in any public place or establishment between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. any day during which said minor is required to be in school. This restriction shall not apply to any minor who has authorization from school authorities excusing him from attendance at that particular time. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to unreasonably refuse to give his correct and complete name and address and the school he/she attends and to state how his custodian can be contacted when reasonably requested to do so by a police officer or other authorized peace officer pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Unlawful conduct of custodian of minors: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any custodian [un]reasonably to permit a minor to violate any part of subsection (b)(1) above. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any custodian unreasonably to permit a minor to remain in police custody for more than 24 hours after the minor has been detained or more than six hours after the custodian has been notified of the detention without communicating with the authority detaining or holding the minor about the possibility of the minor's release. 
(d)  Enforcement; daytime violations. On first and subsequent incidents if a police officer or other authorized peace officer or other person reasonably believes that a minor is violating any provisions of this section, the officer or other authorized person [shall] complete a juvenile warning citation and take such minor to the appropriate authorities of the Juvenile Division, Plaquemine Police Department. 
(e)  Penalty provisions: 
(1)  A custodian who violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor punishable by the city court. 
(2)  A custodian found in violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00. In appropriate cases, the city prosecutor may recommend that the court suspend the sentence on a first offense and, as a condition of such suspension, order or require the performance of up to 60 hours of community service by the custodian. As part of or in lieu of any other penalty that may be imposed under this section, a parent, tutor, custodian or other persons may be required by the court to obtain counseling or attend classes or programs to improve parenting and child raising skills. 
(3)  If a custodian is convicted of a third offense, the record of the prosecution shall be transmitted by the prosecuting attorney (if other than the district attorney) to the district attorney for review for possible action under the Louisiana Children's Code. 
(Ord. No. 099, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 9-149. - Unlawful sales to minors. 
(a)  Unlawful sales to minors is the selling or otherwise delivering for value by anyone over the age of 17 of any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content or any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon to any person under the age of 18. Lack of knowledge of the minor's age shall be not be a defense. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unlawful sales to minors shall be fined not more than $300.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any person convicted of selling or distributing alcoholic beverages to minors shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  On first conviction, a mandatory fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00. 
(2)  On subsequent convictions, a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $300.00 and imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:91, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.11. 
Sec. 9-150. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons over 17 and under 18 years of age. 
(a)  Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person over the age of 17 and under the age of 18 to purchase any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding $25.00 or be imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:91.1, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.12. 
Sec. 9-151. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons under age 17. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 17 to purchase any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  Whosoever is charged with the violation of this section shall be remanded to the juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:91.2, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.12. 
Sec. 9-152. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by adults on behalf of minors. 
(a)  Prohibition. It is unlawful for any adult to purchase on behalf of a person under the age of 18 any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whosoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding $100.00 or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:91.3, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.13. 
Sec. 9-153. - Unlawful entry into business selling alcoholic beverages by persons under 18 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to enter or attempt to enter any place wherein alcoholic beverages of either high or low alcoholic content are the principal commodity sold or dispensed. Anyone over the age of 17 and under the age of 18 found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not exceeding $200.00 or be imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both. Anyone under the age of 17 charged with violations of this section shall be remanded to juvenile court for hearing and disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:91.4, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-154. - Sale of tobacco to persons under 18 years of age prohibited; exception; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, barter or exchange by wholesale or retail tobacco in the form of cigarettes, cigar or any form to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  The provisions hereof shall not apply to the sales of tobacco to minors engaged in business as merchants for the purpose of resale of same. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of paragraph (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1013, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.8. 
Sec. 9-155. - Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles. 
(a)  Definition; enumerated acts. Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles is the intentional enticing, aiding or permitting, by anyone over the age of 17, or any child under the age of 17, and no exception shall be made for a child who may be emancipated by marriage or otherwise, to: 
(1)  Beg, sign or sell any article or play any musical instrument in any public place for the purpose of receiving alms; 
(2)  Associate with any vicious or disreputable persons or frequent places where the same may be found; 
(3)  Visit any place where beverages of either high or low alcoholic content are the principal commodity sold or given away; 
(4)  Visit any place where a gambling device is found or where gambling habitually occurs; 
(5)  Habitually trespass where it is recognized he has no right to be; 
(6)  Use any vile, obscene or indecent language; 
(7)  Perform any sexually immoral act; 
(8)  Absent himself or remain away, without authority of his parents or tutor, from his home or place of abode; 
(9)  Violate any law of the state or ordinance of any parish or village or town or city of the state; or 
(10)  Visit any place where sexually indecent and obscene material, of any nature, is offered for sale, displayed or exhibited. 
(b)  Lack of knowledge of age not a defense. Lack of knowledge of the juvenile's age shall not be a defense. 
(c)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of contributing to the delinquency of a juvenile shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 10 17-A, § 9:92, 12 -11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92. 
Sec. 9-156. - Truants. 
(a)  Any child between the ages of seven and 15 years found in or on any public street or public place or in or on any private commercial establishment during regular school hours on regular school days is hereby declared to be truant and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any police officer, sheriffs deputy, constable or state police officer discovering, finding or becoming aware of any truant child as defined in paragraph (a) shall deliver the child in one of the following manners: 
(1)  To the custody of the principal of the school to which the truant child is assigned and/or required to attend; 
(2)  To the custody of the parent or guardian of the child, in which event the law enforcement officer making such delivery shall notify the principal of the school as soon as possible. 
(3)  To the custody of the family court if the truant child refuses to provide the authorities with the necessary information concerning his identity, his school and the identity of his parents. 
(4)  To the custody of the police juvenile officer as designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 10 17-A, § 9:1015, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-157. - Interference with the custody of a child. 
(a)  Interference with the custody of a child is the intentional taking, enticing or decoying away of a minor child by a parent, not having a right of custody, with intent to detain or conceal such child from a parent having a right of custody pursuant to a court order or from a person entrusted with the care of the child by a parent having custody pursuant to a court order. It shall be an affirmative defense that the offender reasonably believed that his actions were necessary to protect the welfare of the child. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of interference with the custody of a child shall be fined not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned for not more than six months or both. Costs of returning of the child to the jurisdiction of the court shall be assessed against any defendant convicted of a violation of this section, as court costs, as provided the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Amend. of 2-23-87, § 9:45) 
Cross reference- For identical provisions, see § 9-70. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:45.1. 
Sec. 9-158. - Unlawful sales of weapons to minors. 
(a)  Unlawful sales of weapons to minors is the selling or otherwise delivering for value of any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon to any person under the age of 18. Lack of knowledge of the minor's age shall not be a defense. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unlawful sales of weapons to minors shall be fined not more than $300.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91. 
Sec. 9-159. - Illegal use of controlled dangerous substances in the presence of persons under 17 years of age. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of 17, while in the presence of any person under the age of 17 and when there is an age difference of greater than two years between the two persons, to use, consume, possess, or distribute any controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.13. 
Sec. 9-160. - Improper supervision of a minor by parent or legal custodian; penalty. 
(a)  Improper supervision of a minor by a parent or legal custodian, who has care and control of the minor, includes any of the following activities: 
(1)  Through criminal negligence, the permitting of the minor to associate with a person known by the parent or custodian: 
a.  To be a member of a known criminal street gang as defined in R.S. 15:1404(A); 
b.  To have been convicted of a felony offense. 
c.  To be a known user or distributor of drugs in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law. 
d.  To be a person who possesses or has access to an illegal firearm, weapon, or explosive. 
(2)  Through criminal negligence, the permitting of the minor: 
a.  To enter premises known by the parent or custodian to be a place where sexually indecent activities or prostitution is practiced. 
b.  To violate the municipal curfew ordinance. 
c.  To habitually be a truant from school without valid excuse. 
d.  To enter the premises known by the parent or legal custodian as a place of illegal drug use or distribution activity. 
e.  To enter the premises known by the parent or legal custodian as a place of underage drinking or gambling. 
g.  To enter the premises known by the parent or legal custodian as a place which stores or has a person present who possesses an illegal firearm, weapon, or explosive. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than $250.00 for each offense, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Imposition of sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that they participate in 40 hours of court-approved community service activities, or a combination of 40 hours of court approved community service and attendance at a court approved family counseling program by both a parent or legal custodian and the minor. 
(c)  The provisions of subparagraph (a)(1)b. shall not apply to an immediate family member who lives in the household with the minor or other relative who is supervised by the parent or legal custodian when visiting with the minor. 
(d)  No parent or legal guardian shall be guilty of a violation of this section if, upon acquiring knowledge that the minor has undertaken acts as described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a), the parent or legal guardian seeks the assistance of local, parish, or state law enforcement officials, school officials, social services officials, or other appropriate authorities in either leading the child to modify his or her behavior, or her behavior, or in referring the child to appropriate treatment or corrective facilities. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92.2. 
Sec. 9-161. - Purchase and public possession of alcoholic beverages; exceptions, penalties 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase or have public possession of any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  (1)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(2)  Any person apprehended while violating the provisions of this section shall be issued a citation by the apprehending law enforcement officer, which shall be paid in the same manner as provided for the offenders of local traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.12. 
Sec. 9-162. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons on behalf of person under 21. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent, spouse, or legal guardian, to purchase on behalf of a person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.13. 
Sec. 9-163. - Misrepresentation of age to obtain alcoholic beverages or gain entry to licensed premises prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to present or offer to any person having a license or permit to sell alcoholic beverages, or to his agent or employee any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the purpose of obtaining or purchasing alcoholic beverages or attempting to enter the licensed premises. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished by one or more of the following: 
(1)  A fine of not more than $200.00. 
(2)  An appropriate amount of community service not to exceed 30 hours. 
(3)  Suspension of the violator's driver's license for 90 days. 
(c)  As used in this section, "licensed premises" means an establishment licensed under R.S. title 26 and chapter 3 of the Plaquemine Code of Ordinances where the sale of alcoholic beverages constitutes its main business. 
(Ord. No. 112, 9-8-98) 
Sec. 9-164. - Tatooing and body piercing of minors; prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to tattoo or body pierce any other person under the age of 18 without the consent of an accompanying parent or tutor of such person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any business entity to pierce the body of a person under the age of 18 without the consent of a parent or legal custodian of such person. 
(c)  Whoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or be imprisoned for not less than 30 days no more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.2. 
Sec. 9-165. - Consent to search; alcoholic beverage outlet. 
(a)  Any person entering an alcoholic beverage outlet as defined herein, by the fact of such entering, shall be deemed to have consented to a reasonable search of his person for any firearm by a law enforcement officer or other person vested with police power, without the necessity of a warrant. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "alcoholic beverage outlet" means any commercial establishment in which alcoholic beverages of either high or low alcoholic content are sold in individual servings for consumption on the premises, whether or not such sales are the primary purpose or are an incidental purpose of the business of the establishment. 
(c)  An "alcoholic beverage outlet" licensed to sell firearms or containing an indoor shooting gallery shall be exempt from the provisions of this section in those areas designated for the sale of firearms or the shooting gallery. 
(d)  An "alcoholic beverage outlet" shall not include a restaurant if a majority of its gross receipts are from sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages. 
(e)  The owner of the alcoholic beverage outlet shall post a sign, at or near the entrance, that states that by the fact of entering these premises a person shall be deemed to have consented to a reasonable search of his person for any firearm by a law enforcement officer or other person vested with police power, without the necessity of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 171, 9-10-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95.4. 
Secs. 9-166-9-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 9-170. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Defined. Cruelty to animals is the intentional or criminally negligent mistreatment of any animal by any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted upon the animal and shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of cruelty to animals shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:63, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl generally, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:102. 
Sec. 9-171. - Spitting in public places. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or on any hall, stairway or floor of any public building or conveyance. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1012, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 9-172. - Unauthorized use of cable television service and equipment; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a cable television system, or that of its assigns or successors, for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence transmitted over any cable television system or its lessee, assignee or successor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the cable television system owner or its lessee, assignee or successor, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wire or other equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds, or any other information or intelligence transmitted over the cable television system. 
(c)  It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days, or both, for any person to violate any provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:68.1, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:222.1. 
Sec. 9-173. - False accounting. 
(a)  Defined. False accounting is the intentional rendering of a financial statement of account, which is known by the offender to be false, by anyone who is obliged to render an accounting by the law pertaining to civil matters. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of false accounting shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:70, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:70. 
Sec. 9-174. - Desecration of graves. 
(a)  Defined. Desecration of graves is the: 
(1)  Unauthorized opening of any place of interment, or building wherein the dead body of a human being is located, with the intent to remove or to mutilate the body or any part thereof, or any article interred or intended to be interred with the body; or 
(2)  Intentional or criminally negligent damaging in any manner of any grave, tomb or mausoleum erected for the dead. 
(b)  Penalty for commission. Whoever commits the crime of desecration of graves shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:101, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:101. 
Sec. 9-175. - Urinating in public places prohibited; penalty for commission. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate on the streets, in the gutters, on the sidewalks, or in alleys, driveways or other places near the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other places of public resort. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of urinating in public places shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:106.2, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-176. - Littering; penalty for commission. 
(a)  Littering is the placing, throwing or depositing of any trash, debris or deleterious material or substance by any person on public or private property without proper consent of the occupant of the private property, or the owner if there is no occupant present. It is not necessary that the deposited substance be trash, debris or deleterious by its nature if its presence is offensive to a person of ordinary sensibility or tends to constitute a hazard. This provision shall include, without limiting the generality hereof, the throwing of paper containers, bottles and beer cans on public property or the property of another, except in containers provided for the deposit of such materials. 
(b)  Whoever is found guilty of subsection (a) above by littering on the area of land identified as the "median" or "neutral" ground between Haase Street and Osage Avenue shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection (d) below. "Median" or "neutral" ground is defined as the grassy or dirt area between the roadways identified as Haase Street and Osage Avenue. 
(c)  Whoever is found guilty of littering shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months or both. 
(d)  Whoever is found guilty of littering on the "median" or neutral" ground between Haase Street and Osage Avenue shall be fined at least $250.00 but not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he/she perform two eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1001, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 043, 6-8-93) 
State Law reference- Littering, R.S. 30:2521 et seq. 
Sec. 9-177. - Bathing nude. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to bathe in any public pool, pond, lake, river or other body of water in a state of nudity. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whoever is found guilty of bathing nude shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1008, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 9-178. - Riding on moving railroad stock. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than employees or duly authorized representatives of railroad companies, to catch or hang onto or ride on the outside of any locomotive or railroad car while in motion within the city. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Whoever is found guilty of riding on moving railroad stock shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1007, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited, § 20-89; clinging to vehicles by bicyclists, etc., § 20-314; motorcyclists clinging to motor vehicles, § 20-333. 
Sec. 9-179. - Possession of hypodermic needles and syringes; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not being a dentist, funeral director, physician, podiatrist, nurse or veterinarian, registered or licensed under the laws of this state or the state where he resides or a manufacturer or dealer in embalming supplies, wholesale druggist, manufacturing pharmacist, pharmacist, manufacturer of surgical instruments, official of any government having the articles mentioned in this section by reason of his official duties, employee of an incorporated hospital acting under official direction, or a carrier or messenger engaged in the transportation of such articles as an agent of the above-mentioned persons, employees of scientific research laboratories, employees of an agency or organization duly authorized by the state board of pharmacy, or a person who has received a written prescription issued under paragraph (b) shall have in his possession a hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument adapted for the use of narcotic drugs by parenteral administration. No such syringe, needle or instrument shall be delivered, sold or exchanged with any person except the persons specified in this section. 
(b)  A licensed physician, dentist, podiatrist, osteopath or veterinarian may issue to a patient under his immediate charge a written prescription to purchase any of these instruments specified in paragraph (a). The health department shall, by regulation, prescribe a form prescription that the physician shall use and the records and information that shall be kept by the physician and the pharmacist filling such prescription. 
(c)  Whoever is found guilty of a violation of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1017, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Possession of marijuana, § 9-104. 
State Law reference- Drug paraphernalia, R.S. 40:1021 et seq. 
Sec. 9-180. - Drug paraphernalia prohibited. 
(a)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packing, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this Act (meaning the Controlled Substances Act of this state, as scheduled in R.S. 40:964). It includes, but not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(6)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
(7)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(8)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packing small quantities of controlled substances; 
(9)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(10)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(11)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wood, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish beads or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chilams; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior conviction, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this Act; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to direct violation of the Act, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sale of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate use for the object in the community; 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing the drug-related nature of the object, to sell, lend, rent, lease, give, exchange or otherwise distribute to any person any drug paraphernalia. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing the drug-related nature of the object, to display for sale, or possess with the intent to distribute, any drug paraphernalia. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use any drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. 
(f)  "Knowing," as used herein, means either actual or constructive knowledge of the drug-related nature of the object, and a person has constructive knowledge of the drug-related nature of the object if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice of the drug-related nature of the object. 
(g)  Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the manufacture, sale, distribution or advertisement of any product or object designed and sold primarily for scientific research, industrial, veterinary or agricultural purposes, or for bona fide medical or clinical use. 
(h)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the person to whom the drug-related object or advertisement or notice was distributed had a prescription from a licensed medical practitioner or psychiatrist for marijuana or the controlled substance for which the object is primarily intended to be used. It is also an affirmative defense that the drug-related object was designed or marketed as useful primarily for veterinary or agricultural purposes. 
(i)  The first violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this section shall subject the offender to a fine not in excess of $500.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than six months in jail. 
(j)  A second conviction of any violation or failure to comply with this section shall be subject to punishment in the same manner. And, in addition, such second violation by any person licensed under this Code or by such person's manager, agent, servant or employee shall cause such person to forfeit the right to any permit issued thereunder; and such permit may be suspended or revoked. 
(k)  All instruments, devices and objects which are hereafter seized on condemnation as being distributed or possessed in violation of this section may be destroyed by the city/parish only after compliance with the following procedure. Within 90 days after seizures made under this section, which seizures are made on condemnation, the district attorney or city prosecutor shall institute condemnation proceedings in district or city court by petition, a copy of which shall be served upon the owner of the seized items, if known, and, if the owner is unknown, notice of such proceedings shall be published once a week for two weeks in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are published. The petition shall allege that the seized items were distributed or possessed in violation of this section. Fifteen days from the filing of the petition, judgment by default shall be entered by the court chamber, and the court shall order the seized items to be destroyed; otherwise, the case shall proceed as other civil cases in the court. Should the prosecution prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the seized items were distributed or possessed in violation of the law, the court shall order the seized items to be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 9:1019, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Possession of marijuana, § 9-104. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 40:1021 et seq. 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; obstructing of firemen, § 9-38; obstruction of fire prevention, § 9-39; false alarms, § 9-40. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, R.S. 40:1491 et seq.; municipal fire prevention regulations, 33:4741 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Inspection of rental houses and apartments prior to rental. 
    Prior to rental by the owner of any rental house or apartment an inspection shall be made by the city inspector and the fire department for possible fire hazards. No services shall be connected to the rental house or apartment until which time as the inspection is made and the rental house or apartment is approved by the fire department. Should any possible fire hazards be found in the rental house or apartment, the owner shall have 30 days from the date of inspection within which to correct the situation. 
(Ord. No. 876, 6-25-74) 
Sec. 10-2. - Reward for information on false fire alarms. 
    The city shall pay, out of its general fund, a $300.00 reward to anyone who furnishes information leading toward the apprehension and conviction of any person who turns in a false fire alarm in violation of section 9-40. 
(Code 1967, § 6-8; Ord. No. 940, 11-13-79) 
Secs. 10-3-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; reimbursement of costs for response of fire department to discharges of hazardous materials or substances, § 2-88. 

Sec. 10-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created in and for the city a fire department. 
(Code 1967, § 6-21) 
Sec. 10-17. - Control by mayor, selectmen. 
    The officers and members of the fire department shall be subject to such regulation and control as the mayor and board of selectmen shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 6-25) 
Sec. 10-18. - Reports. 
(a)  The fire chief shall make a report each month to the mayor and board of selectmen of all fires within the city, other activities of the department and such other information as the mayor and selectmen shall require. 
(b)  The secretary and treasurer of the fire department shall make a report each quarter of the year to the mayor and board of selectmen of all receipts and disbursements of the department. 
(Code 1967, § 6-26) 
Sec. 10-19. - Power to arrest. 
    The officers of the fire department are hereby to enforce the applicable provisions of this Code, state law and city rules and regulations relating to fire protection and prevention, and for such purpose, such officers are hereby empowered with full police power to make arrests. 
(Code 1967, § 6-27) 
Secs. 10-20-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 10-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, NFPA 101 Life and Safety Code and NFPA 101A Alternate Approach to Life and Safety Code, recommended and published by the National Fire Protection Association, being particularly the most current edition thereof and the whole thereof including all appendices thereto, together with the most current amendments to the NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, NFPA 101 Life and Safety Code, and NFPA 101A Alternate Approach to Life and Safety Code. A copy of such codes have been and shall be hereafter kept on file in the office of the central fire station, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to conduct any business, perform any act, repair or construct any building, structure or vehicle or transport or handle any product or material for which a permit is required by the provisions of the fire prevention code without first securing a permit therefore, or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1; Ord. No. 117, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 230, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 349, 1-13-15) 
Editor's note- At the request of the city, these provision, enacted by Ord. No. 117, adopted Feb. 9, 1999, have been duplicated as § 6-16.1. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt fire prevention code by reference, R.S. 33:1368. 
Sec. 10-32. - Enforcement. 
    The code adopted by section 10-31 shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1967, § 6-2) 
Sec. 10-33. - Definition. 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the City of Plaquemine. 
(Code 1967, § 6-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-34. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 6-4) 
Sec. 10-35. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to mayor and board of selectmen within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1967, § 6-5) 
Sec. 10-36. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks, bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases and storage of explosives and blasting agents to be restricted. 
    The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in section 16.61 of said code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits referred to in section 12.5b of said code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
    Beginning at a point marked by the intersection of the continuation southeast line of Canal Street with the Mississippi River; thence southeast along the southeast line of Canal Street to a point marked by the intersection of the southeast line of Canal Street with the southwest line of Marshall Street; thence northwest along the southwest line of Marshall Street to a point marked by the intersection of the southwest line of Marshall Street with the northwest line of Haase Street; thence southwest along the northwest line of Haase Street to a point marked by the intersection of the northwest line of Haase Street with the southwest line of Kearney Street; thence northwest along the southwest line of Kearney Street to Bayou Plaquemine; thence along Bayou Plaquemine to the Mississippi River; thence along the Mississippi River to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1967, § 6-7) 
Sec. 10-37. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and board of selectmen or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1967, § 6-6) 
Secs. 10-38-10-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Possession or sale prohibited, § 9-120. 
State Law reference- Fireworks, R.S. 51:650 et seq. 

Sec. 10-49. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Manufacturer means any person engaged in the making or construction of fireworks, or pyrotechnics, and who skips or causes to be shipped, or transported into the city. 
    Pyrotechnics commonly known as fireworks, includes sparklers, squibs, rockets, firecrackers, Roman candles, signal lights, flares, cone foundations, and all other similar devices or composition used to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic display. 
    Sale includes barter, exchange or gift or offer therefor, and each transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 6-9, 3-13-79) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-50. - Possession or sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, use, manufacture, offer to sell, handle or transport any pyrotechnics within the city limits, except as provided in section 10-51, it being the intention of this section to prohibit the sale of, distribution of or discharge of any pyrotechnics of any kind or description whatsoever within the city limits to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 6-10, 3-13-79) 
Sec. 10-51. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in section 10-50 shall be held to apply: 
(1)  To the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption and use by railroads, trucks or vessels requiring them; 
(2)  To pyrotechnic display of fireworks in public parks or other open places, where a permit for such display has been issued by the fire chief after his determination that provisions have been made for the proper safeguarding of life and property, and provided proper police protection is available, in connection with any authorized display; 
(3)  To the use, sale, manufacture or storage of ICC class "C," common fireworks as defined by LSA-RS-51-651 during the time periods of June 25 through July 4 and December 20 through January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 6-11, 3-13-79) 
Sec. 10-52. - Possession restrictions. 
    The discharge, shooting or explosion of fireworks as allowed in subsection 10-51(3) shall be permitted on the days herein designated only during the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except on New Year's Eve and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 6-12, 3-13-79) 
Sec. 10-53. - Seizure and destruction. 
    All pyrotechnic devices or composition prohibited by this article shall be subject to immediate seizure and destruction. 
(Ord. No. 930, § 6-13, 3-13-79) 
Secs. 10-54-10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- The mayor and board of selectmen met in regular session Nov. 9, 1999, and adopted the bylaws of the Plaquemine Volunteer Fire Department and did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as §§ 10-81-10-87 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-81. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  The city fire department's mission is to provide the highest level of life and property safety through the extension of fire prevention, fire control, both natural and technological, emergency medical services, and public education services to the citizens of the Plaquemine community and Iberville Parish. 
(b)  To promote friendship and cooperation among its members and the community. 
(c)  To study local fire hazards and make recommendations to correct same. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-82. - Membership. 
(a)  The volunteer fire department shall be composed of active, inactive, and honorary members. Plaquemine Fire Department's paid members are automatically eligible for membership in the volunteer department. 
(b)  Prospective members must be a U.S. citizen. No one convicted of a felony shall be admitted. Prospective members must be nominated by a present member and approved by the current membership. All applicants must be of sound mind and body and must be interested in the purpose of this organization and willing and able to subscribe to its bylaws and rules and regulations. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-83. - Cooperation. 
(a)  The Plaquemine Volunteer Fire Department shall work and cooperate with all fire departments in this area. It shall also cooperate and work with all city, parish, and state police during local emergencies and natural disasters. 
(b)  Plaquemine Volunteer Department shall abide by all the rules of the Plaquemine Fire Department. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-84. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the Plaquemine Volunteer Fire Department shall be held the first Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. at Central Station. Regular meetings may be rescheduled, canceled, or postponed by the president or fire chief for any valid reason. 
(b)  All meetings shall be conducted according to parliamentary rules, and open discussion from the floor on all measures shall be permitted and encouraged. Robert's Rules of Order shall be the basis for all parliamentary procedure. 
(c)  At the meeting the order of business shall be as far as applicable and practicable as follows: Call to order, firemen's prayer, pledge of allegiance, roll call, reading of minutes, approval of minutes, treasurer's report, applications of new membership, and adjournment. 
(d)  A special meeting may be called by the fire chief or president of the volunteer fire department anytime he/she deems it necessary to discuss important business. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-85. - Quorum. 
    A quorum shall consist of five members in good standing. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-86. - Elections. 
(a)  An election shall be held once every year for its elected officers (president, vice-president, secretary/treasurer). 
(b)  Only members in good standing shall have voting privileges or be appointed or elected to any committee, position, or office. 
(c)  When an elected officer leaves the volunteer fire department for any reason, the volunteer president or an elected officer shall call for a special election within 60 days to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-87. - Appointed officers. 
    Every year officials will be elected to certain posts. The volunteer fire department members will elect all officers. The training office (from the paid department) will be appointed by the fire chief. The president of the volunteer department will appoint the sergeant at arms and the chaplain. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
Sec. 10-88. - Committees. 
    The president of the volunteer department may appoint such committees as he/she deems necessary for the better functioning of the volunteer department. 
(Res. of 11-9-99) 
ARTICLE VI. - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 10-89. - Purpose and intent of article. 
    The intent of this article is designed to require the installation of automatic fire suppression systems for the better protection of life and property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-90. - Buildings requiring installation. 
(a)  This article requires the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system in the following buildings: 
(1)  Industrial; 
(2)  Government buildings; 
(3)  Hotels/motels; 
(4)  Nursing homes; 
(5)  Convalescent homes; 
(6)  Commercial. 
(b)  A complete approved automatic fire sprinkler protection system shall be provided in all buildings listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-91. - Accessory buildings and special principal building areas. 
    Approved automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed and maintained in the following accessory buildings and special principal building areas as follows: 
(1)  Daycare centers, including adult day care centers. All buildings in day care centers and adult day care centers, regardless of size, shall have a complete sprinkler protection throughout. 
(2)  Theaters and assembly buildings. All buildings in theaters and assembly buildings, regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout. 
(3)  Hospitals, nursing, convalescent, old age and other similar institutional buildings. All buildings of non-fire-resistive construction in hospitals, nursing, convalescent, old age and other similar institutional buildings regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout. 
(4)  Schools, colleges and universities. All buildings of non-fire resistive construction in schools, colleges and universities, regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout. 
(5)  Hotels/motels. All buildings of non-fire resistive construction in hotels/motels, regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout. 
(6)  Commercial/industrial. Any building in commercial/industrial, greater than 2,000 square feet under roof, shall have sprinkler protection throughout. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-92. - Approval of plans. 
(a)  Submission for review by state fire marshall. Prior to the installation of any portion of a fire suppression system, or the alteration to an existing fire suppression system, plans shall be submitted to the state fire marshall for review. All fire suppression systems must comply with all applicable NFPA standards. 
(b)  Stamping, signing and sealing of plans. Five copies of the plans, specifications and calculations shall be submitted for review; reviewed plans shall be stamped "conditionally approved by the state fire marshall." Two copies will be returned to the submitter. One copy will be delivered to the city fire chief. One copy with the "conditionally approved by the state fire marshall" stamp must remain on the job site at all times. All copies of the plans, specifications and calculations submitted shall be signed and sealed by a state registered architect, engineer before the fire suppression contractor installs the work. Plans and/or calculations which are not signed and sealed will not be reviewed. 
(c)  Conditional approval; effect. The state fire marshall's conditional approval of fire suppression plans does not affirm the accuracy of any calculations performed by the contractor. Full responsibility for the accuracy of the system design and calculations is the responsibility of the fire protection contractor. 
(d)  Work not to commence prior to plan review and permit issuance. No work shall begin on the installation of any fire suppression system or the alteration of an existing system until the plans, specifications and calculations have been reviewed by the state fire marshall and a permit for installation is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-93. - Installation methods and standards. 
(a)  Approved fire suppression systems shall be installed in accordance with current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards and/or recommended practices which are applicable. 
(b)  AH fire sprinkler systems shall use hydrant water flow test data which is dated no greater than six months prior to the submission of the sprinkler plans for review. The date shall be obtained during peak water demand conditions, and conducted in such a manner that it represents true orientation (direction of flow) of the supply to the system being designed. 
(c)  All sprinkler system designs shall be based on no more than 90 percent of the available water supply. A minimum safety factor of ten percent shall be maintained. 
(d)  All fire suppression systems shall be installed in accordance with all applicable state codes. 
(e)  Fire department connections. The location of all fire department connections shall be approved by the city's fire chief. A fire hydrant shall be within 100 feet of the fire department connection. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-94. - Maintenance of equipment. 
(a)  All fire suppression equipment shall be maintained in proper working order. 
(b)  The fire department shall be notified prior to shutting down any system for any reason and again when the system has been restored to service. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-95. - Inspections. 
(a)  All fire sprinkler systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with NFPA 25, 1991 edition. A copy of all inspection and testing reports shall be sent to the state fire marshall's Office on a yearly basis and/or if requested by the state fire marshall. A copy of all inspections and testing reports shall be sent to the city's fire chief. 
(b)  Inspections of fire suppression systems during construction will be made by the state fire marshall or its designated representative. 
(c)  The fire protection contractor must request an inspection prior to any fire protection system component being concealed. 
(d)  The fire protection contractor must request an inspection upon completion of the system installation. 
(e)  The fire protection contractor must request an inspection 24 hours in advance. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-96. - Testing of systems. 
    The following tests shall be witnessed by the fire department or its representative and the state fire marshall or its representative: 
(1)  Fire protection water supply hydrostatic test. 
(2)  Fire protection water supply flushing. 
(3)  Sprinkler system hydrostatic test. 
(4)  Standpipe system hydrostatic test. 
(5)  Dry sprinkler system air/hydrostatic test. 
(6)  Dry pipe valve trip test. 
(7)  Deluge system trip test. 
(8)  Tire pump acceptance test. 
(9)  Carbon dioxide system acceptance test. 
(10)  Dry chemical system acceptance test. 
(11)  Foam system acceptance tests. 
(12)  Special agent system acceptance tests. 
(13)  Standpipe system acceptance test. 
(14)  Full flow backflow preventer test. 
(15)  Sprinkler system acceptance test. 
(16)  Foam system acceptance test. 
(17)  Fire hydrant flow test. 
(18)  The fire protection contractor must request the fire department and state fire marshall to witness all testing at least 24 hours in advance. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 10-97. - Permits. 
    Permits are required for all installations prior to installation of any equipment. Permits will not be issued until the plans and calculations have been reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 364, 6-13-17) 
Chapter 11 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate, § 13 (first). 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; regulation of handbills, § 9-179; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Littering, R.S. 30:2521 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or litter any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city, or property whether owned by the person or not within 100 feet of any established public street, sidewalk or right-of-way in the city, with any combustible material, refuse, garbage or noncombustible material, including particularly, but not exclusively, paper cups, cigarette packages, sandwich papers, beer cans, liquor bottles or any types of bags or wrapping material or paper. 
(Code 1967, §§ 7-6, 7-7) 
State Law reference- Littering, R.S. 30:2521 et seq. 
Sec. 11-2. - Responsibility for cleanliness of premises and adjacent areas; disposal of debris in streets by stores, markets, etc.; obstruction of drainage prohibited. 
(a)  All occupants of residences and business places shall be held responsible for the cleanliness of their premises and of alleys immediately adjacent to their premises. 
(b)  All owners or managers of stores, restaurants, markets or stands, shall be responsible for keeping sidewalks in front of the building occupied by them in a clean condition. It is hereby declared unlawful, to deposit paper, trash, litter, dirt, trees, branches, leaves, bricks, oyster shells, grass or other materials into streets or on sidewalks. 
(c)  Trees, branches, leaves, bricks, oyster shells, grass or other trash of like nature must be removed by the property holder, occupant lessee, or owner, or disposed of at their own expense. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to impede, obstruct and/or dam the passage or flow of water of any gutter, ditch, catch basin, drain or public drainage ways of any kind for any purpose in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 7-8; Ord. No. 258, 10-30-07) 
Sec. 11-3. - Pollution of streams. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drain or permit to be drained or to dispose of in any other manner, oil or other waste matter, which may tend to pollute fresh water, into Bayou Plaquemine or any navigable stream which runs through, within or at the corporate limits of the city. This shall include drainage into storm sewers or other drainage outlets which drain into or toward such stream or streams. 
(Code 1967, § 7-15) 
State Law reference- Sewage disposal in highway ditches, R.S. 48:385. 
Sec. 11-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 258, adopted Oct. 30, 2007, repealed § 11-4, which pertained to obstruction of catch basins with grass or trash and derived from Ord. No. 821, adopted Nov. 10, 1970. 
Secs. 11-5-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 11-16. - Garbage container defined; requirements. 
(a)  The term "garbage container," for the purposes of this article, shall be construed to include any container manufactured for the purpose of holding garbage or refuse. 
(b)  All owners and occupants of dwellings and commercial business places where garbage, paper, trash and other refuse accumulates shall provide and have on hand a sufficient number of garbage containers with lids attached to close or proper dumpsters to properly contain all waste between the designated collection days. 
(Amend. of 2-23-88; Ord. No. 266, 7-15-08) 
Sec. 11-17. - Number required. 
(a)  All owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located, where garbage, paper, trash, etc. accumulates shall be required to provide and have on hand at least one garbage container approved by the city inspector. When the city inspector deems that more than one garbage container is necessary to adequately take care of the garbage, then a sufficient number shall be provided. 
(b)  All owners or managers of lunch stands, drugstores, or other businesses, serving persons outside the building and using paper napkins, shall be required to provide one or more garbage containers outside the front of the building and attendants shall at all times keep all paper napkins or other litter picked up and put in these cans. Owners and managers are held responsible for the carrying out of these regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 7-2; Ord. No. 266, 7-15-08) 
Sec. 11-18. - Maintenance of area; disposal; penalties. 
(a)  All owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located, shall be required to pick up any garbage, trash, litter, rubbish, tin cans, etc., and place these materials in garbage containers. 
(b)  All owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located, shall be required to contract with a waste disposal company to pick up and empty the garbage containers. A copy of the contract shall be filed with the city inspector. 
(c)  In the event the city inspector issues a summons to the owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located reported a violation of subsection 11-18(a), the owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located shall have ten days to remove, correct and rectify the violation. 
(1)  In the event the owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located objects to the summons, the owners and/or occupants of dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located shall file his/her/its objection with the city inspector within three days of receipt of the summons and be placed on the next agenda for the following board of selectmen meeting to review and determine whether more likely than not a violation of subsection 11-18(a) has occurred. 
(2)  In the event the board of selectmen determine that more likely than not a violation of subsection 11-18(a) has occurred, the board of selectmen, in addition to ordering the correction, removal and/or rectification of the violation and assessing fines as per section 1-13, shall also be empowered to order the disconnection and termination of utility service to the dwellings and business places and where automatic ice vending machines and/or water vending machines are located. 
(Code 1967, § 7-3; Ord. No. 266, 7-15-08) 
Sec. 11-19. - Scavenging. 
    It is unlawful for any person to salvage material from garbage containers, except by permission from the owner. 
(Code 1967, § 7-4) 
Sec. 11-20. - Collection fee. 
    A fee of $3.00 shall be required per month, per house for the collection of garbage and trash within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 859, § 1, 5-8-73) 
Sec. 11-21. - Dumping of garbage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump garbage anywhere in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 7-5) 
State Law reference- Littering, R.S. 30:2521 et seq. 
Sec. 11-22. - Dumping of garbage in container of another prohibited. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall intentionally dump, leave or deposit any glass or metallic objects, trash, refuse or garbage in the garbage containers of another as defined in sections 11-16 and 11-17(c) above. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $400.00 or shall be ordered to pick up trash or refuse for a period of not less than 16 nor more than 40 hours, or both, upon a first conviction. 
(b)  For a second conviction, such person shall be fined not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00, or shall be ordered to pick up trash or refuse for a period of not less than 40 nor more than 120 hours, or both. 
(c)  For a third or subsequent conviction, such person shall be fined not less than $400.00 nor more than $500.00 and shall be ordered to pick up trash or refuse for a period of not less than 120 nor more than 200 hours. 
(Amend. of 2-23-88) 
Secs. 11-23-11-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE STORAGE FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 139, adopted June 13, 2000, pertained to the location of garbage facilities and was designated as §§ 6-27-6-30. For purposes of classification and in order to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 6-27-6-30 as §§ 11-27-11-30. 

Sec. 11-27. - Location of garbage facilities and garbage storage facilities. 
(a)  All garbage cans or containers, trash containers or dumpsters shall be kept together in or within a walled or enclosed area on private property or at a location approved by the city inspector. Such area shall not extend into any front yard; on corner lots it shall not extend into any side yard facing a street. Such area shall be accessible to both contractors and private waste collectors. The area shall be located so the garbage collectors do not have to use stairs or ascend or descend split elevations in the collection process. The location of a garbage can, trash container or dumpster in an area requiring the garbage collector to use stairs or ascend or descent split elevations in order to collect garbage is deemed to be a health hazard and subject to penalty pursuant to section 6-25. 
(b)  A city building permit shall be required for construction of a garbage storage facility, and it shall be so constructed as to be compatible in appearance with the building it services. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, operator, agent, lessee, or manager of such property owner and private waste contractor to ensure the return of cans, containers or dumpsters to the approved location after collection. 
(d)  At no time shall cans, containers or dumpsters be kept upon any public property, street, alley or sidewalk or other public land or any property not in the ownership, possession or right of use of the persons by whom the garbage is accumulated. Except that containers provided for pickup of recyclable material pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement for inclusion in the parish curbside recycling program may be placed upon city-owned parkways located in front of the properties between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 11:59 a.m. on designated pickup days. 
(e)  All new commercial buildings and all new multifamily residences exceeding eight units shall provide a garbage storage facility approved by the planning commission and the city inspector as to location, size, and other criteria deemed necessary by law or ordinance. 
(f)  All buildings that are undergoing substantial rehabilitation, construction of an addition or additions, or are under new construction or undergoing a change of use must provide a garbage storage facility approved by the planning commission and city inspector as to location, size and other criteria as required by law or city ordinance. 
(g)  All new restaurants and all restaurants undergoing substantial rehabilitation or construction of an addition or additions shall have garbage storage facilities approved by the planning commission and the city inspector as to location, size and other criteria as required by law or city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 139, 6-13-00) 
Sec. 11-28. - Condition and inspection of garbage facilities. 
    All garbage cans and trash containers shall be maintained in good condition and repair. All such receptacles shall be provided with a cover sufficiently tight to deter flies or other insects from having access to the contents of the receptacles. Containers in which wet garbage or trash matter are placed shall be leakproof. All garbage cans and trash containers shall be subject to inspection and approval or condemnation by inspectors appointed by the mayor, and an appeal from such condemnation shall be to the mayor or his appointed designee. 
(Ord. No. 139, 6-13-00) 
Sec. 11-29. - Minimum capacity requirements for various types of uses and occupancies. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, manager or operator of every premises, structure or building in the city to provide sufficient temporary garbage and trash storage through the use of approved cans, containers or dumpsters. 
(b)  The garbage containers per site shall not be limited provided each individual property has its own approved number of garbage containers and provided that all garbage is picked up a minimum of twice a week. The city inspector has the authority and power to approve the capacity of the containers and the frequency of collection services for each individual property pursuant to the guidelines as set forth below. 
(c)  The city divides and classifies waste and its handling requirements as follows: 
(1)  Residential refuse is all the garbage, rubbish or trash, or waste generated in any existing dwelling used for a single-family residence, duplex, townhouse, apartment, condominium or multifamily building. The city inspector will determine the necessary capacity of containers and frequency of collection service based on the standard of two 30-gallon cans or containers per family in a residence, duplex or townhouse and one 30-gallon can or container per apartment, condominium unit, or cooperative unit. 
If an owner uses containers the volume of which is measured in cubic feet or yards, the foregoing requirements shall be computed by assuming that one gallon equals 0.133 cubic foot. 
(2)  Commercial refuse is all solid waste generated by businesses such as stores, restaurants, bars, hotels, motels, markets, schools, churches, hospitals and other institutional buildings. Minimum requirements for capacity of cans or containers and frequency of collection are as follows: 
a.  Restaurants, stores, office buildings, churches, schools, cafeterias, bars, markets, hotels and motels will have container capacities and frequency of service as approved by the city inspector or his designee on an individual basis. 
b.  The minimum capacity required above may be supplied by providing garbage cans or containers or trash cans, or containers or dumpsters of sufficient size and number as are required to hold the minimum capacity indicated above and providing for all such facilities containing garbage to be emptied at least twice a week or by providing cans or containers of lesser sizes or number provided the same are emptied on a regular scheduled basis more frequently than twice a week; and that the product of the capacity of the containers provided multiplied by the number of times per week the containers are emptied is equal to the minimum capacity requirements set forth in subsection (b). Minimum capacity requirements may also be met through the use of a garbage or trash compactor, in which event the minimum required capacity of the actual cans or containers provided shall be reduced in the same ration as the compactor is capable of reducing the bulk of garbage or trash, as certified by its manufacturer. 
c.  Where the minimum capacity requirements of this section are met through the use of collections on a basis more frequent than twice a week or through the use of a trash or garbage compacting device, the owner of the premises shall, if requested by the city inspector or by such other person as is charged by the city inspector with responsibility for enforcing this section, provided proof of the frequency of trash and garbage collections, or in the case of a compacting device, the manufacturers' brochures or certification indicating its capacities. If such proof is not provided when requested it shall be presumed that the capacity supplied is that of the containers provided and that the containers are emptied on a basis no more frequent than once a week. 
d.  Installation of compactors is subject to permit and approval of the city inspector. 
(3)  Industrial waste is all waste and debris generated by construction, land claims, excavating of structures, roads, streets, sidewalks or parkway, including waste collected for recycling, such as but not limited to oils, greases and papers. Any such waste and debris that, if because of volume or nature do not lend themselves to collection and incineration, shall be removed through special handling and shall be the responsibility of persons who generated the waste and debris. 
(4)  Bulky waste. All large items of household refuse, such as appliances, furniture, accumulations from major tree cutbacks, large crates and like articles shall be disposed of by whomever generates the bulky waste. 
(Ord. No. 139, 6-13-00) 
Sec. 11-30. - Waste disposal requirements. 
(a)  It shall be required that all business and commercial establishments provide adequate waste disposal receptacle for the use of its customers and/or patrons. 
(b)  The city inspector is authorized to inspect and certify that the business and/or commercial establishment has satisfactory waste disposal receptacles for the use and purpose of the business/commercial establishment. 
(Ord. No. 139, 6-13-00) 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; nuisances, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 21. 

Sec. 12-1. - State sanitary code adopted. 
    In order to protect and promote the health and sanitation of the city, there is hereby adopted that certain code known as the "Sanitary Code, State of Louisiana," prepared and promulgated by the Louisiana State Board of Health, as amended from time to time. The provisions of such code shall be considered as in addition and supplementary to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances and other ordinances relating to health and sanitation. The violation or failure to comply with any provision of said sanitary code shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1967, § 81/2-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368. 
Sec. 12-2. - Louisiana Underground Utilities and Facilities Damage Prevention Law. 
    In accordance with the provisions of R.S. 40:1749.19, the city hereby declares that it does not desire to be included in R.S. 40:1749.14 (Regional notification center) or under the provisions of the "Louisiana Underground Utilities and Facilities Damage Prevention Law," R.S. 40:1749.11 through 1749.22, as enacted by Act 923 of 1988. 
(Ord. No. 1077, 8-22-89) 
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Title 13 of Ord. No. 1017-A, adopted Dec. 11, 1984, was not specifically amendatory of the Code; hence, it has been codified as superseding former Ch. 13, which pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from provisions presumably enacted at the time of the original codification; from § 11-113 of the city's 1967 Code; and from Ord. No. 816A, § § 10-56-10-59, adopted July 14, 1970; and Ord. No. 968, adopted Nov. 24, 1981. 
Cross reference- Criminal code, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 20; display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings deemed nuisance, § 20-156. 
State Law reference- Abatement of public nuisances, R.S. 13:4711 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Police to notify mayor of nuisances. 
    It shall be the duty of the city police to report to the mayor the existence of any and all nuisances regulated by this chapter which may come to their knowledge, and the mayor, upon such information, shall cause such nuisances to be abated at the expense and cost of the person or persons on whose property the same may exist, unless such person or persons abate the nuisance after being notified thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:1, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-2. - Nuisance to be abated. 
    All persons shall be required to remove or abate all nuisances which they have perpetrated on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or wharfs, levees or any public places within the city, and every person who shall refuse to do so shall, after a reasonable time for, compliance of this section has elapsed, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for more than 30 days. Each day that the nuisance shall continue shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:2, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-3. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the term "nuisance" shall refer to the prohibitions contained in articles 664 through 674 of the Louisiana Civil Code. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:3, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 13-3. 
Sec. 13-4. - Nuisances generally. 
(a)  Any person who is guilty of unreasonable, unwarranted or unlawful use of his property, real or personal, or from his own improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, thereby working an obstruction or injury to a right of another citizen of the city or the public in general, in producing any material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, hurt, damage or harm, or anyone whose personal conduct or use of property, whether owned by him or under his possession, use and control, which personal conduct and use of property shall cause an offensive, noxious or injurious injury to a citizen of the city or to the public in general, or causing a vexatious, disagreeable or annoying injury to a citizen of the city or the public in general, shall be guilty of a nuisance and upon conviction shall be fined or imprisoned as is directed in section 1-13. 
(b)  The following conduct is hereby defined, particularly, as nuisances, which conduct shall constitute a violation of this chapter; however, in defining such nuisances particularly, such definitions are not to be determined as exclusive and any other conduct which shall constitute a nuisance shall be subject to punishment as herein set forth: 
(1)  When noise is of such a character as to be productive of actual physical discomfort and annoyance to a person of ordinary sensibilities, except usual, necessary and ordinary sounds or noises now in existence from businesses presently in existence; 
(2)  Contamination or pollution of the atmosphere with offensive matter, where the contamination substantially impairs the use of property, or interferes with the comfort of a person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(3)  Dust blown from a person's land onto a neighbor's premises, where it is sufficient to cause perceptible injury to property or so pollutes the air as sensibly to impair its enjoyment; 
(4)  The causing of noxious fumes, gases or vapors to escape onto neighboring premises to such a degree as to render persons of ordinary sensitiveness uncomfortable and sick; 
(5)  Noxious smells or odors; 
(6)  The invasion of premises in the neighborhood or causing annoyance of the general public by smoke, soot or smudge; 
(7)  Invasions of one's premises by ashes, cinders, chaff, dirt, burning particles, refuse or sand; 
(8)  Obstruction of access to a person's property; 
(9)  A bawdy house or other disorderly house of like nature; 
(10)  Keeping of one's premises in a disorderly and untidy condition so as to be offensive to the neighborhood; 
(11)  When a person causes or allows sewage, garbage, filth, refuse or other noxious matter to be discharged, or to penetrate or drain his premises into or onto the premises of another, or keeps such sewage, garbage, filth, refuse or other noxious matter publicly displayed in such a manner as to offend the appearance of the neighborhood, or in such a manner as to cause rats, rodents or other vermin to infest and invade the neighborhood, or in such a manner as to cause an unsanitary and unhealthy condition to exist in a neighborhood; 
(12)  The keeping or storage of gasoline, chemicals, natural gas, butane gas, or other dangerous substances, chemicals or matter in such a way as to present a continuing dangerous condition to the neighborhood; 
(13)  The keeping of one's yard or premises in an untidy and unsightly condition so as to offend the sensibilities of the neighborhood. 
(14)  Any person in any public place or in the view of the public to be found exposing his/her undergarments. 
a.  Any person in violation of subsection (b)(14) shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days or both fine and imprisonment, within the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:4, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 256, 10-9-07) 
Cross reference- Offenses against the public peace generally, § 9-133 et seq.; keeping a disorderly place, § 9-134. 
Sec. 13-5. - Notice to abate. 
    When a nuisance is found to exist within the city, the health officer or some other duly designated officer of the city shall give five days' written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:5, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-6. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary; 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:6, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-7. - Service of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:7, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-8. - Abatement by city. 
    Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this article to abate the same, the health officer or other duly designated officer of the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:8, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-9. - Costs declared lien. 
    Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:9, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-10. - General penalty provisions. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of violating provisions of this chapter where a penalty is not specifically set forth shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months in jail. 
(b)  In lieu of any imprisonment authorized under the provisions of this chapter, the judge may, at his discretion, allow the defendant to perform community service work, not exceeding 30 eight-hour days. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:81, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 13-11-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS MATTER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Weed cutting in municipalities, R.S. 33:5062 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- In order to maintain the format of the Code, and at the discretion of the editor, Div. 1 has been added. 

Sec. 13-21. - Prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, place or area within the city, or the agent of any such owner, to permit and allow to remain on such lot, place or area, or upon any sidewalks or banquettes abutting same, any noxious weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthy growths or other noxious matter that may be growing, lying or be located thereon. It shall be presumed that grass in excess of 12 inches in height is deleterious and unhealthy growth. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:21, 12-11-84; Amend. of 9-24-85, § 13-21) 
Sec. 13-22. - Removal by city, civil penalties, liens. 
(a)  Notice to remove. If an owner or agent of property fails to cut, destroy, or remove such grass, noxious weeds, deleterious, unhealthy growths or other noxious matter from his property or from any abutting sidewalk or banquette, the owner or agent shall be notified by the city of its intent to perform such work after five days and to charge the owner and/or agent for the work. Such notice shall be given by registered mail, addressed in accordance with tax rolls of the city, or served on the owner and/or agent by domiciliary or personal service by a representative of the city. 
(b)  Removal by city, hourly charge. If the owner and/or agent of the property fails to cut, destroy or remove such grass, noxious weeds, deleterious, unhealthy growths or other noxious matters from his property or from any abutting sidewalk or banquette within five days after receipt of such notice, the city may have such grass, noxious weeds, deleterious, unhealthy growths or other noxious matter cut, destroyed or removed and may charge the owner and/or agent $100.00 per man hour in performing the work plus out of pocket expenses in the event the city must correct the violation. The bill for the work shall be delivered by registered mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the city, or served on the property owner and/or his agent by domiciliary or personal service, by a representative of the governing authority. 
(c)  Cost levied against owner, lien. Upon failure of the property owner or his agent to pay the charges within 30 days of receipt of the bill, the city may file a certified copy of said charges with the recorder of mortgages, and the same, when so filed and recorded, shall operate as a lien and privilege in favor of the city against the property on which the work was done or against the property abutting the sidewalk or banquette on which the work was done. The lien and privilege granted under this subsection shall have the same ranking as an ad valorem tax lien on immovable property as provided by R.S. 9:4821(1). 
(d)  Collection. If the said statement is not paid within one month thereafter, the amount shall be included in and form part of the taxes due by the owner of said property, and when collected shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(e)  Lien cancellation. The lien and/or charge shall not be cancelled until payment of all amounts, including costs, attorney fees and interest as provided by law. 
(f)  [Property maintenance by city.] The city may undertake the cutting, destruction, or removal of noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious growths on any property within the city on a monthly basis without notice required in subsection (b) of this section if the property owner liable has been notified pursuant to said subsection at any time during the immediately preceding 12 months and has failed to do the work himself after opportunity to do so. However, prior to undertaking such work, the city shall file and record an affidavit, signed by the mayor or his designee, at the city inspector's office. Such affidavit shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the property sufficient to reasonably identify it; 
(2)  A photograph of the property sufficient to reasonably identify its unsafe or unsanitary condition and to justify the necessity for cutting, destroying, or removing weeds, grass, or other noxious growths; 
(3)  A statement that the property owner liable has within the past 12 months failed to do such work after notification and opportunity to do so pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, 13:22, 12-11-84, Amend. of 9-24-85, § 13:22; Ord. No. 077, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 152, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 155, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 305, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 319, 8-21-12) 
Sec. 13-23. - Criminal penalty. 
    Any owner or owners or agent of any owner or owners found in violation of the above section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:22, 12-11-84; Amend. of 9-24-85, § 13:23) 
Sec. 13-24. - Trash fires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start or set any trash fire or to burn paper, grass, trash or debris, where such fire is not protected by a proper furnace or incinerator, within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:24, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-25. - Filing liens; legal proceedings. 
(a)  In the event a bill for the cutting of grass and/or cleaning a lot within the city limits of Plaquemine exceeds $250.00, the city shall file a lien on the property. 
(b)  In the event a bill for the cutting of grass and/or cleaning a lot within the city limits of Plaquemine exceeds $1,000.00, the city shall take all necessary legal action, including seizure and sale of the property, to effect collection of the monies owed for services rendered by the city. 
(Ord. No. 121, 7-13-99) 
DIVISION 2. - MAINTENANCE OF SWIMMING POOLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- In order to maintain the format of the Code, and at the discretion of the editor, Div. 2 has been added. 

Sec. 13-26. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Swimming pool. Any manmade structure designed or built for the purpose of swimming, whether such structure is above the ground or built into the ground, regardless of whether it is made of plastic, concrete, wood, metal or other material. 
    Vermin. Noxious small animals or parasitic insects including, but not limited to lice, fleas, mosquitoes, worms, rats or mice. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 13-27. - Maintenance of swimming pools. 
(a)  Every owner of a swimming pool, located in the city shall maintain the pool in such a manner that: 
(1)  The pool shall not harbor or become infested with reptiles, mosquitoes, vermin or other pests; 
(2)  The pool shall not harbor or support submergent or emergent vegetation; and 
(3)  The pool shall not collect scum, film or debris to such an extent that the water is not clear enough to permit a black disk six inches in diameter on a white field, when placed on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible from the deck around the pool at all distances up to ten yards measured from a line drawn across the pool through said disk. 
(b)  Every owner of a swimming pool, with a depth greater than 18 inches, shall keep the pool completely enclosed with fences or walls not less than five feet in height with no openings greater than four inches, and composed of rigid, sturdy material. Every pool owner shall equip gate or door openings to the pool with self-closing and self-latching devices capable of keeping such gate or door securely closed at all times. Every swimming pool owner shall keep said fences, gates and doors in a state of repair. All gates and doors shall be securely closed at all times. No waiver of this section shall be accepted as compliance. 
(c)  A violation of sections 13-26 through 13-32 shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties and other provisions set out in sections 13-26 through 13-32, an owner of a swimming pool who fails to abate the nuisance within the ten-day period shall be liable for a penalty of $500.00 for a first violation; and upon a second violation within a two-year period, a penalty of $1,000.00; and upon a third and any subsequent violations within a two-year period, a penalty of $1,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 13-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 13-26 et seq. shall be administered and enforced through cooperation of the Iberville Parish Health Unit, the city chief of police, and the mayor or his designee. Upon having reasonable suspicion to believe that a violation exists, the Iberville Parish Health Unit, the city chief of police, and the mayor or his designee shall have the authority to enter upon private or public property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, for inspection and testing of the swimming pool and/or its contents. 
(b)  After having been notified that a violation exists, the owner shall remedy the violation within ten days or the city may remedy the violation as the city deems proper, including but not limited to treating the water in the swimming pool with chemicals, draining the contents of the swimming pool, filling the swimming pool in with dirt or cement, and/or removing the swimming pool from the premises and disposing of it if it is a portable structure. 
(c)  The city shall have a lien and privilege for the cost of remedying the violation. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 13-29. - Procedures. 
(a)  Whenever any public nuisance exists on occupied or unoccupied premises within the city in violation of sections 13-26 et seq., the city shall order the owner of the property upon which the swimming pool is situated to abate the same. Such order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Specify the location of the swimming pool; and 
(3)  Provide for abatement of the nuisance within ten days from service thereof. 
(b)  The order shall be served upon the owner of the property upon which the swimming pool is situated by serving him/her personally or by sending the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address of record in the most recent city assessment roll. If the property is owned in indivision and the owners in indivision, with their proportionate share in the property, are listed separately in the assessment roll, then each owner in indivision shall be notified. Refusal of service or of certified mail shall constitute notice. 
(c)  Within the ten-day period after services of notice, the owner of the swimming pool shall abate the nuisance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify the city that the nuisance has been abated before the time period for compliance expires. 
(d)  If the owner of the swimming pool fails to abate the nuisance within the ten-day period after notification, the chief of police shall issue a misdemeanor summons to the owner of the swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 13-30. - Abatement process. 
(a)  Before the city may take steps to abate the nuisance through remedial measures, it must obtain approval from the mayor and board of selectmen. The city inspector shall submit a written report to the mayor and board of selectmen recommending that the nuisance be abated by the city and specifying the remedial measures sought to be implemented. The city shall thereupon serve notice of the owner of the swimming pool or his/her agent requiring him/her to show cause at a meeting of the mayor and board of selectmen, regular or special, why the remedial measures should not be executed. The date and hour of the meeting shall be stated in the notice which shall be served at least five days prior to the date of the hearing, except in case of grave public emergency as hereinafter provided. The notice may be served by the chief of police or his designee, Iberville Parish Sheriff or his designee, or person having jurisdiction and power to serve legal process where the owner of the property upon which the swimming pool is situated is found in the state and the officer shall make a return of the service as in ordinary cases. 
(1)  If the owner is absent from the state and unrepresented therein, or if the owner is a minor who has no tutor or an interdict who has no curator, then the notice shall be served upon the occupant of the property upon which the swimming pool is situated, if any, and also upon an attorney at law appointed by the mayor to represent the absentee, minor or interdict. Domiciliary service may be made as in ordinary cases. 
(2)  In case of grave emergency where the condition of the swimming pool is such as to cause possible immediate loss or damage to person or property the mayor and board of selectmen may recommend that remedial measures be taken after 24 hours' notice served upon the owner or his agent, or upon the occupant of the property upon which the swimming pool is situated, if any, and the attorney at law appointed to represent the absentee, minor or interdict. 
(b)  After the hearing, if in the opinion of the mayor and board of selectmen the facts justify it, an order shall be entered that the remedial measures recommended by the enforcing agency within a certain delay. If the owner or his agent chooses to comply with the order of the mayor and board of selectmen, prior to the expiration of the delay the owner or his agent must execute a contract in writing obligating himself/herself to have the abatement completed within a time specified by the mayor and board of selectmen and must file a copy of the contract with the city inspector together with a bond to guarantee performance. Upon failure of the owner or his agent to timely fulfill any of the aforementioned requirements the city shall proceed with the implementation of the remedial measures unless the decision of the mayor and board of selectmen has been appealed as hereinafter provided. If the property upon which the swimming pool is situated is occupied, then the occupant shall be served with notice by ordinary mail as to the approximate date the remedial measures shall begin. 
(c)  The order of the mayor and board of selectmen shall be in writing and shall be final unless appealed from within three days. The owner or his agent may appeal from the decision of the mayor and board of selectmen to the 18th Judicial District Court for the Parish of Iberville. The appeal shall be made by the filing of a suit against the city, setting forth the reasons why the decision or order of the mayor and board of selectmen is illegal or improper and the issue shall be tried de novo in the district court. Where a grave public emergency has been declared by the mayor and board of selectmen, the owner of the swimming pool who desires to prevent the implementation of the remedial measures by the mayor and board of selectmen must file his/her petition within 36 hours and must, at the time of filing of the petition, furnish such bond as may be fixed by the district judge to cover any damage that might be caused by the condition of the swimming pool. Either party may appeal from the judgment of the district court as in other cases. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 13-31. - Lien on property. 
    The city shall have a lien and privilege against the property upon which the swimming pool is situated for the cost of remedial measures implemented to abate the nuisance. The privilege and lien shall be preserved and enforced only after the owner has failed to reimburse the city within 30 days after notification by the city to pay the costs incurred. The 30 days shall run from the day of mailing the notification. In order to preserve the lien and privilege it shall be the duty of the mayor or his designee, to prepare and sign a sworn statement of the cost of the remedial measures implemented. This statement shall be filed and recorded in the mortgage records of Iberville Parish and the city shall be entitled to recover the amount of this expense together with costs of court and legal interest from the date of recordation of the lien, by ordinary process in the 18th Judicial District Court for the Parish of Iberville. Additionally, where it is necessary for the city to appoint an attorney to represent an absentee, a minor or an interdict, as hereinabove provided, the attorney's fee shall be taxed as cost. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 13-32. - Penalties. 
(a)  Whosoever is found guilty of violation the provisions of sections 13-26 et seq. on first offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or be imprisoned for 30 days. In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed, the court may, at its discretion, order as a part of the sentence, restitution to the city where remedial measures are implemented by the city to abate the nuisance in accordance with section 13-30. 
(b)  Whosoever is found guilty of violation the provisions of sections 13-26 et seq. on second and subsequent offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500.00 and/or be imprisoned for six months. In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed, the court may, at its discretion, order as a part of the sentence, restitution to the city where remedial measures are implemented by the city to abate the nuisance in accordance with section 13-30. 
(Ord. No. 320, 9-11-12) 
DIVISION 3. - STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF TIRES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 322, adopted Oct. 9, 2012, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 13-26-13-28. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as Div. 3, §§ 13-33-13-35, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 13-33. - Storage of tires. 
    Tire businesses shall properly store tires at each facility in accordance with local, state and federal law. To eliminate potential nuisances of litter, insect breeding, fire hazards and other health risks, each tire business shall at all times during storage: 
(1)  Store tires in covered or enclosed areas, or under an impermeable cover, in accordance with applicable health and safety laws, including but not limited to the city's fire prevention code, to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(2)  Secure tires at each facility to prevent easy access or theft. Lock, chain or store inside a building or other securable structure. 
(3)  The maximum amount of tires stacked outdoors shall not exceed 20. 
(4)  Isolate tires from other stored materials that may create hazardous products if there is a fire, including, but not limited to, lead acid batteries, fuel tanks, solvent barrels and pesticide containers. 
(5)  Store no more than 100 tires per 1,500 square feet of inside storage space. 
(Ord. No. 322, 10-9-12) 
Sec. 13-34. - Disposal records/transmittal manifest. 
(a)  Tire businesses shall keep disposal records in the form of a transmittal manifest, as prescribed by the State of Louisiana, at each business location for a minimum of three years and make such records readily available upon request at reasonable hours for inspection by representatives of the city. 
(b)  The manifest required by this section shall at all times accompany tires while in transit. Any tire business directly delivering waste or used tires generated at its business location to a tire disposal or tire recycling facility must also utilize the transmittal manifest and make such manifest available for production or inspection by representatives of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 322, 10-9-12) 
Sec. 13-35. - Violation and penalties. 
    Any tire business or tire hauler violating or failing to comply with the provisions of sections 13-33 and 13-34 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 for each offense as determined by the city court. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  The improper storage of one or more tires shall constitute a separate offense per tire and be punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00 for each improperly stored tire on the location of the tire business. Each day of continued violation of this subsection constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  The transport of one or more tires without the required manifest shall constitute a separate offense per tire and be punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00 for each tire being transported and/or disposed of in violation of section 13-34. Each day of continued violation of this subsection constitutes a separate offense. 
(3)  The improper dumping of a tire shall constitute a separate offense per tire and be punishable by a fine up to $1,000 for each improperly dumped tire that is related to a specific tire business. Each day of continued violation of this subsection constitutes a separate offense. 
(4)  In addition to, and cumulative of, all other penalties herein provided, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief, for any violation(s) of these sections. 
(Ord. No. 322, 10-9-12) 
Sec. 13-36. - Storage of tires in residentially zoned districts prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall store junk, used and/or discarded tires in residentially zoned districts. 
(b)  Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 for each offense as determined by the city court. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 325, 10-23-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 325, adopted Oct. 23, 2012, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 13-29. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 13-36, at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE III. - TRESPASS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses against property generally, § 9-75 et seq.; entry on or remaining in places or land after being forbidden, § 9-79; driving over private property prohibited, § 20-78. 
State Law reference- Trespass, R.S. 14:63 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-37. - Unlawful entry onto premises. 
    Whoever shall enter into the house or enter upon the premises or within the enclosure of another person without the consent or permission of the owner, agent or possessor of said house, premises or enclosures shall be guilty of trespass, which is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $25.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 20 days. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:38, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-38. - Failure to leave premises. 
    Whoever having entered into the house, premises or within the enclosures of any other person shall refuse or fail to leave and depart therefrom when ordered so to do by the owner, agent or possessor thereof shall, on conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding $25.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 20 days for each and every offense. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:37, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 14:63.3. 
Sec. 13-39. - Terms defined; trespassing prohibited; erection or posting of signs on property of another. 
(a)  Terms defined. As used in this article: 
(1)  Trespass is: 
a.  The unauthorized and intentional taking possession of any tract of land or structure thereon without the consent of the owner thereof; 
b.  The unauthorized and intentional entry upon any: 
1.  Enclosed and posted immovable property; 
2.  Posted lands belonging to public institutions; or 
3.  Structure, watercraft or movable. 
(2)  Enclosed immovable property shall mean any immovable property which is surrounded by a three-strand, cattle-proof fence or any equivalent cattle-proof fence. 
(3)  Posted immovable property shall mean any immovable property which is designated as such by the owner, lessee or other person lawfully authorized to take such action, provided the following requirements are satisfied. The owner or person seeking to post the property shall place and maintain signs along the boundaries of the property or area to be posted, which signs shall be written in the English language, and the signs shall contain the word "Posted." Such signs shall consist of letters written, printed or painted in black, at least three inches high on a white background and the bottom of the signs shall be placed between four and six feet above the ground and shall be placed at intervals of not less than one-eighth or more than one-fourth of a mile along the properties bounded by a three-strand, cattle-proof fence or an equivalent cattle-proof fence. At the main entrance and at the four extreme corners of the property, there shall likewise be a sign equal in size and according to the specifications heretofore set out indicating that the property is "Posted" and, in addition thereto, shall give the name and mailing address of the person owning or leasing the property. 
(b)  Trespass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit trespass within the city. 
(c)  Posting signs on property of another prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place any posted signs on land belonging to another without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:39, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 13-40-13-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSE-TO-HOUSE PEDDLERS 

Sec. 13-50. - Peddling in residential area; exceptions. 
(a)  The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise or services, not having been requested or invited so to by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or services, and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities named herein is now authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:40, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-51. - Penalty. 
    Any person perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited in section 13-50, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the jail for not more than 20 days, or both, at the discretion of the judge, for each and every violation. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:41, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 13-52-13-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PEDDLERS IN CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS 

Sec. 13-65. - Door-to-door peddling in city buildings as nuisance. 
    The practice of going from door to door or office to office in the municipal building, the courthouse, the municipal annex, or any other building owned by the city located in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers or itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:50, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-66. - Police or sheriff to suppress and abate nuisance. 
    The police department is hereby required and directed to suppress the same, and abate any such nuisance as is described in section 13-65. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:51, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-67. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to individuals delivering merchandise or goods which have been ordered by the city or by individual employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:52, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-68. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited in this division, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in jail for not more than 20 days, or both, at the discretion of the judge, for each and every violation. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:53, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 13-69-13-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TRESPASS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS 

Sec. 13-80. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or trespass on any of the property of the city or of the school board located in the city and used for public school purposes, or to use the grounds of the schools, or the walks across the same, except as is provided in section 13-67. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:54, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-81. - Exception. 
    Section 13-80 shall not apply to teachers, employees or students or persons entering on the grounds on business with the students, teachers and other persons lawfully thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:55, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-82. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 or imprisonment for not more than 20 days or both at the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:56, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 13-83-13-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED JUNK, MOTOR VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 148, adopted March 20, 2001, amended Art. IV to read as herein set forth. The former Art. IV derived from Ord. No. 1017-A, §§ 13:60-13-64.1, adopted Dec. 11, 1984; Ord. No. 101, adopted July 22, 1997; and Ord. No. 107, adopted May 14, 1998. Secs. 13-99 and 13-101 in former Art. IV pertained to removal costs of abandoned property other than vehicles and to condemned houses. Those sections were amended and redesignated as §§ 13-114.1 and 13-114.2 by Ord. No. 149, adopted Mar. 20, 2001. 
State Law reference- Authority to enact ordinances regulating or prohibiting the storing or abandoning of junk, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles, or any part or parts thereof, or any other junk, discarded or abandoned major appliances, such as refrigerators, freezers, ranges or machinery or other metal, tin or other discarded items, on any vacant lot, or any portion of any occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk, R.S. 33:3876. 

Sec. 13-95. - Definition. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the term "junked motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle, as defined by the Louisiana Revised Statutes which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked; 
(2)  Dismantled; 
(3)  Partially dismantled; 
(4)  Inoperative; 
(5)  Abandoned; 
(6)  Discarded. 
(b)  Owner of premises means the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, as shown on the last assessment roll. 
(c)  Enforcing agent means the police department, city marshal or city inspector as well as their duly authorized agents. 
(d)  However, the provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment. 
(3)  Antique vehicles, which means any motor vehicle 25 years or older which is operable and substantially in its original condition. An antique vehicle must be registered as antiques and display antiques license plates. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 194, 11-12-04) 
Sec. 13-96. - Declaration of nuisance and illegality. 
    The presence of any junked motor vehicle as herein defined on any private lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, and/or any public property, street, or alley, within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance; and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow any junked motor vehicle to be parked, left or maintained on such person's own real property or on any public street, alley or other property, provided that this section shall not apply with regard to: 
(1)  Any junked motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  Any junked motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  Any junked motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained at a location officially designated and in a manner approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 13-97. - Evidence of abandonment. 
    The following criteria, illustrative, but not limited to, may be used to help the city determine whether a junked motor vehicle is abandoned or junked under the definitions in this article: 
(1)  It has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking longer than 48 hours; 
(2)  It has been left on property owned or controlled by the city for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(3)  It has been left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(4)  It has been left on any public street or highway of the city for more than 48 hours; 
(5)  The vehicle fails to display a current license plate and/or current motor vehicle inspection sticker; 
(6)  It is partially dismantled or wrecked; 
(7)  It is incapable of self propulsion or being moved in the manner for which it was originally intended. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 13-97.1. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the police department, city marshal or the city inspector. In the enforcement of this article, such persons charged with administration and enforcement may enter upon private or public property to examine the vehicle or parts thereof or appliance or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(b)  When the city has contracted with or granted a permit to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 194, 11-12-03) 
Sec. 13-98. - Order to abate, occupied premises; disposal of vehicle by city; request for hearing. 
(a)  Whenever any public nuisance exists on occupied or unoccupied premises within the city in violation of this article, the enforcing agency shall order the owner of the vehicles, or the owner or occupant of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Specify the public nuisance and its location; 
(3)  Specify the corrective measures required; 
(4)  Provide for compliance within five days from service; 
(5)  Provide for opportunity for hearing by written request to the city within three days. 
(b)  The order shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises by serving him personally or by sending the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the premises and the address shown by the department of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Within the five-day period after service of notice, the owner of the premises or the owner of the vehicle shall abate the nuisance by: 
(1)  Removing the nuisance from the premises; or 
(2)  Commencing repairs to the vehicle which shall be completed within 15 days. 
    An extension not to exceed 30 days may be given by the enforcing agency for good cause shown. 
(d)  If the owner or occupant of the premises or the owner of the vehicle fails to abate the nuisance within the five-day period of notification or fails to timely request a hearing, the police department or city marshal may issue a misdemeanor summons to the owner or occupant of the premises and the cause the vehicle to be removed from the premises in the same manner as provided by state law and local ordinance, including but not limited to removal and disposal of the vehicle or appliance by the city with the cost of removing and disposing of said vehicle or appliance to constitute a special lien on the lot or parcel of ground on which it is located, collected in the same manner in which special assessments are collectible by law not to exceed a cost of $500.00 per vehicle or appliance. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of the premises or owner of the junked motor vehicle or any holder of any lien or mortgage, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage of the junked motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 194, 11-12-04) 
Sec. 13-99. - Hearing conduct; proceedings thereafter. 
(a)  The mayor and board of selectmen shall hear the request for administrative hearing, as provided in section 13-98, and shall determine whether or not the owner or occupant of the premises or owner of the junked motor vehicle is, in fact, in violation of this article. Upon a finding that said person is in violation of this article, said person shall be ordered to remove and/or abate such nuisance as provided in subsection 13-98(c). 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of the premises or owner of the vehicle fails and/or refuses to abate or remove the nuisance, the mayor and board of selectmen shall order the police department or city marshal to issue a misdemeanor summons to the owner or occupant of the premises or owner of the vehicle and cause the vehicle to be removed from the premises in the same manner as provided by this article, including but not limited to removal and disposal of the vehicle by the city with the cost of removing and disposing of said vehicle or appliance to constitute a special lien on the lot or parcel of ground on which it is located, collected in the same manner in which special assessments are collectible by law, not to exceed a cost of $500.00 per vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 194, 11-12-04) 
Sec. 13-99.1. - Refusal by certified mail. 
    For purpose of this article, when the owner of the premises or owner of the vehicle has been served notice by certified mail as set forth is subsection 13-98(b) herein and such certified mail is refused, the owner is deemed to have received notice in accordance with the provisions herein and the five-day period commences to run on the date of refusal. 
(Ord. No. 194, 11-12-03) 
Sec. 13-99.2. - Failure to comply. 
    The failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, and the violator shall be subject to the issuance of a misdemeanor summons. The penalty shall be a fine up to $500.00 or 60 days imprisonment or both for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 194, 11-12-03) 
Sec. 13-99.3. - When owner's whereabouts are unknown or notice unclaimed. 
(a)  When there is an abandoned or inoperative motor vehicle or appliance on premises that are unoccupied and the identify or whereabouts or the owner of the premises is unknown or unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, or if notice sent to the last record owner of the property by certified mail has been returned as unclaimed, then the enforcing agency shall place an advertisement in the official journal of city for the whereabouts of the owner allowing for a response within a period of five days. If no response is forthcoming after the five-day period, then the enforcing agency may take possession of the motor vehicle or appliance and remove it from the premises. The enforcing agency shall thereafter dispose of the vehicle in the same manner as provided herein. 
(b)  If notice sent to the occupant of the premises is returned unclaimed, service may be accomplished by posting the notice on the doorway of the premises with the five-day period commencing on the date of posting. 
(Ord. No. 194, 11-12-03) 
Sec. 13-100. - Immunity from liability. 
(a)  No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any property owner, owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled to the possession of any junked motor vehicle for disposing of it as contemplated herein. 
(b)  The city shall not be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any property owner, owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled to the possession of any junked motor vehicle for disposing of it as contemplated herein. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 13-101. - Burning of junked motor vehicles prohibited. 
    The burning of junked motor vehicles is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 13-102. - Storage of junked motor vehicles. 
    Any vacant lot or unused portion of any occupied lot used for the storage of junked motor vehicles, as herein defined, shall be surrounded or enclosed by a board fence or chain-link fence with slates which obscure and prohibit view of the junked motor vehicles pending determination of ultimate disposition. The board fence shall be composed of wood planks with a minimum dimension of one inch by six inches by ten feet. The board fence or chain-link fence with slats shall be a minimum height of ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 13-103. - Removal of abandoned/condemned houses; removal costs. 
(a)  Removal by city, hourly charge. If the owner and/or agent of the property fails to remove the abandoned/condemned house, or fails to clean and remove the abandoned materials from the abandoned/condemned house from his property within 30 days after receipt of notice, the city may have such abandoned/condemned house removed or remove the abandoned materials and/or trash and may charge the owner and/or agent $100.00 per hour in performing the work, which is limited to one piece of equipment and one city employee. In the event additional equipment and/or city employees are necessary for the removal of the abandoned/condemned house and/or removal of abandoned material or trash, the city may charge an additional $50.00 per employee used and the fair rental value for the equipment used plus out of pocket expenses in the event the city must correct the violation. The bill for the work shall be delivered by registered mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the city, or served on the property owner and/or his agent by domiciliary or personal services by a representative of the governing authority. 
(b)  In the event the city advertises and accepts bids from person(s) to perform any and/or all of the work described in the proceeding paragraph, the successful bidder shall be obligated and required to place $500.00 cash, money order, or certified funds as a deposit with city for the faithful performance of the work described above. 
(c)  In the event the successful bidder does not perform the work as described above, the cash deposit shall be forfeited to the city. 
(d)  The mayor and board of selectmen may grant an additional 30 days for the faithful performance of the work described above, without the necessity of the successful bidder showing good cause for the additional 30 days. 
(e)  The mayor and board of selectmen may grant another additional 30 days for the faithful performance of the work described above, with the necessity of the successful bidder showing good cause for another additional 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 156, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 238, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 13-104. - Sanitation requirements for junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definition of "nuisance." For the purpose of this section, the term "nuisance" is inclusive of the definitions of the term "nuisance" as defined elsewhere in the Code, and is further defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others, of those things which are determined by the mayor or his designee to be dangerous or potentially dangerous to human life and health. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping, retaining or deposing on, or the scattering over the premises of, abandoned, discarded or unused motor vehicles. 
(b)  Exterior storage of nonoperating vehicles prohibited. No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle(s) to remain on such property longer than five days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle(s) on any property within the city for a longer time than five days. This subsection shall not apply with regard to any vehicle(s) in an enclosed building. This subsection shall further not apply with regard to any vehicle(s) on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than in a residential district, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle(s) is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or with regard to a vehicle(s) in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or any other public agency or entity. 
(1)  For the purposes of this subsection, the term "junk, wrecked or used automobile or motor vehicles" shall mean any motor vehicle which is totally inoperable, left unattended on any lot or parcel of property and is so damaged or dismantled as to be a total loss. The term "total loss" shall mean that the cost to repair a damaged or dismantled motor vehicle exceeds the junk value of said vehicle. 
(2)  Notice of violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested or served by the city police department to the owner of the vehicle as determined by the license tags if such information is available, otherwise notice of the violation shall be sent to the last known owner of the lot or parcel of ground upon which the inoperable vehicle is located as determined by the assessment rolls for the city. A notice shall also be securely affixed to such vehicle stating that the vehicle is in violation of the provisions of this section and notifying the owner thereof that it will be removed by the city upon the owner's failure to remove the vehicle within the period of time provided for in the notice. Any vehicles remaining on any property following the expiration of the five days from the date of the notice shall be deemed to be public property and shall be disposed of by the city in accordance with the city's Code. 
(3)  Any person desiring to appeal the requirements of the notice shall request a hearing in writing before the mayor and board of selectmen within five days of the receipt of the notice. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor and board of selectmen shall have the right to appeal the decision of the mayor and board of selectmen within five days from the date of such decision by the mayor and board of selectmen to a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(c)  Nuisance. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other motor vehicles or automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind, which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of five days or more, except in licensed junkyards, within the corporate limits of the city, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety. Removal of such nuisances may be accomplished by use of city personnel and equipment or a private company, if the owner is not known or the whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained or the owner falls to remove such nuisances, with such costs of removal and/or storage being the responsibility of the owner. 
(d)  When a nuisance exists, as set forth in subsection (c), a citation to appear in the City Court of Plaquemine may be issued to the owner of the nuisance by the Plaquemine Police Department. In the event of conviction for violation of subsection (c), the general penalty as set forth in Code of Ordinances, section 1-13, shall apply. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other sections related to junked motor vehicles in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 208, 9-28-04) 
Secs. 13-105-13-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES 

Sec. 13-110. - Fortune-telling. 
(a)  Prohibited without compliance to these regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice the vocation or calling known as fortune-telling, clairvoyance, phrenology, astrology, Indian-advising, palmistry or any like or similar practice indicating that the person has mystic power to fortune future events or to use past occurrences for the purpose of fortune-telling future events in the personal and business lives of any person without first complying with all requirements of this section. 
(b)  Permits. Any person wishing to establish one of the practices listed above must first apply to the city clerk for a fortune-telling permit. 
(c)  Requirements for permit. No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant has fulfilled all the following requirements: 
(1)  Applicant must have been a bona fide resident of the city for the previous 120 days. 
(2)  Applicant must present to the city clerk affidavits by two city residents of good moral character, attesting to applicant's moral character and honesty and residency. 
(3)  Applicant must present to the city clerk a surety bond in the sum of $2,500.00 executed by a good and solvent company and shall be drawn in favor of the city and shall obtain the condition that the principal shall operate said business in an honest and fair way and shall promptly and truly pay all licenses and fees imposed by the city for the conduct of such business. 
(d)  Waiting period. No license shall be issued until 60 days have elapsed since the applicant has applied in writing for the permit, and shall have delivered to the city clerk an affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant has remained a resident of the city during this waiting period. 
(e)  Fee. Upon the applicant fulfilling all previous conditions, the city clerk shall issue said applicant a fortune-telling permit, upon the applicant paying to the city clerk a permit fee of $200.00. 
(f)  Term and renewal. This permit required and obtained by this section shall be for a period of six months and shall be renewable upon like terms and conditions and for a like period at the option of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:65, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 13-111. - Unnecessary noise. 
(a)  Unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, contribute, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the corporate limits. 
(b)  Nonexclusive enumeration of unnecessary noise. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns or signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any noise any unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radio, phonograph or any musical instrument. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, street car or vehicle so out of repair or loaded in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary, grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Construction and repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets or highway in any residential district or section other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:0 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city clerk, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 30 [days] while the emergency continues. If the city clerk should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any buildings or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(9)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, funeral homes. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, nursing home, funeral home or court while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in a hospital. 
(10)  Loading, unloading. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  Drums, loudspeakers. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(12)  Loudspeakers on trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(13)  Loudspeakers for advertising. The use or operation, or the causing to be used or operated, in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or through any window, doorway or opening of such building abutting upon the public street, or upon any public street any device or apparatus for tapping windows, or for amplifying sound from any radio or phonograph, or any sound reproducing device. 
(14)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(c)  Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any publicly owned vehicle while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of any public agency during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character, and for which a permit is first obtained from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 101 7-A, § 13:66, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 027, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 13-111.1 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
    A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibel as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, included demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter.) 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structure, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases when trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GVWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
    Impulsive sound means sound of short duration usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sounds include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
    Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce means any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semitrailers, campers, go-carts, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles. 
    Motorboat means any vessel which operates on water and which is propelled by a motor, including but not limited to boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and hover craft. 
    Motorcycle means an unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor scooters and minibikes. 
    Muffler or sound-dissipative device means a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injuries the safety or health of humans or animals; or 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers or injuries personal or real property. 
    Noise-sensitive zone means any area designated pursuant to subsection 13-111(b)(9) for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet. 
    Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or land borne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Property lines means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra building real property divisions. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Pure tone means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this chapter, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band when the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including direction, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSISI-4-1971), or the latest approved revisions thereof. If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weight networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
    Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
    Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals (20 × 10-6 N/n2). The sound pressure level is denoted L, or SPL and is expressed in decibels. 
    Terminology. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined herein, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
    Vibration means an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with respect to a given reference point. 
    Weekday means any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday. (City Code 1957, title 12, § 100; Parish Code 1962, title 12, § 100) 
(Ord. No. 136, 4-18-00) 
Sec. 13-111.2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Prima facie evidence of a violation. Evidence establishing that an activity is causing or has caused the permissible sound level to be exceeded by more than five decibels at a point designated in any section of this chapter shall be deemed to be a prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. Sound level measurements taken in order to show such prima facie violation must conform to the procedures as outlined in subsection (b). 
(b)  Procedures and measurements. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, sound level measurements shall be taken with a sound level meter microphone located at any point on the real property boundary or other point as provided in this chapter, no closer than five feet from any wall or vertical obstruction when possible, and where practicable not less than five feet above ground level, but in no event less than three feet above ground. A minimum of three readings shall be taken at two-minute intervals. The sound level shall be the average of these readings. 
(c)  Impoundment. The police department may impound and retain as evidence any instrumentality used to create any noise in violation of this chapter, and in the case of motor vehicles, the owner shall be responsible for ordinary towing and storage charges incurred in the course of the impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 136, 4-18-00) 
Sec. 13-111.3. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Maximum permissible sound levels by emanating land use. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private property any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits as established in the following table in accordance with the time of day and zoning applicable to the property from which the sound is created: 
When the Property from which the Sound Emanates is Zoned During the Hours The Maximum Permissible as measured at or Within the Property Boundary of the Receiving Property is H-1, L-1, C-6 C-4 All hours 90 dBA 11:00 p.m. 7:00 a.m. 65 dBA 7:00 a.m. 11:00 p.m. 85 dBA R-10 through R-2 10:00 p.m. 7:00 a.m. 40 dBA 7:00 a.m. 10:00 p.m. 60 dBA  
(b)  Places of public entertainment. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a sound level which exceeds 95 dDB except where a sign is posted at every public entrance which reads "Warning, sound levels created in this building may cause permanent hearing damage or loss." 
(c)  Maximum permissible sound levels by motor vehicles. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle on a public street in such a manner that the sound level emitted therefrom exceeds 70 dBA when measured from the curb of the street, the outer edge of the paved surface or the outer gravel edge on nonpaved streets. 
(d)  Noise-sensitive zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise which exceeds the sound level of 50 dBA as measured within 20 feet from an exterior wall of any public school between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays when school is in session. 
(e)  Recreational motorized vehicles operating off public rights-of-way. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any recreational motorized vehicle on a public right-of-way or on private property in such a manner that the sound level emitted therefrom exceeds eight dBA at or across the boundary of any private property receiving the noise. This section shall apply to all recreational motorized vehicles, whether or not fully licensed and registered, including but not limited to commercial or non commercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go-carts, minibikes, snowmobiles, amphibious craft, campers and dune buggies, but not including motorboats. The provisions of subsection 13-111.3(a) will not apply to the measurements taken to enforce this section. 
(f)  Motor vehicle horns and signaling devices. It shall be a violation of this chapter to do either of the following: 
(1)  Sound any horn or other auditory signaling device on or in any motor vehicle on any public right-of-way or public space, except as a warning of danger; or 
(2)  Sound any horn or other auditory signaling device which produces a sound level in excess of 95 dBA at 50 feet. 
(g)  Animals and birds. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to own, possess or harbor any animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes any other sound which shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons dwelling in he vicinity of where the animal or bird is kept. 
(h)  Permissible time for construction activity, operation of domestic power tools, etc.: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do perform or engage in any construction of any nature in the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m., on one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day or at any time on Sunday, if any such activity shall cause noises whose levels result in excess of 55 dBA at the receiving property line. This section shall not prohibit any work performed because of emergency. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snow blower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., the following day so as to cause the sound level limits established in this section to be exceeded at the property line. At no time shall the sound level cause by or emitted from any of the above tools exceed 90 dBA at the property line. 
(Ord. No. 136, 4-18-00; ord. No. 150, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 13-111.4. - Variances and exceptions. 
(a)  Variance permit. 
(1)  The mayor and board of selectmen shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant special variances which may be requested when it finds or determines that: 
a.  Strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter would cause a hardship upon any person; or 
b.  The offending noise will be for a short duration and compliance with this chapter will be impractical; or 
c.  The benefit in the community of the activity creating the offending noise is greater than the adverse effect on the community of the noise created; or 
d.  The applicant needs additional time to modify equipment or take other action in order to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Notice of an application for a variance granted under this section shall be published in the same manner as provided by law. 
(3)  The chief of police may grant an application for a variance a temporary permit to exceed levels established herein until action is taken by the council on the application for a variance. 
(4)  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of a special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial variances. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Airport and aircraft operations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin or in any manner regulate the movement of aircraft which are in all respects conducted in accordance with or pursuant to applicable federal laws or regulations. 
(2)  Public functions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin or in any manner regulate any public or private school function, including sporting events where the function occurs on the property of school. 
(3)  Governmental activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin or in any manner regulate any federal, state or local governmental agency or any employee or agent of the same in the fulfillment of any official duty or activity sanctioned by or on behalf of the governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 136, 4-18-00) 
Sec. 13-111.5. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $200.00 or not more than 30 days in jail, or both, at the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 136, 4-18-00) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 136, adopted April 18, 2000, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 13-111-13-111.4. With the city's concurrence and for purposes of classification and in order to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 13-111-13-111.4 as §§ 13-111.1-13-111.5. 
Sec. 13-112. - Air guns. 
    The use, firing, shooting and explosion of "air guns" or "air rifles" and "blow guns" within the corporate limits of this city is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot or explode "air guns" or "air rifles" or "blow guns" within the municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:67, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Offenses against the public safety, § 9-115 et seq. 
Sec. 13-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 258, adopted Oct. 30, 2007, repealed § 13-113, which pertained to obstruction of drainage and was derived from Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:57, adopted Dec. 11, 1984. 
Sec. 13-114. - Mayor's authority to secure dangerous structures. 
(a)  The mayor and board of selectmen declares that a dangerous, dilapidated structure is a health or safety hazard or public nuisance and directs the mayor or his authorized agent and the selectman in whose district the structure is located to secure said structure to prevent harm and/or danger to the public without the express permission of the owner or property owner. 
(b)  The city shall not be held to answer in a civil or criminal action to any property owner, owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled to the dangerous, dilapidated structure for securing said structure as contemplated herein. 
(1)  In the exercise of securing the structure and/or property, the costs of securing the structure and/or property shall constitute a special lien collectible in the same manner as special assessments are collectible by law. 
(2)  As an alternative, the cost of securing the structure and/or property may be collected by civil action from the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 120, 4-13-99) 
Sec. 13-114.1. - Removal costs of abandoned property other than junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  Abandoned property, other than junked motor vehicles, which are removed by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or law, the costs of removing such property shall constitute a special lien collectible in the same manner as special assessments are collectible by law. 
(b)  In the alternative and solely in the discretion of the mayor and board of selectmen, the cost of removal of such abandoned property may be collected by civil action from the owner of the abandoned property. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 13:64, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 149, 3-20-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4876(B), (c). 
Sec. 13-114.2. - Removal of abandoned/condemned houses, structures; removal costs. 
(a)  In the event the city removes and/or demolishes abandoned/condemned houses and/or structures, as provided by law, the costs of removing such houses and/or structures shall constitute a special lien collectable as provided by law. 
(b)  The city, through the mayor and board of selectmen, shall be authorized to adopt, from time to time, a policy setting forth the amount of debt due by the property owners of abandoned/condemned houses and/or structures. The city attorney is empowered, on behalf of the city, to effect any and all collection methods and/or procedures, as provided by law, to collect the debt, including but not limited to seizure and sale of the immovable property through sheriff's sale. 
(Ord. No. 101, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 149, 3-20-01) 
Note- See the editor's footnote to Art. IV. 
Sec. 13-115. - Charitable donations prohibited from public street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to beg, ask, seek, or solicit alms, donations, and/or monies from the streets and/or the state highways within the city limits, under a penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00, or be imprisoned not less than ten days nor more than 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 123, 7-13-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 123, adopted July 13, 1999, added § 13-114 to the Code. Since said section already existed, the editor has redesignated the new provisions as § 13-115. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC INDECENCY 

Sec. 13-116. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate nudity as a form of commercial or business exploitation and regulate dress as a form of conduct in commercial or business activities. The purpose is not to impede the free exchange and expression of ideas or to prohibit the activity of breast feeding of children. The conduct regulated is that which the community, the mayor and board of selectmen in public meetings have clearly found to be offensive to the general welfare, public safety, order and morals of the City of Plaquemine and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 343, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 13-117. - Committing public indecency; exception. 
(a)  A person who knowingly or intentionally does any of the following in a public place commits public indecency: 
(1)  Engages in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engages in anal or oral sexual intercourse; 
(3)  Appears in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (a)(3) hereof shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under ten years of age; or 
(2)  Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant under two years of age. 
(Ord. No. 343, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 13-118. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows: 
    Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genital, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which devices simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola. 
    Public place includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms, bars, lounges, or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. 
(Ord. No. 343, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 13-119. - Abatement of nuisances authorized. 
    In addition to the specific penalties provided in this article, it is hereby declared that any building, portion of a building, or enclosed place regularly used for the prohibited display of public nudity is a public nuisance, subjecting the owner, proprietor or other operator thereof to any and all actions authorize by the State of Louisiana and Plaquemine Code of Ordinances sections 13-5 through 13-9. 
(Ord. No. 343, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 13-120. - Penalty. 
    Whoever is found guilty of violating any provision of this article, either by commission of a public indecency, or by the promotion or maintenance of public indecency as property owner and/or proprietor, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or shall be imprisoned for not less than ten days nor more than six months. At least ten days of the sentence imposed shall be served without benefit of probation, parole or suspension of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 343, 3-11-14) 
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; design standards for public use in service areas in subdivisions, § 18-19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 14-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board to be known as the playground and recreation board for the city, whose authority shall extend within the corporate limits of the city, as those limits are now or may hereafter be fixed and determined. 
(Ord. No. 926, 2-13-79; Ord. No. 949, 9-23-80) 
Sec. 14-17. - Composition, appointment. 
    The playground and recreation board shall be composed of eight members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of selectmen, of which one member may be recommended by the Iberville Parish School Board. 
(Ord. No. 926, 2-13-79; Ord. No. 949, 9-23-80; Ord. No. 1015, 10-9-84; Res. of 5-14-85) 
Sec. 14-18. - Terms of members. 
    The term of members of the playground and recreation board shall be for a period of five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually after creation of the board. 
(Ord. No. 926, 2-13-79; Ord. No. 949, 9-23-80) 
Sec. 14-19. - Compensation. 
    All members of the playground and recreation board shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1967, § 2-11) 
Sec. 14-20. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring on the playground and recreation board otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by appointment by the mayor for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 2-11) 
Sec. 14-21. - Organization; quorum. 
    Immediately after the appointment of the playground and recreation board they shall meet and organize by electing from their members a president, a vice-president and a treasurer whose term of office shall run for one year. Five members shall constitute a quorum of the board for all purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 2-12) 
Sec. 14-22. - Powers and duties. 
    The playground and recreation board shall have full power and authority to maintain and equip playgrounds and recreation centers and to employ recreation officers and employees and to otherwise supervise recreation and maintain and conduct playgrounds, recreation centers and other recreation facilities and activities. 
(Code 1967, § 2-13) 
Sec. 14-23. - Donations acceptable; disposition of donations. 
    The city shall accept any donation of movable or immovable property for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreation purposes and any money received for such purpose, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the donation, shall be deposited with the treasurer of the city for the account of the playgrounds and recreation board, and the same may be withdrawn and paid out by the board in the same manner as money appropriated for recreation purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 2-14) 
Sec. 14-24. - Removal of members. 
    Any such member may be removed after public hearing for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or misconduct in office. Failure by any member to attend 80 percent of all meetings or the failure to attend three meetings in a row shall constitute neglect of duty. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 10-9-84) 
ARTICLE III. - BAYOU WATERFRONT PARK 

Sec. 14-25. - Citation. 
    This article shall constitute the Bayou Waterfront Park regulations of the city and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-26. - Police power. 
    This article is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the city, and its provisions shall be liberally construed for the preservation and protection of the natural environment, public peace, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-27. - Purpose and findings. 
    The City of Plaquemine finds as follows, and declares that the ordinance codified in this article is passed in response to the following facts: 
(1)  Unlawful and inappropriate behavior in the Bayou Waterfront Park diminishes this precious asset and deprives citizens of the full use and enjoyment of the natural beauty, recreational opportunities and peaceful repose that the park is intended to preserve in an urban setting. 
(2)  In addition to more serious criminal acts that threaten personal injury and property damage, a wide range of illegal disorderly behavior can transform a park into an unwelcoming, unattractive and ultimately unsafe public space requiring increased expenditures for public safety and maintenance. 
(3)  The law intended to preserve and protect the park for the benefit of all are effective only if those who use the park obey the law. The current criminal and civil penalties for violating the law are frequently inadequate alone to deter illegal behavior, prevent its recurrence or provide for removal of the offender from the park. 
(4)  Compliance with the law, including the provisions under this article and regulations, will be enhanced by the immediate administrative sanction of excluding from the park those who violate the law. In addition, for repeat offenders and for more serious offenses, exclusion for extended periods of time will provide a necessary additional remedy to protect the park. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-28. - Definitions. 
    Unless clearly inconsistent with the context in which used, the following definitions apply: 
    Boardwalk pavilion means the larger pavilion area on the wooden boardwalk, near the Lock Chamber wall. 
    Camp means to remain overnight, to erect a tent or other shelter, or to use sleeping equipment, a vehicle, or a trailer camper, for the purpose of or in such way as will permit remaining overnight. 
    Main pavilion means the large pavilion building. 
    Meeting room means the brick meeting room (the former 1880 Nadler's Foundry and Equipment Office). 
    Park means the entirety of the Bayou Plaquemine Waterfront Park. 
    Park rule means those particular rules, policies and/or regulations the city has adopted. 
    Small boardwalk pavilion means the smaller wooden pavilion area near the main pavilion building. 
    Violation means an act or omission or combination thereof that is contrary to any park rule or any civil or criminal provision of the Code of Ordinances for the city or provisions of the Revised Statutes for the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 310, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 14-29. - Rulemaking; enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The mayor and board of selectmen may adopt, amend and rescind policies, rules and regulations consistent with this article in order to manage and control the park, including rules that: 
(1)  Clarify, interpret or apply this article; 
(2)  Regulate the use of the park; 
(3)  Regulate conduct in the park; 
(4)  Designate restricted areas in the park; 
(5)  Regulate recreational programs; 
(6)  Establish times for opening and closing the park to public use and/or for entry or use of motor vehicles; 
(7)  Restrict and/or prohibit the use of any skateboard, roller skate, coaster or other similar device in the park or any part of the park. This prohibition shall not apply to a person with a disability, who uses wheeled equipment in order to be ambulatory. 
(8)  Impose a speed limit on use of any park paths, trails and walks, improved and unimproved and any waterways. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-30. - Permit system. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen may establish a permit system and require a permit for: 
(1)  Reserving any room or part of the park for a certain time or series of times; and granting the exclusive use thereof during the time reserved. 
(2)  Posting any signs, posters and notices; placing or erecting any structure or obstruction of any kind within a park, whether temporary or permanent; engaging in any competitions involving a vehicle, boat, aircraft, or animal. 
(3)  Using any outdoor electrical power outlet; or laying cables or extending wires in or over the park; or using any park or facility during the hours it is closed to the public. 
(4)  A permit for an event may authorize the placing of temporary signs, posters or notices reasonably related thereto. 
(5)  All permits shall be wholly of a temporary nature, shall not be a permanent right, and may be revoked upon 30 days' notice or, if the permit so states, upon shorter notice. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 310, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 336, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 14-31. - Term and conditions. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen may condition the permit or impose such terms and conditions as appropriate to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and/or the park; to avoid or limit unnecessary interference with other uses or users of the park; to minimize disturbance of the surrounding neighborhood; and to require the user to leave the area under permit in a condition after the activity or event as it was beforehand. For this purpose, the mayor and board of selectmen may require the user to furnish public liability and property damage insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, in such amounts as reasonably necessary to provide recompense for personal injury or death or property damage to a member of the public as result of the event or activity; execute an indemnity and/or hold harmless agreement; and/or make a reasonable security deposit or provide a bond. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-32. - Posting of signs, posters and notices. 
    Except as authorized by the mayor and board of selectmen, it is unlawful to use, place or erect any signboard, sign, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole or device of any kind for advertising or notification in the park, or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or card to any tree, shrub, railing, post or structure within the park. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-33. - Distribution of handbills. 
    It is unlawful to distribute any handbills, circulars, flyers or signs in the park in any manner that interferes with or obstructs the normal passage of people or vehicles, unless authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-34. - No trespassing areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person authorized by the mayor, to enter or go upon any area which has been designated and posted by the city as a "no admittance" or "no trespassing" area for the purpose of protecting the environment or for the purpose of protecting the public from conditions which constitute a potential hazard to life or physical well-being. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person authorized by the mayor, to remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any structure, lawn, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, geological formation, plant, flower, lighting system, sprinkling system, gate barricade or lock or other property lawfully in the park, or to remove sand, soil, or sod in the park. 
(c)  Every offense defined by this section or conduct made unlawful hereby constitute a crime and any person convicted of such crime may be punished by a fine in any sum not to exceed $5,000.0) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-35. - Firearms prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to carry a firearm in the park, provided that this section shall not apply to police officers. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-36. - Soliciting prohibited. 
    Except as may be specifically provided by law, no person shall solicit contributions for himself, nor for any charitable, educational or scientific purpose in the park. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-37. - Sale of merchandise, concession contract required. 
    It is unlawful to sell or attempt to sell any merchandise, liquid, edible, or any other tangible or intangible thing, right, privilege or claim in the park without having an authorized concession contract or permit to do so. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-38. - Sound amplifying devices. 
    Except as authorized by the mayor and board of selectmen for specific events and times, or except as necessary for the preservation of public peace or safety, it is unlawful to use any public address system, loudspeaker or other sound amplifying device in the park. It is unlawful to exceed noise levels prescribed by sections 13-111.1 through 13-111.5. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-39. - Commercial fishing prohibited; cleaning prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful to engage in or attempt to engage in any commercial fishing activities in or from the park. 
(b)  It is unlawful to clean and/or gut fish anywhere in the park. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-40. - Camping. 
    It is unlawful to camp in the park except as permitted by the city and at places set aside and posted for such purpose by the city. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-41. - Alcohol prohibited. 
    It is unlawful in the park to consume, or to possess an open container holding, or to open a container holding, alcohol as defined by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-42. - Use of driveways and boulevards. 
    It is unlawful to ride, propel, drive or direct any animal or motorized vehicle over or through the park except along and upon the park drives, parkways and park boulevards, or to do so at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit, or to do so in excess of 15 miles per hour where no speed limit is posted. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-43. - Areas closed to general vehicular access. 
    Except as authorized by the city, it is unlawful to drive or operate a noncity vehicle in the park or in any area therein which is designated as being closed to general vehicular traffic access, and which is so posted. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-44. - Restrictions on uses of vehicles and animals in a park when the park is not open to the public. 
(a)  It is unlawful to drive or ride in or on any motor vehicle or animal, in the park when the park is not open to the public, or when the park, roadway or parking lot is, by order of the mayor, closed to entry or use by motor vehicles. 
(b)  It is unlawful to park or leave a motor vehicle unattended in the park during hours when the park is not open to the public, or when the park, roadway, or parking lot is, by order of the mayor, closed to entry or use by motor vehicles, except pursuant to a permit issued by the city. Vehicles parked or left unattended in violation of this section are hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be impounded in accordance with the provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances providing for impoundment with or without citation and without prior notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-45. - Littering. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw or deposit any refuse or other material in the park, except in designated receptacles; or to take garbage or refuse in the park for disposal in the park; or to deposit garbage or refuse generated outside the park in a receptacle within the park designated for deposit of trash by the public. 
(b)  Whoever is found guilty of littering in the park shall be fined not less than $500.00 but not more than $1,500.00 or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. In addition, the offender shall be placed on supervised probation for not less than six months, but not more than one year, with a minimum condition that he/she perform four eight-hour days of court approved community service activities. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-46. - Motorized models. 
    It is unlawful to operate any motorized model aircraft or motorized model watercraft in the park, except at places set apart by the city for such purposes or as authorized by a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-47. - Fires. 
    It is unlawful: 
(1)  To ignite or maintain any fire or to participate in igniting, maintaining or using any fire within any park except in a designated stove, barbecue grill or fire ring; or 
(2)  To ignite in any stove, barbecue grill or fire ring any household rubbish or other material banned from outdoor burning by air pollution control regulations. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-48. - Animals running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit any dog or other pet to run at large in the park. 
(b)  Any person with his/her animal(s) inside the park shall be required to pick up and dispose of, in a sanitary waste and/or garbage container, his/her animal's feces. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 14-49. - Operation or land of watercraft at designated areas only. 
    It is unlawful to have, keep or operate any boat, float, raft or other watercraft in or upon Bayou Plaquemine within the limits of the park, or to land the same at any point upon shores within the park, except where designated by the city for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 232, 4-11-06) 
ARTICLE IV. - PLAQUEMINE CITY PARK 

Sec. 14-50. - Citation. 
    This article shall constitute the Plaquemine City Park regulations of the city and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-51. - Police power. 
    This article is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the city, and its provisions shall be liberally construed for the preservation and protection of the natural environment, public peace, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-52. - Purpose and findings. 
    The city finds as follows, and declares that the ordinance codified in this article is passed in response to the following facts: 
(a)  Unlawful and inappropriate behavior in the Plaquemine City Park diminishes this precious asset and deprives citizens of the full use and enjoyment of the natural beauty, recreational opportunities and peaceful repose that City Park is intended to preserve in an urban setting. 
(b)  In addition to more serious criminal acts that threaten personal injury and property damage, a wide range of illegal disorderly behavior can transform a park into an unwelcoming, unattractive and ultimately unsafe public space requiring increased expenditures for public safety and maintenance. 
(c)  The law intended to preserve and protect City Park for the benefit of all are effective only if those who use City Park obey the law. The current criminal and civil penalties for violating the law are frequently inadequate alone to deter illegal behavior, prevent its recurrence or provide for removal of the offender from City Park. 
(d)  Compliance with the law, including the provisions under this article and regulations, will be enhanced by the immediate administrative sanction of excluding from City Park those who violate the law. In addition, for repeat offenders and for more serious offenses, exclusion for extended periods of time will provide a necessary additional remedy to protect City Park. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-53. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless clearly inconsistent with the context in which used, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Area means a specified place within the park. 
(2)  Camp means to remain overnight, to erect a tent or other shelter, or to use sleeping equipment, a vehicle, or a trailer camper, for the purpose of or in such way as will permit remaining overnight. 
(3)  City means the City of Plaquemine Mayor and Board of Selectmen. 
(4)  City Park means Plaquemine City Park, bounded by Belleview Road, Sherburne Street and Ferdinand Street. 
(5)  Park rule means those particular rules, policies and/or regulations the city and/or Iberville Parish Parks and Recreation District has adopted. 
(6)  Parish means Iberville Parish Council. 
(7)  IPRD means Iberville Parish Parks and Recreation District management. 
(8)  Violation means an act or omission or combination thereof that is contrary to any park rule or any civil or criminal provision of the Code of Ordinances for the city or provisions of the Revised Statutes for the state. 
(9)  In-line skates means in-line skates, also known as rollerblades, which are footwear containing four or more axles mounted in a straight line extending generally from or behind the heel of the footwear to or in front of the toe of the footwear with a single wheel attached to each axle. 
(10)  Skate or skateboard means to ride, operate or use skates or a skateboard. 
(11)  Skate area means the area of the park specifically designated pursuant to this article for skating and skateboarding. 
(12)  Skateboard means a board of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which if [is] propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or control the wheels. 
(13)  Skates means any footwear, or device which may be attached to the footwear, to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion. "Skates" includes roller skates, in-line skates, and rollerblades. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-54. - Rulemaking; enforcement. 
(a)  The city chief of police shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The mayor and board of selectmen and/or IPRD may adopt, amend and rescind policies, rules and regulations consistent with this article in order to manage and control City Park, including rules that: 
(1)  Clarify, interpret or apply this article; 
(2)  Regulate the use of City Park; 
(3)  Regulate conduct in City Park; 
(4)  Designate restricted areas in City Park; 
(5)  Regulate recreational programs; 
(6)  Establish times for opening and closing City Park to public use and/or for entry or use of motor vehicles; 
(7)  Regulate the skate board park area within City Park. This prohibition shall not apply to a person with a disability who uses wheeled equipment in order to be ambulatory. 
(8)  Regulate the water spray park area within City Park; and 
(9)  Impose a speed limit on use of any park paths, trails and walks, improved and unimproved. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-55. - Permit system. 
    IPRD may establish a permit system and require a permit for: 
(a)  Reserving any room or part of City Park for a certain time or series of times; and granting the exclusive use thereof during the time reserved. 
(b)  Posting any signs, posters and notices; placing or erecting any structure or obstruction of any kind within a park, whether temporary or permanent; engaging in any competitions involving a vehicle, aircraft, animal or devices such as skateboards, in-line roller skates. 
(c)  Conducting a commercial activity; using any outdoor electrical power outlet; or laying cables or extending wires in or over City Park; or using any park or facility during the hours it is closed to the public. 
(d)  A permit for an event may authorize the placing of temporary signs, posters or notices reasonably related thereto. 
(e)  All permits shall be wholly of a temporary nature, shall not be a permanent right, and may be revoked upon 30 days' notice or, if the permit so states, upon shorter notice. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-56. - Term and conditions. 
    IPRD may condition the permit or impose such terms and conditions as appropriate to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and/or City Park; to avoid or limit unnecessary interference with other uses or users of City Park; to minimize disturbance of the surrounding neighborhood; and to require the user to leave the area under permit in a condition after the activity or event as it was beforehand. For this purpose, IPRD may require the user to furnish public liability and property damage insurance, naming the IPRD and/or the city as an additional insured, in such amounts as reasonably necessary to provide recompense for personal injury or death or property damage to a member of the public as result of the event or activity; execute an indemnity and/or hold harmless agreement; and/or made a reasonable security deposit or provide a bond. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-57. - Posting of signs, posters and notices. 
    Except as authorized by IPRD and/or the city, it is unlawful to use, place or erect any signboard, sign, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole or device of any kind for advertising or notification in City Park, or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or card to any tree, shrub, railing, post or structure within City Park. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-58. - Distribution of handbills. 
    It is unlawful to distribute any handbills, circulars, flyers or signs in City Park in any manner that interferes with or obstructs the normal passage of people or vehicles, unless authorized by IPRD and/or the city. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-59. - No trespassing areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized IPRD, city or Iberville Parish Council employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person or persons authorized by IPRD and/or the city, to enter or go upon any area which has been designated and posted by IPRD and/or the city as a "no admittance" or "no trespassing" area for the purpose of protecting the environment or for the purpose of protecting the public from condition which constitute a potential hazard to life or physical well-being. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized IPRD, city or Iberville Parish employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person or persons authorized by IPRD and/or the city, to remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any structure, lawn, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, geological formation, plant, flower, lighting system, sprinkling system, gate barricade or lock or other property lawfully in City Park, or to remove sand, soil, or sod in City Park. 
(c)  Every offense defined by this section or conduct made unlawful hereby constitute a crime and any person convicted of such crime may be punished by a fine in any sum not to exceed $5,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-60. - Firearms prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to carry a firearm in City Park, provided that this section shall not apply to police officers or other designated law enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-61. - Soliciting prohibited. 
    Except as may be specifically provided by law, no person shall solicit contributions for himself, nor for any charitable, educational or scientific purpose in City Park. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-62. - Sale of merchandise, concession contract required. 
    It is unlawful to sell or attempt to sell any merchandise, liquid, edible, or any other tangible or intangible thing, right, privilege or claim in City Park without having an authorized concession contract or permit to do so. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-63. - Sound-amplifying devices. 
    Except as authorized by IPRD and/or the city for specific events and times, or except as necessary for the preservation of public peace or safety, it is unlawful to use any public address system, loudspeaker or other sound amplifying device in City Park. It is unlawful to exceed noise levels prescribed by Plaquemine Code of Ordinances sections 13-111.1 through 13-111.5. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-64. - Camping. 
    It is unlawful to camp in City Park except as permitted by IPRD and/or the city and at places set aside and posted for such purpose by IPRD. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-65. - Alcohol prohibited. 
    It is unlawful in City Park to consume, or to possess an open container holding, or to open a container holding, alcohol as defined by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-66. - Use of driveways and boulevards. 
    It is unlawful to ride, propel, drive or direct any animal or motorized vehicle over or through City Park except along and upon City Park drives, parkways and park boulevards, or to do so at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit, or to do so in excess of ten miles per hour where no speed limit is posted. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-67. - Areas closed to general vehicular access. 
    Except as authorized by IPRD and/or the city, it is unlawful to drive or operate a nongovernment vehicle in City Park or in any area therein which is designated as being closed to general vehicular traffic access, and which is so posted. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-68. - Restrictions on uses of vehicles and animals in a park when City Park is not open to the public. 
(a)  It is unlawful to drive or ride in or on any motor vehicle or animal, in City Park when City Park is not open to the public, or when City Park, roadway or parking lot is, by order of IPRD and/or the City, closed to entry or use by motor vehicles. 
(b)  It is unlawful to park or leave a motor vehicle unattended in City Park during hours when City Park is not open to the public, or when City Park, roadway, or parking lot is, by order of IPRD and/or the city, closed to entry or use by motor vehicles, except pursuant to a permit issued by IPRD. Vehicles parked or left unattended in violation of this section are hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be impounded in accordance with the provisions of the City of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances providing for impoundment with or without citation and without prior notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-69. - Littering. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw or deposit any refuse or other material in City Park, except in designated receptacles; or to take garbage or refuse in City Park for disposal in City Park; or to deposit garbage or refuse generated outside City Park in a receptacle within City Park designated for deposit of trash by the public. 
(b)  Whoever is found guilty of littering in City Park shall be fined not less than $500.00 but not more than $1,500.00 or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. In addition, the offender shall be placed on supervised probation for not less than six months, but not more than one year, with a minimum condition that he/she perform four eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-70. - Motorized models and vehicles. 
    It is unlawful to operate any motorized model aircraft or vehicle in City Park, except at places set apart by IPRD for such purposes or as authorized by a permit from IPRD. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-71. - Fires. 
    It is unlawful: 
(a)  To ignite or maintain any fire or to participate in igniting, maintaining or using any fire within any park except in a designated stove, barbecue grill or fire ring, or 
(b)  To ignite in any stove, barbecue grill or fire ring any household rubbish or other material banned from outdoor burning by air pollution control regulations. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-72. - Animals running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit any dog or other pet to run at large in City Park. 
(b)  Any person with his/her animal(s) inside City Park shall be required to pick up and dispose of, in a sanitary waste and/or garbage container, his/her animal's feces. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-73. - Liability limit. 
    R.S. 9:2795 limits liability of a governmental unit for damages arising directly from skating, in-line skating, roller-skating, skateboarding, rollerblading use on premises that the governmental unit owns, operates or maintains for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-74. - Responsibility of items. 
    IPRD and/or city shall not be responsible for lost, stolen or damaged items. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec 14-75. - Photo policy. 
    All participants and/or users involved in any department programs or special events are subject to be[ing] photographed. Such photographs may be used by IPRD and/or the city without an obligation to provide compensation to those photographed. Photos may be used for print and website publications in addition to other promotional items related to IPRD and/or the city. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-76. - Violation. 
    Any person violating any of the regulations set forth in section 14-50 et seq. may be removed from City Park. Any violation of any section of this article is deemed to be an infraction and punishable under this section according to the provisions of the City of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-77. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The city board of selectmen hereby declares that it would have adopted this article and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrases, or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-78. - Effective date. 
    This article shall go into effect as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 14-79. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances and resolutions in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, except those (sic). 
(Ord. No. 275, 9-9-08) 
PLAQUEMINE CITY PARK SKATEBOARD AND WATER SPRAY PARK REGULATIONS 
Pursuant to the provisions of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances section 14-50, et seq. 
I.  Hours of operation/children. 
(A)  Plaquemine City Park shall be open from dawn to dusk, except for certain recreational areas which are lighted for night use or overnight camping areas; 
(B)  Plaquemine City Park may be closed, in whole or in part, for the use of persons and/or organizations events. You can obtain information of scheduled park events from IPRD. 
(C)  Plaquemine City Park may be opened for additional hours for special events permitted by IPRD. 
(D)  All persons under the age of 17 years must be accompanied by an adult to enter and use City Park. Plaquemine City Park patrons and guest[s] are responsible for the behavior of minors using City Park. Children must be chaperoned at all times and not allowed to roam around City Park without supervision. 
II.  Camping. 
(A)  To camp in City Park it is necessary to obtain a permit from IPRD. 
(B)  Camping will only be permitted at places set aside and posted by IPRD for such purpose. 
III.  Fires/barbecue/boils. 
(A)  It is unlawful (a) to ignite or maintain any fire or to participate in igniting, maintaining or using any fire within City Park except in a designated stove, barbecue grill or fire ring. 
(B)  Barbecues, and/or boils shall only be conducted in areas designated for these activities. 
(C)  Camp fires are prohibited. 
IV.  Littering. Plaquemine City Park patrons and guest[s] agree not to damage, deface, waste, or strip park facilities, landscaping, signs, and/or displays. Plaquemine City Park patrons and guest[s] agree, understand and acknowledge the City of Plaquemine Code of Ordinance regarding littering. 
A.  It is unlawful to throw or deposit any refuse or other material in City Park, except in designated receptacles; or to take garbage or refuse in City Park for disposal in City Park; or to deposit garbage or refuse generated outside City Park in a receptacle within City Park designated for deposit of trash by the public. 
B.  Whoever is found guilty of littering in City Park shall be fined not less than $500.00 but not more than $1,500.00 or imprisoned in the parish jail for not more than six months, or both. In addition, the offender shall be placed on supervised probation for not less than six months, but not more than one year, with a minimum condition that he/she performs four eight-hour days of court approved. 
V.  Security. Security for City Park shall be provided by the Plaquemine Police Department or other designated law enforcement personnel. Park patrons and guest shall obey all directives of law enforcement personnel with respect to conduct occurring in City Park. 
VI.  Permitted activities. IPRD-issued permits may be required for: 
A.  Reserving any room or part of City Park or granting exclusive reserved time; 
B.  Posting any advertisement or announcements or public or community event; or 
C.  Conducting commercial activity. 
Certain permitted or authorized events may require public liability and property damage insurance certificate, security deposit and hold harmless agreement. 
VII.  Recreational activities. 
A.  Skate board park area. The purpose of the skate board park area is to offer skaters an alternative to sidewalks, streets and parking lots. It offers skateboarding activity [that] relies on interacting with physical structures such as steps, benches, and railings area for ages six and older. Skateboard is one of the largest participatory sports in the U.S.A. Skateboard equipment is engineered to be vandal-resistant, safe, and durable. 
To ensure the enjoyment, safety and proper use of the park, all persons using the park, including all persons skating or skateboarding at the park, shall comply with each and every one of the following regulations: 
1.  The skateboard park area is unsupervised; therefore IPRD and/or the city will not be held responsible for accidents. Know your ability and skate at your own risk. 
2.  Helmets are required for all users. 
3.  All safety equipment, including helmets, knee pads, elbow pads, and wrist guards must be worn at all times. Please skate responsibly. 
4.  Shirts and nonskid closed-toe shoes/sneakers must be worn at all times. 
5.  Users must provide their own equipment in good working order. 
6.  Participants under the age of 12 must be accompanied by an adult. 
7.  Minimum age for skateboarders and skaters is six years old. 
8.  For safety reasons, admittance to the skate board park will be limited to the established maximum capacity. 
9.  Skate board park area permitted or open to only skateboards and in-line or rollerblade skates. 
10.  Users are requested to keep the skating area surface clean and clear of debris. 
11.  Users are requested to inspect the surfaces before riding them. Remove all trash, debris and objects that may prevent a smooth, safe ride. 
12.  Skateboard ramp and ground surfaces are slippery when wet-Use only when dry. 
13.  This skate facility is classified as a tier one skill level for beginners and intermediary users. 
Restrictions in the skateboard park area. The following are not allowed: 
1.  Profanity or foul language and boisterous behavior; 
2.  Gum chewing, tobacco, alcohol, or drugs; 
3.  Food and/or beverages, glass bottles; 
4.  No horseplay, fighting, littering; 
5.  All forms of graffiti, waxing, tagging, stickers or vandalism; 
6.  No activity permitted when surface is icy or wet; 
7.  Unauthorized equipment or ramps or obstacles, including makeshift items/modifications to existing ramps; 
8.  Other items such as benches, tables, wood materials or other objects used as ramps or jumps; 
9.  No spectators allowed in the skate board spray area unless supervising a user; 
10.  Speed skates, bicycles, scooters, cycles, motorized vehicles or animals of any kind and other device not specified as allowed are not permitted at any time. This prohibition shall not apply to a person with a disability who uses wheeled equipment in order to be ambulatory; 
11.  Only one user allowed per ramp or item at a time. No more than three allowed on the waiting platform 
12.  No person shall use a portable or personal radio, stereo, CD player, or similar device in the skate area. No person shall use headphones in the skate area; 
13.  Skating against traffic flow is dangerous and can cause serious (sic); 
14.  Competitive or demonstration events without prior approval from the park management; 
15.  All rules and regulations cited in City of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances will apply; 
16.  Users are to report any discovered safety hazards to the Iberville Parish Parks and Recreation District management. 
B.  Water spray park area. Water spray park area is a participatory aquatic play area with a shaded structure which incorporates water spray features on a surface designed for drainage. Water spray equipment has an on/off sensor so kids activate an array of play and spray features on their own. State-of-the-art water treatment and filtration systems ensure safe water play and optimum water conservation. The system uses potable water that is treated, filtered and recirculated just like a swimming pool. As with all public park installations, Plaquemine's water spray equipment is engineered to be vandal-resistant, safe, durable, and will keep children entertained for long periods, rather than just a one-time visit. Water spray park area is wheelchair accessible. 
1.  The water spray park area is unsupervised; therefore IPRD and/or the city will not be held responsible for accidents. 
2.  Users under the age of 12 must be accompanied by an adult or a person above the age of 16. 
3.  Adult supervisors are requested to responsible for all messes made by children. 
4.  Appropriate clean swimwear must be worn at all times. Aqua socks, sandals and water shoes recommended as water pad may be hot. 
5.  Swim diapers required for children under age of four. 
6.  Children who are not toilet trained must wear tightly fitting plastic pants over a swim diaper. 
7.  For safety reasons, admittance to the water spray park area will be limited to the established maximum capacity. 
8.  Water spray park caters to children of all abilities, aged two to 12 years. 
9.  Operating season will vary. 
10.  Water spray park cannot be reserved for parties. It is a first-come, first served basis. 
11.  Users must clear or exit the area when conditions for thunder or lightening are possible. 
12.  Small beach toys and balls are acceptable if used in a safe manner, 
Restrictions in the water spray park area. The following is not allowed: 
1.  Profanity or foul language and boisterous behavior. 
2.  Gum chewing, tobacco, alcohol, or drugs. 
3.  Food and/or beverages, glass bottles. 
4.  Horseplay, fighting, running, rough play, littering. 
5.  All forms of graffiti, tagging, stickers or vandalism. 
6.  No activity permitted when surface is icy. 
7.  Unauthorized equipment or obstacles. 
8.  No spectators allowed in the water spray park area unless supervising a user. 
9.  No skateboarding, in-line skating, bicycles, scooters, cycles, motorized vehicles or animal of any kind and other device. This prohibition shall not apply to a person with a disability, who uses wheeled equipment in order to be ambulatory. 
10.  Water balloons, water noodles, baby strollers or carriers. 
11.  Footballs, baseballs, tennis balls, hockey pucks, and other hard objects. 
12.  Hanging, climbing, swinging or pulling or throwing objects at water spray equipment. 
13.  Disposable diapers, soap, shampoos, conditioners, lotions, or body washes. 
14.  Do not use the spray activities if you have an infectious or communicable disease. Be aware that open cuts, blisters, or wounds may become infected. 
15.  All rules and regulations cited in City of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances will apply. 
16.  Users are to report any discovered safety hazards to the Iberville Parish Parks and Recreation District management. 
X.  Prohibited activities. The following activities shall not be permitted within City Park: 
A.  Firearms; 
B.  Soliciting or merchandise sales, unless a concession contract or permit is obtained; 
C.  Skateboarding, rollerblading, motorized vehicles or bicycles on sidewalks, streets, parking lots; 
D.  Removal of landscape vegetation or materials. 
    These regulations are in addition to the provisions of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances sections 14-50 through 14-79. 
Chapter 14.5 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 293, adopted Dec. 15, 2009, amended ch. 14.5 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former ch. 14.5 derived from Ord. No. 972, adopted March 9, 1982. 
Cross reference- Criminal code, § 9-1 et seq.; license taxes generally, § 19-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Louisiana Pawnshop Act, R.S. 37:1781 et seq. 

Sec. 14.5-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Pawnbroker defined. "Pawnbroker" shall mean any person(s) who lend money on a deposit or pledge, or who takes other things as security for money advanced, or who purchases property for the purpose of selling it back at a stipulated price. 
(b)  Secondhand dealer defined. Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, trading in or otherwise acquiring or disposing of used or secondhand property shall be deemed a secondhand dealer. These provisions shall not apply to dealers of items whose transfer is accomplished by virtue of a valid state title, such as a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-2. - License, bond and permits. 
(a)  [Compliance.] All secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers shall comply with all state laws relating to licenses and bonds, however the minimum occupational license shall be $300.00. 
(1)  A secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker may only conduct business at the address indicated upon his occupational license. 
(b)  Permit required. Any person engaged in the business of a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker in the city must first have obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and subsection and shall have the permit at his place of business and display the same to any law enforcement officer upon request. 
(c)  Permit application, fees. Any person not the owner of the business who seeks a permit as a secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker shall execute a sworn application with the chief of police on a form to be designated by the chief of police. The application shall include the name of the secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker, date of birth, Social Security number, driver's license number, height, weight, address and telephone number, together with the name of the business, the name of the owner(s), or, if owned by a corporation or limited liability company, the name of the director(s) or member(s), the name of the manager and the address of the business. Every applicant for a permit shall provide such other information as the chief of police may require in the application. 
(1)  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $40.00, which shall be inclusive of the costs of photographing the applicant. 
(d)  Issuance of permit . Upon receipt of an application and appropriate fees, as set forth herein, the chief of police shall issue a permit in the form of a photo identification card as may be designated by the chief of police unless the applicant was convicted within the last five years of a felony or was convicted within the last five years of misdemeanors involving misappropriation, theft or receiving stolen things. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application and appropriate fees and upon establishing that the applicant is qualified under this chapter, the chief of police may issue a receipt, which shall authorize the permittee to engage in business for a period not to exceed 90 days while the photo permit is being prepared. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-3. - Records. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall be required to maintain a book or ledger setting forth an accurate description of each item purchased or pawned and the amount loaned or paid together with the date of such. 
(b)  The name, address, sex, race, height, weight and driver's license number of the person(s) selling or pawning said merchandise shall be obtained and included with each ledger entry. Records of each purchase shall be preserved for a period of three years. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-4. - Disposal prohibited during 30-day period; exceptions. 
(a)  No secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker shall sell, dispose of, change or destroy the identity of any goods, articles, or things purchased or pawned by him before an interval of 30 calendar days from the date of purchase has elapsed. Any secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker may sell, dispose of, change, or destroy any goods, articles or things purchased by him from a client known to him personally and from whom he has previously obtained goods of a similar nature, after providing police with written notice of such intent upon a form designated by the pawn shop detail and licensing division of the police department and after expiration of 72 hours (exclusive of weekends and legal holidays) of such notice. 
(b)  A secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker may sell an item he has purchased as previously owned property before the lapse of 30 days from the purchase if the secondhand dealer and/or pawnbroker keeps a record of the sale, including name, address and phone number of the purchaser as verified by the proper identification, and if: 
(1)  The item was purchased from a dealer permitted under the provisions of this chapter or like ordinance in another municipality or state statute; or 
(2)  The item was purchased at a trade or craft show which is scheduled as a special event, the duration of which is not more than 72 hours. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-5. - Records inspection. 
    The book or ledger containing the record of purchases and pawned merchandise shall at all time be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police of the City of Plaquemine or the sheriff of the Parish of Iberville, or any deputy or policeman designated by said officer in writing. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-6. - Minors. 
    No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take or receive in payment for money loaned any property or item of value from a minor. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-7. - Stolen items. 
    When the operator of a pawnshop or secondhand dealer has acquired a stolen item, the operator shall return the item to the owner, at no cost to the owner, upon presentation by the owner of proof of ownership of the item and a certified copy of the police report in which the item was reported stolen. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-8. - Daily report of entries. 
    Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall make out, provide and deliver to the chief of police and to the sheriff of Iberville Parish, or his designee, with a daily report of the book entries of the previous day. The report shall provide a correct description of every item purchased or pawned to said operator. The name of the person(s) making any particular sale or pawn shall be furnished to the chief of police or sheriff when specifically requested in connection with a criminal investigation involving said item. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 14.5-9. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person found in violation of the above sections shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 293, 12-15-09) 
Chapter 15 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning regulations, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Louisiana Housing Authorities Law, R.S. 40:381 et seq. 

Sec. 15-1. - Created. 
    Because there is a need for the housing authority of the city to function, it is declared to exist and function pursuant to R.S. 40:381 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1016, 10-23-84) 
Sec. 15-2. - Composition; appointment and removal of members. 
    The housing authority of the city shall consist of seven members, all to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of selectmen. Any such member may be removed after public hearing for inefficiency, neglect of duty or misconduct in office. 
(Ord. No. 1016, 10-23-84; Res. of 5-14-85; Ord. No. 040, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 15-3. - Terms of members. 
(a)  Members of the housing authority of the city, appointed in 1993, shall hold office as follows: 
District six appointment: 6 years District five appointment: 5 years District four appointment: 4 years District three appointment: 3 years District two appointment: 2 years District one appointment: 1 year At large appointment: 1 year  
(b)  Their successors shall be appointed for a term of five years from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessor in office. 
(Ord. No. 1016, 10-23-84; Ord. No. 058, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 15-4. - Organization and operation. 
    The housing authority of the city shall organize and operate under the provisions of this Code and R.S. 40:381 et seq., the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(Ord. No. 1016, 10-23-84) 
Secs. 15-5-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commissions generally, R.S. 33:101 et seq. 

Sec. 15-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a municipal planning commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Authority to create planning commission, R.S. 33:102. 
Sec. 15-17. - Composition; appointment and removal of members. 
    The municipal planning commission shall consist of eight members, all to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of selectmen who may remove any member of the commission, after public hearing, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3; Res. of 5-14-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103. 
Sec. 15-18. - Compensation of and holding of public office by members. 
(a)  The city may appropriate, as compensation, to the members of the municipal planning commission, a per diem for attendance at meetings of the commission for a maximum of 24 days per year. 
(b)  The per diem for attendance at meetings of the commission for the members of the municipal planning commission may be $25.00. 
(c)  All members of the municipal planning commission shall not hold any other public office save and except they may also serve as members of any duly constituted regional commission of which the city forms a part. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4; Ord. No. 157, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 240, 4-10-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103. 
Sec. 15-19. - Terms of members. 
    Members of the municipal planning commission first appointed shall hold office for terms of one, two, three, four, five, six and seven years, respectively; their successors shall be appointed for a term of seven years from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103. 
Sec. 15-20. - Vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs on the municipal planning board otherwise than by an expiration of term it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:103. 
Sec. 15-21. - Organization. 
    The municipal planning commission shall elect a chairperson from its members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transaction, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:104. 
Sec. 15-22. - Appointment of employees and consultants. 
    The municipal planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work and may also contract with planning experts; engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as may be required. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:105. 
Sec. 15-23. - Expenditures. 
    The expenditures of the municipal planning commission, exclusive of those made from funds received by gift, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:105. 
Sec. 15-24. - Powers and duties. 
    The municipal planning commission shall exercise all of the powers and duties conferred by R.S. 33:101 through R.S. 33:119, inclusive. 
(Code 1967, § 2-7) 
State Law reference- General powers and duties, R.S. 33:106, 33:110. 
Sec. 15-25. - Acting as municipal zoning commission. 
    The municipal planning commission shall serve as a municipal zoning commission, and when acting as such, it shall hold separate meetings with separate minutes and records. When acting as the municipal zoning commission, it shall exercise all of the powers and duties conferred by R.S. 33:4721 through R.S. 33:4729. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4726. 
Secs. 15-26-15-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGIONAL PLANNING AREA 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-37. - Area established. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 33:131, there is hereby created a regional planning area, which shall include the Parish of Iberville as a whole, the boundaries of which are shown on a map made a part of this section by reference; which map shall be filed with the clerk and recorder of the parish. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9.1) 
Sec. 15-38. - Effective date of article. 
    This section shall be effective in and for the regional planning area described in section 15-37 upon the adoption of identical ordinances by the police jury of the Parish of Iberville, the mayor and board of selectmen of the City of Plaquemine, the mayor and board of aldermen of the Towns of White Castle and Maringouin, and the mayor and board of aldermen of the Villages of Rosedale and Grosse Tete. As and when this section becomes effective, it shall be filed, together with its accompanying map in the office of the clerk and recorder for the Parish of Iberville, Louisiana. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9.1) 
Secs. 15-39-15-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Regional planning commissions, R.S. 33:131 et seq. 

Sec. 15-46. - Creation; purpose. 
    For the purpose of exercising the powers and duties set forth in R.S. 33:131 et seq., there is hereby created a regional planning commission to be known as the Iberville Regional Planning Commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9.1) 
Sec. 15-47. - Composition; appointment. 
(a)  The regional planning commission shall be composed of nine members appointed as follows: 
(1)  Four members to be appointed by the Iberville Parish police jury; 
(2)  One member to be appointed by the mayor of the City of Plaquemine; 
(3)  One member to be appointed by the mayor of the Town of White Castle; 
(4)  One member to be appointed by the mayor of the Town of Maringouin; 
(5)  One member to be appointed by the mayor of the Village of Rosedale; 
(6)  One member to be appointed by the mayor of the Village large of Grosse Tete. 
(b)  The members of the regional planning commission shall hold office and their successors shall be appointed as provided in R.S. 33:132. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9.1) 
Secs. 15-48-15-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; board of adjustment responsibilities in zoning, § 23-77. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4727. 

Sec. 15-61. - Created. 
    A board of adjustment is hereby created. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Sec. 15-62. - Composition; appointment. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of R.S. 33:4727, the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of selectmen shall appoint a board of adjustment, which shall consist of five members, who shall be freeholders and qualified voters. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Sec. 15-63. - Terms of members. 
    The membership of the first board of adjustment shall serve for one, two, three, four and five years, respectively. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of five years each. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Sec. 15-64. - Removal of members. 
    All members of the board of adjustment shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and public hearings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Sec. 15-65. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the board of adjustment shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Sec. 15-66. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall function in a manner and with the powers and duties set forth in R.S. 33:4727. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Chapter 16 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; traffic regulations with regards to trains and railroad crossings, § 20-232 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 21, vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Railroads, R.S. 45:321 et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
    The word "locomotive" or "train" as used in this chapter is defined to mean any and all railway engines and trains however propelled, when in use on railroad tracks within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 131/2-1, 3-28-78) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-2. - Composition of train crews. 
(a)  All trains operating on railroad tracks in the city shall have a crew of one engineer, one fireman, one conductor and two brakemen or switchmen at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any locomotive or train or cause or permit the same to be operated on any railroad tracks within the limits of the city, unless each such locomotive shall then be manned with a crew of not less than one qualified engineer or operator and one qualified fireman or helper, one conductor and two brakemen or switchmen, both the engineer or operator and fireman or helper, shall be located in their proper position on such locomotive. 
(Ord. No. 917, §131/2-1, 3-28-78) 
Sec. 16-3. - Blocking public way, time limit. 
(a)  Main lines. On any main line, extension of mainline or other similar type railroad track, it shall be unlawful for any railroad corporation, or receiver or assignee thereof, or it or his servant, agent or employee, to wilfully or negligently obstruct or unnecessarily or unreasonably use or occupy a public way or in any case obstruct, use or occupy it with cars or engines passing or standing over it for more than five minutes at one time and if a public way as been thus used or occupied with cars or engines, the railroad corporation, or receiver or assignee thereof, shall not again use or occupy it with the cars or engines of a freight train, until a sufficient time not less than three minutes, has been allowed for the passage across the railroad of such travelers as were ready and waiting to cross when the former occupation ceased. 
(b)  Spurs. On any spur, industrial, team, switching, side or similar type track, it shall be unlawful for any railroad corporation, or receiver or assignee thereof, or it or his servant, agent or employee, to wilfully or negligently obstruct or unnecessarily or unreasonably use or occupy a public way, or in any case obstruct, use or occupy it with cars or engines passing or standing over it for more than five minutes at one time; and if a public way has been thus used or occupied with cars or engines, the railroad corporation, or receiver or assignee thereof, shall not again use or occupy it with the cars or engines of a freight train, until sufficient time, not less than three minutes, has been allowed for the passage across the railroad of such travelers as were ready and waiting to cross when the former occupation ceased. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 131/2-2, 3-28-78) 
Sec. 16-4. - Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for a train to operate in or through the corporate limits of the city at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour. However, after the train's engine has passed Barrow Street going southbound, that part of the train which remains in the city may exceed 20 miles per hour. After the train's engine has passed the city limits northbound, that part of the train which remains in the city may exceed 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 131/2-3, 3-28-78; Ord. No. 1083, 11-28-89) 
Sec. 16-5. - Actions to enjoin violations. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to bring injunctive or other civil action, in the name and of the city against any person to enjoin any acts or practices which may violate the provisions of sections 16-2 to 16-4. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 131/2-4, 3-28-78) 
Sec. 16-6. - Crossings to be paved; failure to maintain crossings. 
    Railways, railroad, railroad corporations, receivers or assignees thereof operating in the city shall be required to pave and keep in good repair all railway and railroad crossings intersecting with any part of any public road, highway, or street, whether the same be paved, blacktopped or otherwise, in the city. The paving shall include the space between the rails and shall extend to the width of the railroad right-of-way and conform to the existing and future street, road or highway specifications. Whenever there are two or more tracks crossing the road, highway or street, the entire space between all of the tracks shall be paved with concrete. The concrete paving shall be flush with the top of the rail and shall be of the same width as the connecting highway. 
(Ord. No. 917, § 131/2-5, 3-28-78) 
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority with respect to streets, § 13. 
Cross reference- Ordinances accepting, vacating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening or ordering the improvement of any street or public ways saved from repeal, § 1-5(8); dogs prohibited from running at large, § 5-17; livestock prohibited from running at large, § 5-55; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 15; railroads, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 18; design standards for streets in subdivisions, § 18-16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Streets and sidewalks generally, R.S. 33:3301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Bicycle riding, roller skating on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or to roller skate upon any sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 15-2) 
Cross reference- Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted, § 20-29, pedestrian's rights and duties, § 20-475 et seq. 
Sec. 17-2. - Washing vehicles in streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wash any automobile, truck or other vehicle on any of the streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 15-3) 
Sec. 17-3. - Blind corners. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to plant any shrubbery or erect any structure or to allow such to be done on his property that would obstruct the view of any motorist approaching or entering any intersection within the corporate limits. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 989, 11-7-82) 
Cross reference- General subdivision requirements and minimum standards of design for streets, § 18-16; traffic and motor vehicles, § 20-1 et seq. 
Secs. 17-4-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 17-16. - Permit. 
    No cuts shall be made in any street in the city by any person for the purpose of service to any property abutting in or near the street, excepting cuts provided for in section 17-18, without first making application to the plumbing inspector, and obtaining a permit therefor as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 12-8) 
Sec. 17-17. - Deposit. 
    Before any cut shall be made on any street, a deposit of $5.00 for such cut and the repair thereof shall be paid. Such deposit shall be returned after the street is replaced in original condition. 
(Code 1967, § 12-8) 
Sec. 17-18. - Backfilling. 
(a)  Any cut on any street made by any person under the provisions of this article, shall be made promptly after the permit is taken out and shall be backfilled without any delay as soon as the work is completed. In no case shall a trench outside of the property line be left open for more than two days. All trenches shall be backfilled in layers not over six inches thick, thoroughly compacted by tamping. If more than one man is engaged in this operation, there shall not be less than one man tamping to each man shoveling earth backfill in trench and the person shall protect the cut while making same and doing any work thereon and all liability for any damages occurring from the cut and while the work and refilling is being done shall be on the responsibility of the person obtaining the permit and doing the work. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the person obtaining the permit and doing the work to notify the plumbing inspector when ready to begin backfilling, so that inspection can be called for and it shall be the duty of the person to keep and maintain the trench and backfill to grade and in good shape in order to afford the least possible obstruction to traffic for a period of 30 days after the backfill has been completed. 
(Code 1967, § 12-8) 
ARTICLE III. - DRAINAGE 

Sec. 17-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway means every parking lot, private road, common driveway or similar feature, whether or not open for public use. 
    Gutter means the gutter area of a paved and curved street. 
    Roadside ditch means every ditch, culvert, swale or other watercourse permitting the normal flow of water with drains off public streets and highway. 
(Ord. No. 20, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 17-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 258, adopted Oct. 30, 2007, repealed § 17-20, which pertained to obstruction of drainage ways and was derived from Ord. No. 20, adopted April 14, 1992. 
Sec. 17-21. - Permit to construct driveway, install culvert across required. 
(a)  No person shall cause a construction or connection of any driveway which crosses a roadside ditch, nor shall install a culvert as may be required in this article, nor change the flow of water in any such roadside ditch, without first obtaining a permit from the city inspector. All connection or construction shall require the installment of a proper culvert as required by the city inspector. 
(b)  Any modification of the curb and gutter forming the entry to a driveway shall be in conformity with the plans and specifications of the consulting engineers for the city. These plans and specifications are attached to the ordinance amending this section [Ordinance No. 022] and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 020, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 022, 6-9-92) 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPOT MARKET OPERATIONS 

Sec. 17-22. - Address, phone number, email address, web site. 
    [The operating policies and procedures set out in this article apply to the Plaquemine Depot Market which may be contacted by the following methods:] 
Address: 
Plaquemine Depot Market 
57960 Main Street @ La. Hwy One 
Plaquemine, LA 70764 
Mailing Address: 
Post Office Box 675 
Plaquemine, LA 70765-0675 
Telephone: 
225/687-9998 
Fax: 
225/685-1194 
E-mail: 
plaqms@aol.com 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-23. - Mission statement. 
    It is the concept of the Depot Market to provide a city market offering a variety of merchandise and promoting various craftsmen. It is not the intent of the Depot Market to subsidize any particular business venture or entity by one vendor, nor to allow one vendor to dominate a significant area of the depot for an overly extended period of time, but rather to encourage overall growth and development of retail business enterprises. It is the desire of the Depot Market for a vendor's business to become financially stable enough to secure a permanent location outside of the depot at the appropriate time. It is our intent to offer Depot Market customers a fun place to shop with a diverse selection of merchandise for sale. Depot Market reserves the right to refuse any merchandise which in our estimation will hinder the overall scope of the Depot Market and its booth vendors. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-24. - Holidays. 
    Depot Market will be closed on all major holidays. Specific days are listed as follows. Such holiday schedule will be reviewed annually and posted accordingly. 
SCHEDULED HOLIDAYS 
Year 2003 Year 2004 New Year's Day - Jan. 1 New Year's Day - Jan. 1 Easter Sunday - Apr. 20 Easter Sunday - Apr. 11 Mother's Day - May 11 Mother's Day - May 9 Father's Day - June 15 Father's Day - June 20 Thanksgiving Day and Friday - Nov. 27 and 28 Thanksgiving Day and Friday - Nov. 25 and 26 Christmas - Dec. 25, 26 Christmas - Dec. 25, 26  
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 183 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-25. - Hours and days of operation. 
    [The following are the days and hours of operation of the Depot Market:] 
Wednesday-Friday, 10:00 a.m.-5:30 p.m. 
Saturday, 10:00 a.m.-4:00 p.m. 
Sunday, 1:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m. 
These hours may vary to accommodate Depot Market needs and such changes will be announced and posted when available. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-26. - Permits. 
(a)  Depot Market permit is valid for one calendar year at the rate of $20.00. Depot Market permits issued between the months of September through December will be at the rate of $10.00. Such Depot Market permits allow the vendor to sell his/her products only through the Depot Market or other Main Street-sponsored events confined to the Plaquemine Historic District. Upon buying a permit from the Depot, the vendor must sign a form stating he/she has received and agrees to the rules and regulations governing the market. Purchase of a Market Depot permit also requires the vendor to sign the waiver of liability. Payment for the Market Depot permit is to be received upon signing the permit application. 
(b)  For the benefit of vendors, the Depot Market has its own sales tax number which booth vendors can utilize for tax purposes and collection. It is not mandatory for a booth vendor to obtain an individual sales tax number from the Iberville Parish Sales Tax Division to do business in the Depot Market. It is not mandatory for a booth vendor to obtain an individual business occupational license permit from the city to do business in the Depot Market. Such permits will be issued by the Depot Market to each booth vendor. Cultural activities or special events sponsored or cosponsored by the Main Street Program do not require a permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-27. - Entertainment/special events. 
    Any seminars, demonstrations, events, activities, etc., to be held at the Depot Market must have prior approval from management. Nonprofit organizations are encouraged to hold cultural activities or events that are open to the public. A special event fee may be required for special or a one-time event not sponsored or cosponsored by the Plaquemine Main Street Program. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-28. - Rental payments. 
(a)  Rental payments are due in advance upon receipt of the depot market permit. Rent is due on the twentieth day of the preceding month and is considered delinquent after five days. Accounts not paid on time will be assessed a $5.00 late fee. Accounts not paid by the first of the month will be considered delinquent. Delinquent rental payments will be deducted from vendor's monthly sales check. Accounts not satisfied within 30 calendar days will result in merchandise being removed and will become property of the Plaquemine Depot Market. A $25.00 merchandise packing fee will be charged and storage charge of $5.00 per day will be assessed. Such property may be sold to satisfy the debt. 
(b)  In the event of a nonsufficient fund (NSF) check is presented for rental fee or permit payment, a $35.00 service fee will be incurred by booth vendor. In the event NSF payment is not made, collection will be turned over to the Plaquemine Police Department, district attorney, or any other law enforcement agency. 
(c)  A booth vendor will be issued a booth rental payment receipt upon receipt payment of the Depot Market permit. The vendor is required to post Depot Market permit and booth rental receipt in his/her booth at all times. The vendor must display at all times any other appropriate permit(s) to sell his/her merchandise, as required by law. The Plaquemine Depot Market is only renting to the booth vendor space and utilities for the operation of the booth vendor's business. All merchandise must be removed promptly from the Depot Market if the vendor does not have a continued rental permit. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 184, 4-8-03; Ord. No. 368, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 17-29. - Sales tax identification number. 
    A booth vendor with an established sales tax number with the Iberville Parish Sales Tax Office and Louisiana Tax Division is permitted to obtain a booth. Sales taxes collected by a Depot cashier will be returned to the booth vendor in monthly sales check, if applicable. Monthly sales checks are issued on the first Thursday following the first of the month by the city finance department. The booth vendor has the responsibility to submit all required city, parish and state taxes. Sales received by a vendor with its own tax number may be kept and sent in under his/her regular business operation. However, for the purpose of an accounting and monitoring the economic benefit of the Depot Market, all vendors must advise the Depot cashier of total sales on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-30. - Sales tax collection. 
(a)  Booths (inside single register area) are required to be open for business during all normal working hours and days. 
(b)  Booth vendors are encouraged to man their booth(s) inside the single register area at any and all times as he/she sees fit, and need not pay sales commission on sales they make. They are required to handle their own cash and change, collect and turn in all sales taxes collected on those sales to the Depot cashier at their departure. Total sales amounts are to be included on forms provided by the Depot cashier. 
(c)  Vendor booths not in the single register area are required to report sales taxes by the end of the business day to Depot cashier. Failure to comply may result in expulsion. 
(d)  A booth vendor has three options for the disbursement of required parish, state and local taxes which must be elected when the booth vendor applied for space: 
(1)  Plaquemine Depot Market management will collect taxes on sales and distribute the collected taxes to the appropriate tax collecting agencies; 
(2)  A booth vendor with an existing tax identification number will be responsible for collection of sales taxes, reporting the collection of sales taxes and distribution of sales taxes to the appropriate tax collecting agencies; 
(3)  A booth vendor with an existing tax identification number collects sales taxes, prepares report on sales tax collection, and designates the Plaquemine Depot Market management to distribute the sales tax collected to the appropriate tax collecting agencies. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-31. - Vendor booth set-up hours. 
    Working in booths: Cleaning, arranging, adding small items from boxes [is] allowed during open hours. [Moving] large items, hauling numerous items, use of hand carts [is] allowed only during nonopen hours. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-32. - Vendor booth rental information. 
(a)  Booth rentals are rented on a first-come, first served basis. A waiting list is maintained. Any vendors displaced from the booth due to Depot Market maintenance work or spacing will get first choice of available/waiting list booths. 
AREA ROOM/BOOTH SIZE MONTHLY RATE Building One Booths 1-39 Single register area (SRA) - Air Conditioned Various sizes $0.85 per square foot Breeze Way No. 40 $10.00 per day Parking Area (outside booths) Nos. 41-45 8' × 16' $10.00 per day Building Two 
Building Three No. 2 
No. 3 
Air-conditioned To be negotiated by 
Plaquemine Depot 
Market Management  
  
    Booth rental is based on $0.85 per square foot per month. All inside booths are provided with electricity and air conditioning. Breeze way area is provided with electricity and roofing. These booth rental fees are guaranteed through December 31, 2003. 
(b)  A Depot vendor may rent up to seven adjacent or consecutive booths in the single register area. All vendors will be reviewed by Depot management yearly to assess the needs and desires of the Depot overall and the economic feasibility by the vendor to secure a location outside the Depot Market. In the event that it is deemed appropriate that the vendor must relocate outside the Depot Market, the vendor will be given a grace period of 90 days to remove booth items. Booths are required to be opened during normal business hours. 
(c)  Depot Market reserves the right to exercise early termination on any permitted booth vendor for any reason deemed necessary by the Depot Market management and/or Plaquemine Main Street Program. Such termination demand will be made of a booth vendor in writing and will be effective immediately upon receipt of such notice by booth vendor. Failure to remove merchandise within the time requested will result in booth vendors' forfeiture of all merchandise within booth space to Depot Market. Depot Market reserves the right to assess repair and/or cleanup fees, if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-33. - Table rental. 
    Upon request, booth vendors with a valid market permit can rent a table to be used in the booth area. Rental charge is $5.00 per week. Tables will not be loaned out or rented for any other purposes without the prior approval of Plaquemine Main Street Manager and/or Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-2001) 
Sec. 17-34. - Vendor's responsibility. 
(a)  Booth vendors have use of their booth according to depot regulations. Booth vendors are required to keep their own booth clean, neat, safe and relatively full of sellable items. All items should be tagged with price, description and booth number. All permanent brick wall surfaces must be kept clean and free of any screws, paint or coloring, markers or any other mediums that may mar or deface wall areas. Wooden border molding is provided in interior for each interior booth space to hang or tack display items. No holes may be drilled in bricks. Nails are not allowed in sheetrock above bricks. Nails are allowed in wood runners along the walls of booths. Depot Market management reserves the right to restrict booth displays deemed inappropriate which may cause permanent building damage. Booth vendors must provide all necessary racks or shelves needed for proper display. Merchandise may be attached to walls so long as no disfigurement of walls occur once merchandise is removed. 
(b)  Vendors must keep their items within the booth lines outlining their booths. No vendor may use another booth to display his/her items without a rental receipt issued, or without prior management approval. Booth vendors are permitted, upon prior approval of Depot management, to utilize exterior windows or doorways for seasonal theme decorations. However, such decorations must be removed promptly at the end of the season. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-35. - Vendor's conduct. 
(a)  Booth vendors must conduct themselves and their employees in a professional manner. Loud playing of radio, television, or other noise producing items will not be permitted. Loud outburst directed at Plaquemine Depot Market management, fellow employees, fellow booth vendors or customers will not be permitted. 
(b)  The Plaquemine Depot Market telephone is to be used for Plaquemine Depot Market business only. Only booth vendors in buildings 2 and 3 are permitted to have business telephone lines installed, at their expense and upon the approval of the Plaquemine Main Street manager. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-36. - Prohibited sale of items. 
(a)  Vendors are prohibited from selling any and all merchandise specifically prohibited by law, including, but not limited to: 
Items and actions not allowed on Depot Market premises: 
(1)  No sale of cigars, cigarettes or tobacco of any sort. 
(2)  No sale or use of any alcoholic beverages, carried or consumed on premises. 
(3)  No sale, advertising or use of illegal drugs and/or paraphernalia allowed. 
(4)  No firearms or ammunition of any sort sold or carried on premises except those weapons identified as antiques. 
(5)  No sale or use of switchblades. 
(6)  No sale or use of martial arts equipment. 
(7)  No sale or use of explicit sexual material. 
(8)  No sale of reproduced audio tapes, videos, records, etc. 
(9)  No counterfeit trademark items. 
(10)  No sale of grocery items or fast food items, unless prior approval from Depot management. 
(11)  No live animals (exception: domesticated animals) without prior approval of depot management. 
(12)  No sale of products from endangered species. 
(13)  No profane language, fighting, verbally downgrading another vendor/booth allowed. 
(14)  No smoking inside any Depot Market building at any time. 
(15)  Any other items or actions deemed to be inappropriate by Depot Market management. 
(b)  Violation of any of the above regulations will result in the vendor being expelled from the Depot Market permanently and given 24 hours to vacate booth, and any remainder of rental payments will be forfeited immediately. 
(c)  Depot Market management reserves the right to limit type of merchandise that may be sold at any given time. Management further reserves the right to prohibit sale items deemed to be inappropriate. Management further reserves the right to take any action necessary to insure the safety and welfare of the Depot Market. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-37. - Depot market's responsibility. 
(a)  The Depot Market will be secured nightly with a monitored alarm system. Trash service will be provided by the Depot Market. Janitorial service is provided for the upkeep of Depot Market aisles, restrooms, and common areas. 
(b)  The Plaquemine Depot Market is a drug-free and smoke-free facility. Smoking is permitted outside of the buildings. 
(c)  It is not the responsibility of the Depot Market or its staff to haul large items sold in the Depot Market. Booth vendors and/or customers must make arrangements for movement of all items sold. 
(d)  In addition, all items purchased by a customer at the Plaquemine Depot Market must be removed by the customer within ten days from the date of purchase. After ten days, a $5.00 charge per day for item(s) stored up to 30 days from date of purchase. After 30 days, the merchandise becomes the property of the Plaquemine Depot Market. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-38. - Advertisement. 
(a)  The advertising committee composed of appointed historic district commission members and Depot Market vendors will handle all advertising used to promote the Depot Market overall. Depot Market will sponsor advertisements in various local and regional publications for the depot, as budget considerations are met. Individual vendor booths will not be named in Depot Market-sponsored advertisements. Individual vendors are encouraged to promote and advertise their sale items. The Depot Market management will not be responsible for individual vendor advertisements. 
(b)  The Plaquemine Depot Market may be used by licensed Depot Market vendors in the advertising in legal public publications of the items sold in their booths. Depot Market management reserves the right to restrict unlawful advertisements that may be deemed inappropriate or not reflective of the image of the Plaquemine Depot Market. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-39. - Contracted management company (DMM). 
(a)  DMM will be responsible for the management and overall safety and cleanliness of the Depot Market area. DMM is supervised and directed under the Plaquemine Main Street manager. 
(b)  Trained cashiers will be provided at the single register area during all open hours. The cashier will not be responsible for doing any maintenance of any vendor's booth, except to have general knowledge of sale items in the booth. DMM will collect all Depot rental and permit fees, assess late fees and collect sales taxes and enforce delinquent policies and procedures. 
(c)  DMM will collect a ten percent commission on any items sold in the single register area or handled by the Depot Market cashier. This commission is paid directly towards the operation and management of the Plaquemine Depot Market. Customers are allowed to pay by any normally acceptable means of payment for any items from any booths. 
(d)  DMM will not sell unpriced items in any booth, but will try to contact the booth vendor for more information for the customer. DMM is allowed to give discounts to customers only if prior approval is given by booth vendor. DMM will contact booth vendors with additional requests. DMM will issue checks to booth vendors for items sold on behalf of booth vendors. Booth vendors will be provided a statement of sale to include items sold, sales taxes and collected commissions. 
(e)  DMM will issue checks to booth vendors for items sold on behalf of booth vendors for sales the preceding month. Booth vendors will be provided a statement of sale to include items sold, sales taxes collected, and commission. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01; Ord. No 184, 4-8-03) 
Sec. 17-40. - Insurance. 
    Depot Market will carry proper building insurance on itself to protect against liability exposure. The Depot Market does not carry insurance on booth vendors' inventory nor product liability insurance on products sold or services rendered by any booth vendor. Depot Market requires that the booth vendor acknowledges this fact and agrees to hold Depot Market harmless for any liability exposure incurred during the booth rental in the signed Depot Market agreement. While the Depot Market does not require booth vendors to purchase insurance for its products and/or services, the vendor is strongly encouraged to do so. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-41. - Parking. 
    Vendors will be directed to appropriate parking during hours of operation by management. Vendor parking (to unload) is allowed along the side of building (Depot Street). Depot Street parking spaces are for customers only. The front two parking spaces are reserved for Depot Market management parking only. Vendors selling out of their vehicle at an outside booth must pay for a second booth if activities take up more than one booth. No blocking or setting up [is allowed] in any areas not designated as a booth. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-42. - Signage. 
    All exterior building signage must have prior approval of Depot management and the Plaquemine Main Street manager. Any interior booth signage deemed inappropriate by Depot management will be removed. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-43. - Grievance procedure. 
    In the event there is a dispute or disagreement between Depot Market management and booth vendors, it shall be the responsibility of the parties to submit a written grievance to the Plaquemine Main Street manager within 24 hours after the cause of such grievance. It shall be the responsibility of the Plaquemine Main Street manager and/or historic district commission chairman to study the grievance and attempt to resolve it in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 17-44. - Appeals. 
(a)  Formal action taken under this section or other types of formal adverse action may be appealed in writing directly to the historic district commission chairman within 24 hours of such action, with a copy to the Plaquemine Main Street manager. 
(b)  Any ordinance, parts of ordinances, or regulations formerly adopted which are in conflict with the provisions contained herein are hereby repealed. These rules and regulations are subject to change, upon discretion of the Depot Market and Plaquemine Main Street Program. These rules and regulations supersede the rules/regulations dated October, 2000. These rules and regulations are subject to change, upon discretion of the Plaquemine Depot Market and Main Street Program. 
(c)  Plaquemine Depot Market does not discriminate in the acceptance of vendor applications because of race, color, creed, religion, sex or sexual preference or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-23-01) 
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, R.S. 33:112; platting of land, R.S. 33:5051. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this chapter a subdivision of land is: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels of three acres or less in area; or 
(2)  Resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites or parcels. 
Any sales, or contract of sale or agreement to purchase any lot or division of land either by lot description or by metes and bounds as defined in the preceding portion of this section shall constitute a subdivision of land and shall require, prior to any sale or contract of sale or agreement to purchase and before the delivery of a deed, the submission of a plat to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  From and after June 27, 1958, this chapter shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any owner of land within the limits of the subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the mayor and board of selectmen a plat of the subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in article II. Before approving a subdivision plat the mayor and board of selectmen shall submit the plat to the planning commission for recommendation and report. Failure of the planning commission to report within 45 days shall be deemed approval by the commission. 
(c)  No plat of a subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder of Iberville Parish, Louisiana, and no subdivider may proceed with improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the mayor and board of selectmen and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 16-3) 
Sec. 18-3. - Exceptions to chapter provisions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Land in subdivisions previously legally recorded, except in the case of resubdivisions; 
(2)  The subdivision of land to be used for orchards, forestry, or the raising of crops, provided that the subdivider certifies upon the plat that such land is to be used only for orchards, forestry or the raising of crops; 
(3)  The subdivision of land to be used as cemeteries, except the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1967, § 16-4) 
Sec. 18-4. - General procedure for subdivision approval. 
    A subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat to the mayor and board of selectmen for approval. After approval, a registered engineer selected by the subdivider shall submit construction plans and specifications to the mayor or his authorized agent (city engineer). Development of the subdivision may start after the approval of the plans and specifications. The final plat may be submitted for approval after the subdivision is completed according to the approved plans and specifications, or after a bond has been recorded in the office of the clerk of court of the parish, sufficient to assure completion of the subdivision. Lots may be sold after the final plat is approved and recorded with the clerk of court of the parish. 
(Code 1967, § 16-1) 
Sec. 18-5. - Violations. 
    Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the mayor and board of selectmen and recorded or filed in the office of the clerk of court of the parish, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of $100.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed to be sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties herein provided. 
(Code 1967, § 16-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:114. 
Sec. 18-6. - General procedure for resubdivision approval. 
    All plans for the resubdivision of lots, sites, tracts, parcels or acreage, regardless of size, shall conform with the requirements of the laws of the state governing surveying, platting and subdivision of land and applicable ordinances of the city and all amendments thereto. The following information is required on all resubdivision plats, and all conditions listed below must be complied with prior to approval of a resubdivision plat. 
(1)  All property affected must be platted; i.e. when a lot is removed from a property, both the lot and the remainder must be designated as lots and dimensions given. 
(2)  All dimensions and corner markers must be shown on the plat. 
(3)  The title and accurate description of property. 
(4)  The owner's or subdivider's name. 
(5)  Engineer's certification, signature and seal. 
(6)  North point and scale. 
(7)  Street names and right-of-way widths, if applicable. 
(8)  Lot numbers of resubdivided lots must be redesignated. For example, if lot 1 was divided into lots, the resulting new lots would become 1-A and 1-B, or Lot X would become X-1 and X-2. 
(9)  The following procedures must be followed for obtaining approval of resubdivision plats: 
a.  Submit two prints for checking by the city inspector. 
b.  After the city inspector checks the plat, it shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation. 
c.  After the planning and zoning commission reviews the resubdivision plat, it shall be submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen for approval. 
(Ord. No. 084, 1-9-96) 
Sec. 18-6.1. - Additional procedure for resubdivision of property. 
(a)  [Application.] Each application to resubdivide lots, sites, tracts, parcels or acreage, regardless of size shall be filed with the secretary of the planning and zoning commission and the city inspector. Each application shall comply with the provisions of section 18-6 and this section and pay a fee of $350.00. 
(b)  Review. The application shall be reviewed by the city inspector who shall be responsible for determining the application's adherence to the applicable development standards for the district for which the application is made. He shall submit his findings to the planning and zoning commission after the public hearing. 
(c)  Schedule. An application shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted by the planning and zoning commission which shall provide that each application shall be submitted to allow sufficient time to legally advertise for public hearing in accordance with these regulations. 
(d)  Withdrawal or amendment of application. An application may be withdrawn or amended by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this section; however, upon withdrawal or amendment, the applicant forfeits his fee. 
(e)  Advertising. Notice of the proposed resubdivision and the time and place of the hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be published once a week for three weeks consecutively in the official journal for the city. At least four days shall elapse between the last date of publication and the date of the hearing. A printed notice in bold type shall have been posted from the time of the first advertisement prior to the public hearing conducted by the planning and zoning commission and not removed until after action has been taken by the planning and zoning commission and the board of selectmen, on a sign not less than one square foot in area, prepared, furnished, and placed by the city inspector or designee upon the principal and assessable rights of way the area proposed for a resubdivision. 
(f)  [Public hearing.] A public hearing shall be held in accordance with law and duly advertised before the planning and zoning commission at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. After such public hearing, the city inspector shall submit a report of his analysis of the proposed resubdivision to the planning and zoning commission. 
(g)  [Commission action.] The planning and zoning commission shall review and take action upon each application in accordance with the schedule adopted by the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing has been held at which parties in interest and citizens shall have had the opportunity to be fully heard. Each application shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission by the city inspector or his designee, together with his analysis of it. A report of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation and the city inspector's or his designee's analysis shall be submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings and meetings as are consistent with state law and are appropriate to its responsibilities, which shall be published and available to the public, as well as conflict of on a matter in which he has an interest directly or indirectly. 
(2)  A final vote shall have been taken on the proposed resubdivision by the planning and zoning commission within 20 days after the public hearing. In the event that no final vote is taken, the proposed resubdivision shall be sent to the mayor and board of selectmen without recommendation. However, in the event that the 20-day deadline falls on a holiday or a meeting that has been cancelled by the planning and zoning commission, the 20-day deadline is extended automatically to the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting. 
(h)  [Action by mayor, board of selectmen.] The mayor and board of selectmen shall not take official action until the report of the planning and zoning commission is received or the time for the planning and zoning commission to take action has passed. Notice of the proposed resubdivision and the time and place of the hearing before the mayor and board of selectmen shall be published once in the official journal for the city. A final vote shall have been taken on the proposed resubdivision by the city within 45 days after the report has been received from the planning and zoning commission or the time for the planning and zoning commission to take action has passed. If no final vote is taken the proposed resubdivision shall be automatically approved. However, in the event that the 45-day deadline falls on a holiday or a meeting that has been cancelled by the planning and zoning commission, the 45-day deadline is extended automatically to the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 298, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 18-6.2. - Resubdivision guidelines and criteria. 
    Before the planning and zoning commission recommends or the city resubdivides property, there should be reasonable factual proof by the proponent of a change that one or more of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Land use pattern or character has changed to the extent that the existing lot, site, tract, parcel or acreage no longer allows reasonable use of the proponent's property and adjacent property. Reasonable is defined as: 
a.  Land use the same as, or similar to that existing on properties next to, or across the street from the site under consideration. 
b.  Consideration of unique or unusual physical environmental limitations due to size, shape, topography or related hazards or deficiencies. 
c.  Consideration of changes inland value, physical environment or economic aspects which tend to limit the usefulness of vacant land or buildings. 
(2)  The proposed resubdivision, and the potential of resulting land use change, will comply with the general public interest and welfare and will not create: 
a.  Undue congestion of streets and traffic access. 
b.  Overcrowding of land or overburden public facilities such as transportation, sewerage, drainage, schools, parks, and other public facilities. 
c.  Land or building usage which is, or may become incompatible with existing character or usage of the neighborhood. 
d.  An oversupply of types of land use or zoning in proportion to population, land use and public facilities in the neighborhood. 
(3)  As far as possible, the city inspector should base resubdivision analyses on these criteria. The planning and zoning commission, in its recommendation to the mayor and board of selectmen, may state its concurrence with, or rejection of, proponents' offer of proof at public hearings and may state, in its motion of recommendation to the city, its position in relation to proponents statements and the city inspector's analyses shall be forwarded to the city along with the planning and zoning commission's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 298, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 18-7. - Disaster/catastrophe hardship designation for travel trailers. 
(a)  Application required. No travel trailer may be placed on any property and used as a residence in any area not specifically zoned therefore, unless a hardship designation has been applied for and granted as per paragraph (d) below. 
(b)  Travel trailer defined. A travel trailer is a recreational vehicle designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle, by means of a bumper or frame hitch, and are of such size and weight as not to require a special highway movement permit. Towable recreational vehicles do not require permanent on-site hookups. 
(c)  Definition of temporary disaster/catastrophe hardship. A disaster/catastrophe hardship is defined as any individual situation, specifically related to the displacement of the applicant due to the effects of a disaster/catastrophe, shown to create an unreasonable difficulty upon the individual in finding alternative housing, other than the use of a travel trailer. 
(d)  Application for disaster/catastrophe hardship. Prior to any disaster/catastrophe hardship designation being issued, the individual(s) so requesting must file an application for disaster/catastrophe hardship with the planning and zoning commission. Such application must contain an affidavit containing a concise statement of the facts supporting the individual(s) claim of hardship and requested waiver. 
(1)  In addition to the affidavit of the individual applying for the disaster/catastrophe hardship, the owner of the property must execute an affidavit that he/she/it will not charge any rent or any other type of charge for the use of the travel trailer on the property of the owner. 
(2)  The disaster/catastrophe hardship application must have attached to it a signed, notarized petition of 51 percent of the landowners, or the landowners' designated representative, of the property within 500 feet of the individual parcel of land requesting a disaster/catastrophe hardship designation. 
(e)  Recommendation after hearing. After a hearing by the planning and zoning commission as to an application for disaster/catastrophe hardship designation, the commission shall make a recommendation to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(f)  Term. 
(1)  If such application is granted, the disaster/catastrophe designation shall be valid for only three months. After the three-month period, the disaster/catastrophe hardship designation shall cease and the individual and/or land owner shall be obligated to remove the travel trailer. 
(2)  In the event the travel trailer is not removed, the city is empowered and authorized to remove the travel trailer from the premises. 
(3)  The city shall not be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any property owner, individual or other governmental entity entitled to the possession of the travel trailer removed by the city as set forth in this sub-part. 
(g)  Authority of zoning commission to adopt rules and regulations. The zoning commission is empowered to adopt and enact all necessary rules and regulations to implement these disaster/catastrophe hardship designation provisions, reserving to the mayor and board of selectmen final authority to determine whether an applicant is entitled to a disaster/catastrophe hardship designation. 
(h)  [Penalty for violation.] In the event the travel trailer is not removed, the applicant and land owner who refused and/or failed to remove the travel trailer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 and/or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the travel trailer remains on the property shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 226, 12-14-05) 
Secs. 18-8-18-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN 

Sec. 18-16. - Streets. 
(a)  Relation to adjoining street system. Proposed new streets shall extend existing streets or their projections at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required width, unless variations are deemed necessary by the mayor and board of selectmen for reasons of topography or design. Where, in the opinion of the mayor and board of selectmen it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall extend to the boundary of such property. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision will not be permitted. 
(b)  Street widths. The minimum width of proposed streets measured from lot line to lot line, shall be not less than 80 feet for major streets, and 50 feet for streets, with curb and gutters, and 60 feet for streets with open ditch drainage. Seventy feet for streets with open ditches are desirable. 
(c)  Street intersections. Insofar as practical, acute angles at street intersections shall be avoided. Where an acute angle of less than 75 degrees occurs between streets at their intersection, the mayor and board of selectmen may require the property lines to be rounded or otherwise set back to permit curb construction of desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at the street corner to less than normal width. Submission of a grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at one foot intervals and a detailed design for the intersection may be required by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(d)  Dead end streets. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed (cul-de-sac) shall be provided at the closed end with a turn around with a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet, and a minimum driving surface radius of 35 feet. A "cul-de-sac" shall not be more than 500 feet in length unless approved by the mayor and board of selectmen for specific reasons of topography or design. Consideration will be given to a "tee" type dead end that will run completely through the subdivided property. 
(e)  Street names. Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for the proposed streets duplicate existing street names irrespective of the suffix used. 
(f)  Street improvements. Street improvements shall be required as set forth in subsection 18-37(c). 
(Code 1967, § 16-10) 
Sec. 18-17. - Blocks. 
    Blocks shall not be more than 600 feet in length, unless there is provided a ten-foot right-of-way for public use. If such a crosswalk is provided, blocks may be not longer than 1,200 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-11) 
Sec. 18-18. - Lots. 
(a)  Lot arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front upon a street which is not less than 50 feet in width and which is connected with the public street system. Lots that face on existing streets with open ditch construction, which streets are less than 60 feet in width, shall provide for an ultimate right of way width of 60 feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot size. With the subdivision jurisdiction limits of the city the size and shape of residential lots shall be such as the mayor and board of selectmen deem appropriate for the type of building development contemplated. In no case, however, shall lot sizes and widths at the building line be less than the minimum standards established by the zoning regulations set forth in chapter 23. Lots shall have a minimum width of 50 feet at the building setback line and a minimum area of 6,000 square feet. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit establishment of a building line at least ten feet from the side street property line. The distance from the side street property line shall be measured from the street right of way paralleling the long dimension of the lot. The distance from the front set back line shall be measured from the street right of way line parallel to the front of the lot. 
(Code 1967, § 16-12; Ord. No. 243, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 18-18.1. - Zero lot line lots/housing. 
(a)  Zero lot line: Single-family housing which has only one side yard. The zero lot line must be designated on the approved subdivision plat and the exterior wall constructed on the zero lot line shall be a one-hour fire UL rated wall with no openings. A five-foot private maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line for maintenance of the zero lot line wall, and this shall be noted upon the approved subdivision plat. 
(b)  Zero lot line housing: The planning and zoning commission may approve zero lot line housing within an existing lot that is not a minimum of 50 feet front footage under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Any exterior wall erected on the zero lot line shall be constructed without any openings and shall provide a two-hour fire rating as specified by the International Building Code. 
(2)  The lot with any habitable dwelling shall not be less than 30 feet front footage and the minimum lot area shall be 3,700 square feet. 
(3)  The minimum setbacks shall be 20 feet front depth, ten feet rear depth and four feet side depth. 
(Ord. No. 244, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 18-19. - Public use and service areas. 
(a)  Public use. Where a park, neighborhood recreational open space, a school site, or other areas for public use shown on a plan which has been officially adopted by the planning commission, is located in whole or in a part in the proposed subdivision, the mayor and the board of selectmen shall seek to secure the reservation of the necessary land for such use. Special consideration shall be given to schools and parks in subdivisions larger than 25 acres or 100 lots. 
(b)  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are provided for the purpose, the mayor and board of selectmen will require easements not exceeding 15 feet in width for poles, wires, conduits or where feasible for sanitary sewers, gas, water or other utility lines on each side of the rear lot lines and/or side lot lines unless the utility company certifies this is to be impractical or unless it is not feasible in the opinion of the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(c)  Storm drainage. Whenever any stream or improved surface drainage course is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate right-of-way along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, depending, sloping, improving or protecting the stream, or for drainage maintenance. For drainage courses having a depth of less than five feet the right-of-way width shall not be less than six times the depth, but never less than 15 feet. For drainage courses having a depth more than five feet the right-of-way width shall be not less than five times the depth, plus 20 feet. 
(d)  Dedication to public use. There shall be no reserve strips except those which are conveyed to the government having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1967, § 16-13) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 18-20. - Building restrictions and building setback lines. 
(a)  No final plat of land within the force and effect of the zoning regulations shall be approved unless the building restrictions to be established conform with the minimum requirements of such zoning regulations. 
(b)  Minimum building setback lines shall be provided for all residential lots. Such building setback lines shall be not less than 30 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-14) 
Sec. 18-21. - Comprehensive group housing development. 
    A comprehensive group housing development including the construction of two or more buildings together with the necessary drives and ways of access and which is not subdivided into the customary lots, blocks and streets may be approved by the mayor and board of selectmen if in the opinion of the mayor and board of selectmen any departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations. Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the mayor and board of selectmen whether or not such plat is to be recorded and no building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
(Code 1967, § 16-15) 
Sec. 18-22. - Variances. 
    Where a subdivider can show that a provision of these general requirements and minimum standards and design would cause an unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provision, the planning commission may recommend that the mayor and board of selectmen authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the planning commission and the reason which justified the departure to be set forth. No variance however, shall be authorized without the recommendation of the planning commission; provided, however, that the failure of the planning commission to report within 45 days from and after the date of official submission by the mayor and board of selectmen to the commission shall be deemed approval by the commission. 
(Code 1967, § 16-16) 
Secs. 18-23-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 18-36. - Preliminary plat approval. 
(a)  To prevent undue hardship on the subdivider through possible required plat revisions, a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to the inch shall first be submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen in triplicate and shall give the following information: 
(1)  The subdivision name, the names and addresses of the owners and of the designer of the plat, who shall be a competent engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor; 
(2)  Date, approximate north point and a graphic scale; 
(3)  The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, water mains and any public utility easements, both on the land subdivided and on the adjoining land; the names of adjacent subdivisions and the names and addresses of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land as they appear on the current conveyance records; 
(4)  The names, locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines and minimum building setback lines; 
(5)  Statement of proposed street improvements: A contour map shall be furnished where terrain might affect the location of streets; and profiles of all streets in this area showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet horizontal and one inch equals two feet vertical when required by the mayor and board of selectmen; 
(6)  Preliminary sketch plans or proposed utility layouts (sewer, gas, water and electricity) showing feasible connections, where possible, to existing and proposed utility systems. 
(b)  Upon receipt of this preliminary plat the mayor and board of selectmen shall transmit the plat to the planning commission and any other interested city or parish department for review and recommendation in relation to specific service problems. The approval of the preliminary plat shall not be deemed final acceptance but rather an expression of approval of the layout as submitted on the preliminary plat; such approval shall not be noted on the preliminary plat. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained in the files of the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 16-20) 
Sec. 18-37. - Improvements. 
(a)  Generally. The improvements listed hereinafter in this section shall be submitted to the mayor or his authorized agent and approved before construction can start. These construction plans and specifications shall carry the stamp and signature of a registered professional engineer who will certify that these plans and specifications are properly designed. If requested, the engineer shall submit all or part of the design calculations to the mayor or his authorized agent. 
The subdivider shall notify the mayor or his authorized agent, in advance, the date that construction will start. Construction shall be at all times subject to inspection of the mayor or his authorized agents. However, this in no way shall relieve the subdivider and his engineer of close field supervision and final compliance with approved plans and specifications. 
A field inspector acceptable to the mayor or his authorized agent shall be maintained continuously on the site during all phases of the construction of sanitary sewers, underground storm drains, water, gas and street pavements. The mayor and his authorized agent may demand that any inspector who appears incompetent or otherwise unsatisfactory shall be replaced by a satisfactory inspector. The mayor and his authorized agent shall establish detailed regulations governing the inspections to be furnished by the developer or his engineer, and may refuse to accept work which was done without proper inspection. 
(b)  Permanent markers. Wherever improvements are constructed under this section, all subdivision boundary corners, the four corners of all street intersections and all lots in the subdivision shall be marked with permanent monuments. A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a steel pipe which extends a minimum of two feet below the ground line. Should conditions prohibit the placing of monuments on line offset marking will be permitted provided, however, that exact offset courses and distances are shown on the subdivision plat. 
For all subdivisions larger than 20 lots more, a permanent bench mark shall be accessibly placed, the elevation of which shall be based on mean sea level datum as determined by the United States Geological Survey, and accurately noted on the subdivision plat. Such permanent bench mark shall be deemed to be concrete with a minimum of dimension of four inches extending a minimum of two feet below the ground line, poured in place. 
(c)  Street improvements: 
(1)  Base. All streets shall have a six-inch compacted sand-clay gravel base that meets the specifications of the state department of highways; or a six-inch soil-cement base with a minimum cement content of 14 percent. The base width shall exceed the surface width at least one foot, except for curb and gutter construction. 
(2)  Surface. All streets shall be surfaced with a minimum of one and one-half inches of hot asphalt mix, or a three course bituminous surface treatment that meets the specifications of the state department of highways. Surface application shall be for a minimum width of 18 feet for open ditch construction or 23 feet for curb and gutters. 
(3)  Grading. The full right-of-way width shall be graded to the proper cross-section, satisfactory to the mayor or his authorized agent. 
(4)  Ditches. If curbs and gutters are not provided, ditches shall be provided having at least 3:1 for slopes (or side slopes on the street side having at least three feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical drop), and 2:1 back slopes on the property side having at least two feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical drop. 
(5)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks four feet in width made of concrete surface shall be provided on all streets designated as major streets on the official major street plan adopted by the planning commission. 
(6)  Approved street markers. Approved street markers bearing the names of the streets shall be provided and installed at each intersection in the subdivision. 
(d)  Sanitary sewers: 
(1)  If the subdivision is located where a public sanitary sewer is accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide adequate sewer lines accessible to each lot. Sewer connections and subdivision sewer systems shall comply with the regulations of the state board of health, and shall be constructed under the supervision of and approved by the parish health unit. 
(2)  If no sanitary sewer is accessible, sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by and constructed under the supervision of the parish health unit. If sewage disposal is to be by septic tank or other similar individual means, the plat shall carry the notation that such individual means of sewage disposal shall be constructed according to the specifications of and under the supervision of, the parish health unit. A proper designed collection line for septic tank and field effluent shall be provided by the subdivider. 
(e)  Water supply. The subdivider shall connect with water supply approved by the parish health unit, and make it available for each lot within the subdivided area. Fire hydrants shall also be installed by the subdivider in accordance with requirements of the national board of fire underwriters. Water distribution system shall also comply with the resolution of the mayor and board of selectmen governing utilities installations. 
(f)  Storm drainage: 
(1)  All surface drainage courses shall have at least 11/2:1 side slope (or side slopes having at least one and one-half feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical drop). 
(2)  The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course shall be a slope of 0/125 percent (or a vertical fall of one foot in each 800 feet of horizontal length). 
(3)  All concrete pipes shall comply with the A.S.T.M. designation C-118 except the concrete pipes under the streets, which shall comply with the A.S.T.M. designation C-76. Pipes under streets shall be reinforced concrete pipe, or fully coated corrugated metal. 
(4)  Corrugated metal pipes shall meet the specifications designated as A.A.S.H.O. M-36 and shall be dipped in asphalt according to article 9.06 of the Louisiana Department of Highways Standard Specifications of July, 1955. 
(5)  The plat or subdivision deed restrictions shall carry the notation or provision that the size and grade of culverts for driveways shall be approved by the mayor or his authorized agent. No pipes, except for driveways, shall be installed in any roadside ditch. 
(6)  A contour map should be prepared for the area comprising the subdivision and all additional area necessary to include all watersheds which drain into the property to be developed. In the design of the drainage for the subdivision, provision should be made to adequately take care of adjacent watershed areas after they have been developed. All drainage structures should be sufficient for the drainage of the watershed after complete development of the area, and where ditches and canals are used, adequate servitudes shall be provided for future needs. 
(Code 1967, § 16-21) 
Sec. 18-38. - Flood hazards. 
    The building inspector in reviewing all subdivision applications shall make finding of facts and determine if: 
(1)  All such proposed developments are consistent with the need of minimizing flood damage; 
(2)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided so as not to increase the exposure of flood hazards of adjacent lands; 
(4)  All public utilities and facilities are located, elevated and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage, these utilities and facilities to include sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 4, 4-18-73) 
Cross reference- Flood prevention and protection, § 6-163 et seq. 
Sec. 18-39. - Final plat approval. 
(a)  The final plat shall be submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen in triplicate, of which one copy shall be the reproducible drawings, and unless this is done within 18 months of the mayor and board of selectmen approval of the preliminary plat, such approval shall lapse. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter that the sale of building lots should be contingent upon at least a minimum of public improvements as defined in section 18-37. With this in mind the mayor and board of selectmen will consider approval of the final plat only after receipt of: 
(1)  Certification by the city engineer, or designated engineer, that all improvements have been installed in accord with these regulations and with the action of the mayor and board of selectmen giving conditional approval of the preliminary plat; or 
(2)  Certification by the city clerk that a bond has been posted available to the city clerk and recorded and in sufficient amount to assure the completion of the required improvements. 
(c)  The final plat shall be drawn in ink or tracing cloth on sheets 36 inches by 24 inches and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger. Where necessary the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Township, range and section in which the subdivision is located. If section corner, township line or range line falls within the subdivision, it shall be shown; 
(2)  Primary control points, or descriptions and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred; 
(3)  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves; 
(4)  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way; 
(5)  Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements; 
(6)  Number to identify each lot or site; 
(7)  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved; 
(8)  Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites; 
(9)  Any areas which have been subject to flood within a period of ten years prior to date of final plat; 
(10)  Location and description of monuments; 
(11)  Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land; 
(12)  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number; 
(13)  Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy or survey and plat; 
(14)  Statement by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way and any sites for public uses; 
(15)  Title, scale, north point and date; 
(16)  Certificate of approval by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(d)  Upon approval of the plat the original drawings shall be returned to the subdivider; and one copy retained in the files of the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 16-22) 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances levying annual taxes saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); administration, Ch. 2; finance generally, § 2-86 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Authority of mayor to negotiate tax collector agreement. 
    The board of selectmen of the city hereby authorizes the mayor of the city to negotiate an agreement with the Sheriff of Iberville Parish, State of Louisiana, to serve as collector of ad valorem taxes for the city. 
(Ord. No. 113, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 19-2. - Change in due date for ad valorem taxes. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen of the city hereby changes and replaces the due date for property owners in the city to pay ad valorem taxes to the city on or before December 31 of each and every year. The city shall charge the property owners penalties and interest, as provided by law, in the event a property owner fails to pay their ad valorem taxes on or before December 31 each and every year. 
(Ord. No. 114, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 19-3-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority, § 13 (sixth); collection of license taxes, § 15. 
State Law reference- Occupational license tax, R.S. 47:341 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 19-16. - Levy; issuance of license. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an occupational license tax for the year 1988 and for each subsequent year upon each person pursuing and conducting any business, trade, calling, profession or vocation within the corporate limits of the city, subject to license under the Louisiana Constitution and laws of this state. 
(b)  The amount of license tax levied in each case is hereby fixed, determined and ordained to be the same as that fixed, levied and collectable by the governing authority under, and shall be granted in accordance with, the provisions of R.S. 47:341 through R.S. 47:363, both inclusive, as amended, and all other applicable laws, all of which for all purposes of this article is made a part hereof by reference as if written herein in extenso. 
(c)  Upon payment of the tax due as reflected on the application filed by the taxpayer, the collector shall issue the license applied for. Upon payment of the tax due as reflected on the application filed by the taxpayer, the collector shall have no authority to deny, refuse to issue, or revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. After audit or examination of a taxpayer's books and records, however, the collector shall have authority to adjust or amend the application and license to reflect the correct amount of gross receipts, tax due, or the correct class of business for which the license tax shall be computed. 
(d)  Any rules or regulations issued or promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall state, without limitation, that any person or entity engaged in conduct protected by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America, including, but not limited to, any editor or publisher, upon notification to the collector of the name and place of business of such person or entity, shall be issued a license forthwith and without further inquiry. 
(Code 1967, §§ 9-1, 9-2; Ord. No. 967, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 1049, 6-23-87; Ord. No. 1054, 9-22-87) 
Sec. 19-17. - Exemptions, definitions, classifications adopted. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the exemptions, limitations, definitions and classifications in effect on January 1, 1988, as provided in the statutes, as amended, and in any act hereinafter passed amending same, are hereby adopted. 
(b)  In addition to the exemptions, limitations, definitions and classifications identified in subsection (a) above, day care centers, excepted as provided in subsection (c) below, are exempt from paying an occupational license tax on gross revenues. Day care centers include child care services commonly known as babysitting. 
(c)  Day care centers, which are licensed under the "Child Care Facility and Child-Placing Agency Licensing Act," R.S. 46:1401 et seq., shall pay an occupational license tax on gross revenues as provided in R.S. 47:341 through R.S. 47:363, both inclusive, as amended, and all other applicable laws, all of which for all purposes of this article is made a part hereof by reference as if written herein in extenso. 
(Code 1967, § 9-4; Ord. No. 967, § 3, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 1049, 6-23-87; Ord. No. 010, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 19-18. - Gross premiums tax on insurers. 
(a)  Levy. There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on any insurer engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract, which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax for state purposes, all as authorized by R.S. 22:1076 on risks located in this municipality as follows: 
(1)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies, other than programs of benefits authorized or provided pursuant to the provisions of R.S. title 42, chapter 12, parts I and II, or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations whether such insurer by operating in this state through an agent or other representative or otherwise; 
a.  Ten dollars on gross annual premiums up to $2,000.00 and an additional license thereafter of $70.00 on each $10,000.00 or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of $2,000.00; 
b.  The maximum license on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any one insurer, shall be $21,000.00. 
(2)  On any insurer engaged in the businesses of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, worker's compensation, employers' liability, property damage, live stock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary, or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operating in this state through agents or other representative or otherwise, not more than the following: 
a.  First class. When the gross receipts are not more than $2,000.00, the license shall be $40.00; 
b.  Second class. When the gross receipts are more than $2,000.00, and not more than $4,000.00, the license shall be $60.00; 
c.  Third class. When the gross receipts are more than $4,000.00, and not more than $6,000.00, the license shall be $80.00; 
d.  Fourth class. When the gross receipts exceed $6,000.00, the additional license thereafter shall be $70.00 for each $10,000.00 or fraction thereof in excess of $6,000.00; 
e.  The maximum license tax on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any insurer shall be $9,000.00, provided that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay only one-third of the above rates provided by subsection (2). 
(3)  The amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this section, shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by R.S. title 22, chapter 1, part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixth of the total admitted assets of the payer are invested and maintained in qualifying Louisiana investments as defined in R.S. 22:1068(C). 
(b)  Due; late payment penalty. All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on June 1. A penalty of five percent per month shall be added to the amount of tax due and payable to this municipality along with the tax due. The amount of any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to this section shall not be greater than 25 percent of the total amount of the tax due. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with R.S. 22:1076 and R.S. 47:1601. 
(c)  Agreement for collection. Pursuant to R.S. 33:361, the agreement with the Louisiana Municipal Advisory and Technical Services Bureau Corporation for collection of current and delinquent license taxes in the form attached hereto is approved, and the mayor is authorized to execute it. 
(Code 1967, § 9-5; Ord. No. 140, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 162, §§ 1, 2, 5, 12-11-01) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 140, adopted July 11, 2000, pertained to a gross premiums tax on insurers, but did not specify manner of codification. However, such provisions have been included herein as superseding former § 19-18 which pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 19-19. - Purpose. 
(a)  The municipal licenses that are herein levied are declared to be for the purpose and need required and set forth by the constitution and laws of this state. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, no provision of this article shall be construed as requiring any person or entity engaged in conduct protected under the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America, including, but not limited to, any editor or publisher, to apply for and obtain a license or to pay the tax levied by this article as a condition to engaging in such business, profession or conduct. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3; Ord. No. 1054, 9-22-87) 
Sec. 19-20. - License required for each location and each class of business. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided, any person taxed having one or more places of business within the corporate limits shall pay a separate license fee for each class of business conducted at each place. 
(b)  A separate license for each class of business at each place of business shall not be required where any person has taxable annual gross sales, and taxable annual gross receipts in an aggregate amount of less than $5,000.00, or has only taxable annual sales or taxable annual gross receipts in an amount of less than $5,000.00. In this instance, only one license shall be required for each place of business, which license shall be based upon the classification of business which constitutes the major portion of the taxable annual gross sales or taxable annual gross receipts. 
(c)  All gross receipts, sales fees, premiums or commissions derived from any business or occupation taxed under this article, whether earned within or without the municipality, shall form the proper basis upon which all license shall be assessed and collected by the tax collector. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2; Ord. No. 967, § 4, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 19-21. - Health permit required in certain cases. 
    The clerk and tax collector of the city shall demand of all persons engaged in manufacturing, processing, distributing, serving, selling or offering for sale, prepared foods, beverages, liquors, milk or milk products for human consumption, a written permit to be issued by the parish health unit, to do business as required by the state sanitary code, before issuing them a city occupational license to do business in the city, provided however if this permit is not issued or denied by the parish health unit, within 15 days, the clerk and tax collector shall issue license without the permit. 
(Code 1967, § 9-6) 
Sec. 19-22. - Procedure for collection. 
    The procedure for the collection of municipal licenses under this article shall be the same as is now in force for the collection of state licenses. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2) 
Sec. 19-23. - Due and payment dates; failure to pay tax; judgment prohibiting further pursuit of business. 
(a)  On January 1 of 1982 and each succeeding year the license tax herein authorized to be levied shall be due and payable to the collector of municipal taxes, who shall commence collecting the tax from each person pursuing and conducting any business subject to taxation under this article, the Louisiana Constitution, and applicable laws of the state. All license taxes levied hereunder shall be due and payable on January 1 of each calendar year for which the license is due, except that for a new business commencing after January 1 of any calendar year, the first license shall be due and payable on the date the business is commenced. 
(b)  All licenses unpaid prior to March 1 of each calendar year for which they are due or, in the case of a new business, unpaid on the date such business is commenced shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the payment of delinquent interest and penalty. 
(c)  Failure to pay the tax levied under authority of this article shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent. The tax collector or other tax-collecting official is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the delinquent taxpayer to show cause in not less than two nor more than ten days, exclusive of holidays, why the delinquent taxpayer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of the business taxed under authority of this article. This rule may be tried out of term and in chambers and shall be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order therein rendered shall be considered a judgment in favor of the local governmental subdivision prohibiting the taxpayer from the further pursuit of the business therein until he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered a contempt of court, punishable according to law. 
(d)  If a change in ownership of an establishment with a valid occupational license occurs, the city shall immediately be notified, in writing, of the act of sale or lease. The new owner shall be allowed to continue to operate under the old occupational license if: 
(1)  The new owner applies for a new occupational license within ten days of the act of sale or lease; and 
(2)  The new owner shall be allowed to continue in operation under the old occupational license, until denial of the new occupational license application or acceptance of the new occupational license application. 
(3)  The new owner shall be charged an administration fee of $100.00, to cover the cost of investigation, clerical, and administration of the new occupational license application. 
(4)  The new owner or lessee shall provide, at the time of application to the city, a certified copy of the act of sale or lease. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1; Ord. No. 967, § 6, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 168, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 19-24. - Peddlers. 
    All peddlers, defined by R.S. 47:369(C) shall obtain a license costing $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 10409, 6-23-87) 
Cross reference- House-to-house peddlers, § 13-50 et seq.; peddlers in city-owned buildings, § 13-65. 
Sec. 19-25. - Theatre owners. 
    For purposes of this article, taxpayers engaged in the business of theatre operators shall be removed from the schedule of taxable businesses listed and described in R.S. 47:354, entitled "Retail dealers in merchandise, services, and rental," and shall be placed in the category and class of business entitled "All other business," as defined in R.S. 359(J) and shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of that section. 
(Ord. No. 1054, 9-22-87; Ord. No. 272, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 272, 9-9-08) 
Sec. 19-26. - Delinquent license fees. 
(a)  Penalty and interest schedules. The following penalty and interest schedule for occupational licenses [is established:] 
Period Interest Penalty 1-month (Mar) 1.25% 2.08% 2-month (Apr) 2.50% 4.17% 3-month (May) 3.75% 6.25% 4-month (Jun) 5.00% 8.33% 5-month (Jul) 6.25% 10.42% 6-month (Aug) 7.50% 12.50% 7-month (Sept) 8.75% 14.58% 8-month (Oct) 10.00% 16.66% 9-month (Nov) 11.25% 18.75% 10-month (Dec) 12.50% 20.83% 11-month (Jan) 13.75% 22.91% 12-month (Feb) 15.00% 25.00%  
(b)  Delinquency longer than one year. For all licenses delinquent for more than one year: 
(1)  Interest accrues for each month of delinquency. 
(2)  Penalty limited to 25 percent per year no matter how many years delinquent. 
(Res. of 4-25-89) 
Sec. 19-27. - Video draw poker devices. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on every person engaged in the business of operating video draw poker devices or similar devices and permitted pursuant to R.S. 33:4862 et seq. of $50.00 for each such device. 
(b)  All license taxes levied herein shall be collected in the same manner as occupational license taxes levied pursuant to R.S. 47:359D. The taxes shall be due and payable upon initial installation of each such device or on November 1 of each year and a ten percent penalty shall be assessed against each device for failure to timely pay the annual license tax. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with R.S. 47:1601 and 47:1602. 
(Ord. No. 045, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 260, 11-7-07) 
Cross reference- Suspension or revocation of license for placement of video draw poker devices on premises selling alcoholic beverages, § 3-41(a). 
Secs. 19-28-19-33. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ITINERANT VENDORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An amendment to Art. II of Ch. 19 adopted Apr. 8, 1986, enacted new provisions designated §§ 19-24-19-29. In order to provide for better classification, and to facilitate indexing, reference and use, the editor, at his discretion, has included these new provisions as a Div. 2 to Art II, §§ 19-34-19-39. 
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, Ch. 13; house-to-house peddlers, § 13-50 et seq.; peddlers in city-owned buildings, § 13-65. 

Sec. 19-34. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division: 
    Itinerant vendor. The term "itinerant vendor" means and includes and shall be construed to mean and include all persons, firms and corporations, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, including photographs and portraits, or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof; and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof, either hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure or other enclosure, or lot in the town in, through, or from which any goods, or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale, or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. 
    Temporary. The word "temporary," as above used, means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least six months in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
    Transient. The word "transient," as used above, means and shall be construed to mean any such business of any such itinerant vendor as may be operated or conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees who reside away from the city, or who have fixed places of business in places other than the city, or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of six months. 
(Amend. of 4-8-86, § 19:24) 
Sec. 19-35. - License-Required; issuance; fee; purpose. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof any goods or merchandise, including photographs and portraits, in the city without first obtaining a license permit as herein provided for. The city tax collector shall issue a license to any itinerant vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof in the city his goods or merchandise only after such itinerant vendor shall have fully complied with all provisions of this division and make payment of the sum of $50.00 for said permit license, except for the business of peddling or hawking of auto parts which is hereinafter set forth in detail in the following paragraph, all of which sums shall be an annual license charge and which sums shall be compensation to the city to partially defray expenses for enforcing provisions of this division. 
(b)  For every business of peddling or hawking of auto parts at wholesale, including, but not limited to spark plugs, fan belts, brake shoes, and batteries, auto and tractor tires and tubes; auto equipment, including, but not limited to, battery chargers, jacks and air compressors, automotive tools, including, but not limited to, wrenches and tire tools; chemicals, including, but not limited to, cleaners, polishes, waxes, radiator and oil additives; and motor vehicle accessories, that is, selling to persons who in turn resell to consumers, except those hereinafter specifically exempt, the annual license tax shall be $200.00 for each vehicle when the business is conducted by traveling in a vehicle, and $200.00 for each person engaged in peddling when the business is conducted by traveling on foot; provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons engaged in the business of selling at wholesale from a fixed place of business in this city to licensed retail dealers. 
(Amend. of 4-8-86, § 19:25) 
Sec. 19-36. - Same-Application; bond. 
(a)  The itinerant vendor shall make application to the city tax collector at least 30 days prior to the date of his contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city, which application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating the full name and address of the itinerant vendor, the location of his principal office and place of business, the names and addresses of its officers if it be a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all parties if such itinerant vendor be a firm. 
(b)  Before said license permits shall issue, the application thereof must be accompanied by: 
(1)  A statement showing the kind and character of goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited. 
(2)  A certified copy of the charter if the itinerant vendor be a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state. 
(3)  A certified copy of its permits to do business in Louisiana if the itinerant vendor be a corporation incorporated under the laws of some state other than Louisiana. 
(c)  A bond in a sum of not less than $2,000.00 shall be executed by the itinerant vendor as principal with two or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the collector of taxes, which bond shall be payable to the mayor and his successors in office for the use and benefit of any person or persons entitled thereto and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to person or persons caused by or arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the itinerant vendor while conducting the sale or exhibit in the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license permit as provided herein and two years thereafter. 
(Amend. of 4-8-86, § 19:26) 
Sec. 19-37. - Same-Not transferable; personal nature of license. 
    The license permit provided for in this division shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than one person to sell or exhibit goods or merchandise as an itinerant vendor either by agent or clerk or in any other way than his own proper person, but any person having obtained such license permit may have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting the sale or exhibit who shall have authority to aid that principal but not to act for or without him. 
(Amend. of 4-8-86, § 19:27) 
Sec. 19-38. - Same-To be displayed. 
    Such license permit shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where such sale or exhibit is being conducted and shall remain so displayed so long as any goods or merchandise are being sold or exhibited. 
(Amend. of 4-8-86, § 19:28) 
Sec. 19-39. - Exception to division provisions. 
    This division is not, and shall not be held to be, applicable to the: 
(1)  Ordinary commercial traveler who sells or exhibits for sale goods or merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and dealing in such goods or merchandise. 
(2)  Vendor of farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural products in their natural state produced by vendors; proof of such natural state and production by vendor must be made to the city tax collector. 
(3)  Sales of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. 
(Amend. of 4-8-86, § 19:29) 
Secs. 19-40-19-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ARBORISTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 085, adopted March 19, 1996, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 11-23-11-29. In order to provide for better classification, and in order to facilitate in the indexing reference and use of this new material, the editor has redesignated these provisions as a new Div. 3, §§ 19-50-19-56, to Ch. 19, Art. II. 

Sec. 19-50. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this division: 
    Arborist: Any person servicing trees for a fee on established residential or commercial property containing less than acreage other than one working on his own improved property in the parish or in the city, but specifically excluding persons engaged in clearing of rights-of-way for public utilities. 
    Person: An individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation. 
    Shrub: A woody plant with more than one stem or trunk at the ground level. 
    Tree: A woody perennial plant that has a single trunk or stem. 
    Tree service: Work performed on shade or ornamental trees, specifically excluding normal pruning of shrubbery, but including tree removal, shade or ornamental tree trimming and cavity work, and the fertilizing of shade and ornamental trees. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:23, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 19-51. - Arborist's license. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or engage within the city in the business of servicing trees unless such person shall have first procured a license to do so from the city inspector. This requirement is in addition to any other local licenses, and also in addition to the license required by the Horticulture Commission of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture. All persons holding an arborist's license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of his employees as well as himself in fulfilling all requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalty for doing business without license. Any person doing business in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be fined $200.00 or sentenced to 60 days in jail or both, at the judge's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:24, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 19-52. - Vehicles used in tree services. 
    All vehicles used in tree service shall be clearly marked with the name and city license number of the person holding a valid arborist license from the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:25, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 19-53. - Application for arborist's license. 
(a)  No arborist's license shall be issued to a person until that person shall have filed with the city inspector, in writing, an application therefor to be accompanied by a photostatic copy of that person's license issued by the Louisiana Horticulture Commission. The application shall give the exact location from which the business is to be conducted. The completed application, together with a copy of the license issued by the Louisiana Horticulture Commission, shall be forwarded by the city inspector to the superintendent of utilities for review. 
(b)  No license shall be issued by the city inspector until the applicant shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter and any future requirements affecting arborists that may be enacted by the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:26, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 19-54. - License not transferable. 
    It shall be unlawful to transfer any arborist license to any other person or for any arborist to knowingly allow any other person to use his license. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:27, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 19-55. - License fee; term; renewal; issuance of identification cards. 
(a)  The license fee for an arborist's license shall be $50.00 per year. Licenses issued hereunder shall expire December 31 following the date of issue, and no such license shall be issued for more than one year. The license granted hereunder shall be renewable only upon application filed with the director of finance prior to December 31 each year. No additional application shall be required to renew the license hereunder. The license may be renewed by payment of the annual license fee prior to January 1 of each succeeding year. 
(b)  The city inspector shall issue to each approved applicant an identification card showing his license number and shall forward to the superintendent of utilities of public works a copy of all approved applications. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:28, 3-19-96) 
Sec. 19-56. - Exemptions. 
    This division shall not apply to any business or occupation of land clearing or harvesting of timber for resale. 
(Ord. No. 085, § 11:29, 3-19-96) 
Secs. 19-57-19-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADJUDICATED PROPERTIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 289, adopted Sept. 22, 2009, added Art. III, consisting of §§ 19-57 through 19-60 to the Code. At the editor's discretion said sections have been renumbered to read as herein set out to accommodate reserved sections and future growth in Art. II. 
State Law reference- Sale of adjudicated properties, R.S. 47:2195 et seq. 

Sec. 19-65. - Minimum bid prices; sale of adjudicated properties. 
(a)  The city may elect to set a dollar amount as a minimum bid for the public sale of adjudicated property, which shall be at least the total amount of the statutory impositions, governmental liens, and costs of sale. 
(b)  The city may also elect to require an appraisal of adjudicated property to be sold at public sale. In the event the city requires an appraisal of the adjudicated property, to establish a bidding floor instead of setting a dollar amount minimum bid as provided in subsection (a), the city shall appoint a licensed appraiser to appraise and value the adjudicated property. 
(1)  The minimum bid at the first public sale shall be at least two-thirds of the appraised value of the property. 
(2)  In the event the adjudicated property fails to sell at the first public sale, the minimum bid for the second public sale shall be one-third the appraised value of the adjudicated property. 
(Ord. No. 289, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 19-66. - Prebidding procedures; sale of adjudicated properties. 
(a)  The city empowers the city clerk to set administratively the date, place and time for the public sale of adjudicated properties. 
(b)  In the event a person desires to initiate the public sale of adjudicated property and the city desires to sell the adjudicated property, the person shall deposit an amount to be determined by the city to cover the expenses of the sale, including advertising, appraisals and other costs associated with the sale. 
    In the event the person/depositor at the public sale fails to be the highest bidder, the money deposited shall be returned to him. However, if no one at the sale bids up to the minimum price provided in this section, then the money shall be retained to pay the expenses of the sale, but any money remaining after the expenses are paid shall be returned to the person/depositor. 
(c)  The public sale shall be advertised twice in the official journal for the city, once at least 30 days prior to the date of the public sale, and once no more than seven days prior to the date of the public sale. 
(1)  The advertisement shall provide for the minimum bid, the latest date written bids will be accepted, the time and place of in-person bidding, and any other terms of sale. 
(2)  The city may provide for other terms and conditions by subsequent ordinance. 
(3)  The city may donate adjudicated property to the extent and for the uses allowed by the Louisiana Constitution. 
(d)  The city may provide by ordinance for the sale of adjudicated property at public sale. The date of the public sale shall be as provided in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 289, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 19-67. - Notice; sale or donation of adjudicated property. 
(a)  The person acquiring the adjudicated property shall send written notice to any tax sale party whose interest the successful bidder or donee intends to be terminated that the party has until the later of the following to redeem the property or otherwise challenge in a court of competent jurisdiction the potential sale or donation: 
(1)  Sixty days from the date of the notice provided in this subsection, if five years have elapsed from the filing of the tax sale certificate, or six months after the date of the notice provided for in this subsection, if five years have not elapsed since the filing of the tax sale certificate. 
(2)  The filing of the sale of donation transferring the property. 
(3)  If the notice is given after the expiration of the applicable redemptive period, the notice shall constitute the notice of sale. The sending of the notice of sale shall constitute service of the notice of sale under article VII, section 25 of the Louisiana Constitution. The notice required by this section shall be sufficient, and it shall not be necessary to determine whether notice of the tax sale or any other notice was given. The written notice shall be sufficient if it is in the form provided in R.S. 47:2206. 
(b)  The person acquiring the adjudicated property shall cause to be published in the official journal of the city a notice that any tax sale party whose interest the successful bidder or donee intends to be terminated that the party has until the later of the following to redeem the property or otherwise challenge in a court of competent jurisdiction the potential sale or donation: 
(1)  Sixty days from the date of the notice provided in this subsection, if five years have elapsed from the filing of the tax sale certificate; or six months after the date of the notice provided for in this subsection, if five years have not elapsed since the filing of the tax sale certificate. 
(2)  The filing of the sale or donation transferring the property. 
(3)  The publication shall be sufficient if it is in the form provided in R.S. 47:2206. 
(c)  The person shall file with the recorder of mortgages for Iberville Parish in which the property is located a copy of one of the notices that was sent to the tax debtor or the current owner. A transfer, mortgage, lien, privilege, or other encumbrance filed after the filing of the notice shall not affect the property. The recorder of mortgages for Iberville Parish shall cancel, erase, terminate or release the acts upon the request of the acquiring person. 
(Ord. No. 289, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 19-68. - Donation of adjudicated property. 
    The city may, by ordinance, allow the donation of any identified adjudicated property to any person to the extent allowed by the Louisiana Constitution. The donated property can be used only for purposes allowed by the Louisiana Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 289, 9-22-09) 
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Title 20 of Ord. No. 1017-A, adopted Dec. 11, 1984, was not specifically amendatory of the Code; hence, it has been codified as superseding former Ch. 20, which pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from provisions presumably enacted at the time of the original codification and from the following: 
Code 1967 Section Code 1967 Section 10-1 10-19-10-21 10-3-10-6 10-40-10-53 10-8 10-55 10-9 11-91  
Ord. No. Sec. Date Ord. No. Sec. Date 840 1  2- 8-72 938 -  9-25-79 919 -  6-13-78 964 1-5  8-25-81 925 -  2-13-79 989 -  7-22-80  
Charter reference- Authority to regulate, § 13 (fifteenth). 
Cross reference- Ordinances regulating traffic or parking at specific locations not inconsistent herewith saved from repeal, § 1-5(7); railroads, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic regulation, R.S. 32:1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate traffic, R.S. 32:41. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL, MISCELLANEOUS AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-1. - Definition of words and phrases. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context otherwise requires: 
    Alley or alleyway shall mean a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean such fire department vehicles, police vehicles and ambulances as are publicly owned, and such other publicly or privately owned vehicles as are designated by the chief of police. 
    Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. 
    Bus shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Business district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
    Chauffeur shall mean every person who is employed by another for the principal purpose of driving a motor vehicle, and every person who drives a school bus transporting school children or any other motor vehicle when in use for the transportation of persons or property or property for compensation. 
    City shall mean the City of Plaquemine, Louisiana, or any person authorized to act on its behalf. 
    Commercial vehicle shall mean every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property and used in commercial activity. 
    Controlled access highway shall mean every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Criminal negligence exists when, although neither specific nor general criminal intent is present, there is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender's conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful man under reasonable circumstances. 
    Crosswalk shall mean that part of the roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Driver shall mean every person who drives or is an actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Driveway shall mean every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Farm tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry. 
    Freight curb loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
    Highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, including bridges, causeways, tunnels and ferries. 
    Housetrailer shall mean a trailer or semitrailer which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place (either permanently or temporarily) and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways, or a trailer or a semitrailer whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a house trailer, as defined above, but which is used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales, display or promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose except the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier. 
    Intersection shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting street also included two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway shall mean a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor-driven cycle shall mean every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, and every bicycle with a motor attached. 
    Negligence, criminal. See "criminal negligence." 
    Official traffic-control device shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Owner shall mean a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security. 
    Park or parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Passenger curb loading zone shall mean a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot. 
    Pole trailer shall mean every vehicle without power, designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and/ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Police officer shall mean every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations, including city marshals and deputy marshals. 
    Private road. See "driveway." 
    Railroad shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad sign or signal shall mean any sign or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train shall mean a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
    Residence district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property or such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residence or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way shall mean the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
    Road tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Roadway shall mean that portion of a highway, improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway," as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus shall mean every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
    School zone shall mean streets within the vicinity of school grounds, and so designated by the municipal zoning commission in accordance with section 15-25. 
    Semitrailer shall mean every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Sidewalk shall mean that portion of the street between the curb lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stand or standing shall mean the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Stop shall mean, when required, the complete cessation from movement. 
    Stopping shall mean, when prohibited, any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Street. See "highway." 
    Through street shall mean every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign or other official traffic-control device, when such signs or devices are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal shall mean any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed. 
    Traffic division shall mean the traffic division of the city police department or city marshal's office. 
    Trailer shall mean every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck shall mean every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:1, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; definitions pertaining to parking meter zones, § 20-414; definitions pertaining to freight routes, § 20-440. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:1. 
Secs. 20-2-20-11. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 20-12. - Police administration. 
    There is hereby established in the police department, a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:2, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-13. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to make and promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to make more effective the provisions of this chapter, and each of such officers is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:12, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-14. - Payment of fines by mail for traffic offenses by mail. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), any person charged with a violation of a traffic offense may promise, in writing on a form prepared or otherwise used by the municipality, to appear to answer the charge. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), any person charged with a violation of a traffic offense may plead guilty to the alleged offense and pay the fine prior to the date of adjudication in the clerk's office in the municipal building during business hours or by mail. Payment by mail must be postmarked on or before the date of adjudication and may be made by certified check or money order. No temporary checks or cash shall be accepted by mail. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to citations alleging that the operator of the motor vehicle was: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances. 
(2)  Exceeding the speed limit by 15 miles per hour or more. 
(3)  Exceeding the speed limit in a school zone. 
(4)  Driving with a suspended license. 
(5)  Drag racing. 
(6)  Cited for failure to maintain compulsory security. 
(d)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply when the operator was involved in an accident in which a person was injured or is alleged to have committed the same offense twice within a period of one hour. 
(Ord. No. 089, § 1, 5-14-96) 
State Law reference- Alternatives to citations authorized, R.S. 32:57. 
Secs. 20-15-20-24. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-25. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the city marshal, police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Such officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand/or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:20, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-26. - Required obedience to traffic title. 
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:21, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-27. - Obedience to police and fire department officials; penalty for violation. 
    No person shall willfully or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. Anyone found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:22, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:56. 
Sec. 20-28. - Certain nonmotorized traffic to obey traffic regulations. 
(a)  Every person propelling any push cart upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter and by the rules of the road of the state vehicle code, except those provisions which by their very nature have no application. 
(b)  Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:23, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:22. 
Sec. 20-29. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:24, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Roller skating on sidewalk prohibited, § 17-1; pedestrians' rights and duties, § 20-475 et seq. 
Sec. 20-30. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States this state, or any parish, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or in the state vehicle code. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:25, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-31. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not when returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions hereinafter stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the stated speed limit, but not by more than ten miles per hour; except that this shall not apply to police vehicles when in pursuit of other vehicles or in other emergencies, so long as the driver does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted emergency light displaying a flashing red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue light visible from the front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of other persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:26, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:24. 
Sec. 20-32. - Barricades, signs and signals; prohibition against tampering with and violating instructions; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No one shall in any way tamper with, move, damage or destroy any barricade, sign or signal placed upon any street by the department of public works or by any contractor or subcontractor doing street construction or repair work under or by authority of the department, or by an railroad company; nor shall any person disobey the instructions, signals, warnings or marking of any warning signs, signals or barricades so placed upon any highway under construction or being repaired; nor shall any person drive around or through any barricade or fence placed upon any closed street by the department or any contractor or subcontractor doing street construction or repair work under or by authority of the department, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Provisions of this section shall not apply to employees of the department of public works or any contractor or subcontractor or other person whose proper and lawful duties require them to go on any portion of the street which is under construction or in the process of being repaired and is, therefore, barricaded or closed as above stated. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in any place where signs or barricades have been officially placed as provided in paragraph (a) to prohibit such operations. 
(d)  Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:27, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:237. 
Secs. 20-33-20-44. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTS 

Sec. 20-45. - Immediate notice of accidents. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of $50.00 or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department, if such accident occurs within the city. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in paragraph (a), and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:30, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:398. 
Sec. 20-46. - False reports. 
    Any person who gives information in oral or written reports as required in this chapter knowing or having reasons to believe that such information is false shall be fined, upon conviction, not more than $200.00, or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:33, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-47. - Hit-and-run driving; penalty for commission. 
(a)  Hit-and-run driving is the intentional failure of the driver of a vehicle involved in or causing an accident to stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, to give his identity and to render reasonable aid. 
(b)  "To give his identity," for the purpose of this section, means that the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident shall give his name, address and the license number of his vehicle, or shall report the accident to the police. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of hit-and-run driving shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:34, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100. 
Secs. 20-48-20-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 20-60. - Equipment of motor vehicles. 
    Every motor vehicle operated upon the streets of this city shall be constructed and equipped in every respect as provided by the highway regulatory laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:250, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Vehicle equipment, R.S. 32:302 et seq. 
Sec. 20-61. - Inspection sticker required; penalty for noncompliance. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle upon the streets of this city, or permit or allow any vehicle owned or under his control to be driven on the streets, unless and until such vehicle bears a current inspection tag showing it to have been inspected and approved as required by the provisions of R.S. 32:1301 through R.S. 32:1310, if such vehicle is required to be so inspected. 
(b)  Whoever operates, or permits to be operated, a vehicle not in accordance with this section shall be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. If the violator is other than an individual, imprisonment shall be dispensed with a double fine imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:251, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:1301 et seq. 
Sec. 20-62. - Vehicle license required; penalty for noncompliance. 
(a)  No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, any motor vehicle upon the streets of this city unless it has a current and properly displayed license plate in accordance with the laws of this state. 
(b)  Whoever operates, or permits to be operated, a vehicle not in accordance with this section shall be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. If the violator is other than an individual, imprisonment shall be dispensed with and a double fine imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:252, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:51. 
Secs. 20-63-20-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 

Sec. 20-75. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:260, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:145. 
Sec. 20-76. - Limitations on backing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interference with other traffic. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway, except as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:261, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:281. 
Sec. 20-77. - Driving upon sidewalk. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:262, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 20-78. - Driving over private property. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle through or over private property, including, but not limited to, any corner parking or driveway facility from a highway for the purpose of reentering another highway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:263, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Trespass generally, § 13-37 et seq. 
Sec. 20-79. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or side of the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:264, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:282. 
Sec. 20-80. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic to load or unload passengers. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:265, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:283. 
Sec. 20-81. - Riding in house trailers. 
    No person or persons shall occupy a house trailer while it is being moved upon a public highway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:266, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:284. 
Sec. 20-82. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:267, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:286. 
Sec. 20-83. - Obstructing a fireman. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to obstruct any fireman while in the performance of his official duties. Obstructing a fireman is hereby defined as intentionally hindering, delaying, hampering, interfering with, or impeding the progress of, any regularly employed member of the fire department while in the performance of his official duties; or cursing, reviling or using any opprobrious language directed at any such fireman while in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:268, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Offenses against public administration generally, § 9-36 et seq.; obstruction of fire prevention, § 9-39. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:327. 
Sec. 20-84. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:269, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:287. 
Sec. 20-85. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, not withstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:270, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-86. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:271, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Funeral processions, R.S. 32:300.3. 
Sec. 20-87. - Drivers in a procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicles ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:272, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Funeral processions, R.S. 32:300.3. 
Sec. 20-88. - Putting glass, etc., on highway prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:274, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Offenses against public safety, § 9-115 et seq. 
Sec. 20-89. - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
    No person shall ride or cling to the outside of any vehicle, including, but not limited to, the running board, fender, bumper or radiator of any vehicle, or any other outside portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:275, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Riding on moving railroad stock, 9-178; clinging to vehicles by bicyclists prohibited, § 20-34. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:196. 
Sec. 20-90. - Sirens and whistles prohibited. 
    No vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicles, shall be equipped with, nor shall any driver of any vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicles, use any siren, bell or whistle or any other type of horn or horns, or other similar devices, which are used ordinarily by fire department or police department vehicles, or ambulances, and which might cause others to believe that such were authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:276, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Unnecessary noises, § 13-111. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:351(B). 
Sec. 20-91. - Use of flashing red and blue lights restricted. 
    No vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicles, shall display a flashing or blinking red or blue light to the front of the vehicle, while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:277, 12-11-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:327. 
Sec. 20-92. - Quiet zone. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon any street where a person is seriously ill if requested to do so by a physician who states that such zones shall be marked by conspicuous signs bearing the words which will call such to the attention of the operators of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:278, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-93. - Making unnecessary noise prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make an unnecessary noise by means of the horn or other device on his said vehicle; he being required to drive his vehicle as quietly as possible at all times and especially during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to the provisions of these antinoise provisions in chapter 13, article V. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:279, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Unnecessary noises, § 13-111. 
Sec. 20-94. - Litter from vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit, or allow to be thrown or deposited, upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property, any type of debris, litter or any other material, as described herein. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "litter" shall be considered as any putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including specifically, but not exclusively, the following: Garbage, rubbish, dead animals or parts of animals, feathers, paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cigars, cans, leaves, wood, glass, tin cans, plastic containers and similar materials. 
(c)  The operator or owner of the vehicle involved shall be held responsible for violation of this section; provided, however, that where the violation is committed by a passenger in a public carrier, the passenger only shall be held responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:280, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Spitting in public places, 9-171; littering, 9-176; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; noxious matter, 13-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Littering, R.S. 30:2521 et seq. 
Sec. 20-95. - Driver's license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle within the limits of the city without a driver's license as required by the laws of the state, and which is not under suspension. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any other person to drive or operate any vehicle owned or controlled by him within the limits of the city unless and until such other person has been issued a license to do so as required by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:281, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:52. 
Sec. 20-96. - Other laws of the road. 
    Any violations and regulations provided by the statutes of the state, and particularly any violation of the provisions of R.S. title 32, known as the Highway Regulatory Act, shall likewise be deemed in violations of the tariff regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:282, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-97. - Headlamps; when low beams required; penalty for noncompliance. 
(a)  Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a street of this city between sunset and sunrise, or at such times as atmospheric conditions require the use of headlamps on the vehicle, the operator of such vehicle must dim the lights to the lowermost distribution of light when approaching an oncoming vehicle within 500 feet, or when following another vehicle within 200 feet to the rear. 
(b)  Whoever operates a motor vehicle not in accordance with this section may be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:283, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Equipment of vehicles, § 20-60 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:322. 
Sec. 20-98. - Weights and standards enforcement, payment and collection procedures. 
(a)  The city police shall have concurrent authority with the weights and standards police force and the state police to enforce the size, weight and load of vehicle provisions found in R.S. 32:380 through 32:388 (or their successors), all inclusive. 
(b)  Any city police officer having reason to believe that any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeds or is in violation of the provisions of R.S. 32:380 or the terms and conditions of a special permit issued under R.S. 32:387 or regulations of the department of transportation and development, office of highways, section 20-293 et seq. of this Code, is authorized to stop such vehicle or combination of vehicles to inspect, measure or weigh such vehicles, either by means of portable or stationary scales, or to require available location equipped with facilities to inspect, measure or weigh such vehicles. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is found in violation of any provision of this chapter or any regulation of the department of transportation and development, office of highways, the city police shall take the name and address of the owner and driver and the license number of the vehicle and shall issue a violation ticket assessing a penalty for such violation in accordance with R.S. 32:388. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:284, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-99. - Riding or hauling on levees prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall ride, drive or haul upon the public levees except where, in the judgment of the levee commissioners of a district and the department of public works, ample provision has been made to guard against any damage to which the levees may thereby be exposed from wear, tear and abuse. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(c)  This section shall not be constructed to restrict the proper officers of the state or of any levee district or parish while in the performance of duty in inspecting, guarding, or repairing the levees. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall interfere with the crossing over any public levees, at ramps or inclines established under plans and specifications of the department of public works, for the purpose of transporting any material that may be used or required in the business of the population living behind the levees. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:285, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:846. 
Sec. 20-100. - Proof of insurance. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Motor vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
(2)  Motorcycle: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designated to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor and excluding a motorized bicycle. 
(b)  Possession of proof while operating. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle within the municipal limits without proof of insurance, as required by the provisions of R.S. title 32, present in the motor vehicle or motorcycle at the time of operation. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine not more than $500.00, and/or imprisonment of up to six months. 
(Ord. No. 086, 4-23-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:863.1. 
Secs. 20-101-20-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Abandoned junk, vehicles, etc., § 13-95 et seq.; stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified areas, § 20-360 et seq. 

Sec. 20-111. - Authority to remove traffic obstructions. 
    Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove any traffic obstruction from the streets, bridges, alleyways, municipal parking lots or tunnels in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:290, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Removal, tow away and impounding of vehicles parked in prohibited parking zones, § 20-370. 
Sec. 20-112. - Authority to impound vehicles. 
    A vehicle or bicycle may be removed by any police officer from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by this city whenever such vehicle or bicycle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or public property in such a manner as to cause a hazard or obstruction to traffic, and the officers are further authorized and directed to remove, as herein set forth, any bicycle which is left continuously unattended upon any street, bridge, or public property for a period in excess of 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:291, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Operation of bicycles generally, § 20-302 et seq.; parking of bicycles, § 20-316; removal, tow away and impounding of vehicles parked in prohibited parking zones, § 20-370. 
Sec. 20-113. - Procedure after removal. 
(a)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle or bicycle from a street as authorized in section 20-112 and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle or state motor vehicle registration bureau the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle or bicycle from a street under section 20-112 and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and if the vehicle or bicycle is not claimed by the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal to the chief of police, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle or bicycle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle or bicycle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reason for such removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle or bicycle is stored. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:292, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-114. - Vehicle returned to owner. 
    The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of the vehicle or bicycle upon payment of such cost as may be fixed by the chief of police for the removal and impounding, all of which shall not exceed the sum of $30.00. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:293, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-115. - When owner is unknown. 
    The chief of police shall insert in the official journal of the city a notice stating the fact of removal of the vehicle or bicycle, the reasons for the removal, the complete description of the vehicle or bicycle, the name of the garage or place where the vehicle or bicycle is stored, and the fact that the owner is unknown, and that the same will be returned to owner upon proof of ownership and payment of the removal and impounding fee and cost of this notice. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:294, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-116. - Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle or bicycle belonging to a known person is not called for and the charges paid within three days after notice provided in section 20-113, or whenever a vehicle or bicycle belonging to an unknown person is not claimed within ten days after the notice is given as provided for in section 20-114, the chief of police shall insert an advertisement in the official journal of the city once a week for two weeks describing the vehicle or bicycle and giving the owner's name if known, setting forth the amount of removal and impounding and other costs due, and giving notice that unless all such costs and charges including the costs of advertisement are paid and the vehicle or bicycle is removed by the owner within ten days after the date of the last advertisement, it will be sold at public auction by the city constable. 
(b)  After the advertisement has been published and the notice elapsed, if it has not been claimed and the cost and charges paid, the city constable shall advertise in the same paper that the vehicle or bicycle will be offered at public sale to the highest bidder for cash for not less than two-thirds of its appraised value, this advertisement to be published once and the sale to be made not less than ten days nor more than 15 days from the date of this advertisement, which shall fix the time and place of the sale. At this time the constable shall have the vehicle or bicycle appraised in the manner that personal property is appraised for judicial sales, and shall then offer it at public auction on the terms as advertised. As alternate methods of disposing of unclaimed bicycles, the chief of police, in his sole discretion, may donate such bicycles to charitable organizations providing services to children, including, but not limited to, the Good Fellows Organization, and foster children in the care and custody of the state department of welfare by court order. Before any such unclaimed bicycle or bicycles shall be donated, as herein provided, the chief of police shall insert an advertisement in the official journal of the city once a week for two weeks describing the bicycle or bicycles to be so donated and giving the owner's name, if known; and further advising that such bicycles will be available for inspection during the period of advertisement, during which time any interested party, if he can identify any of such bicycles as his own, may claim same. The failure of the owner to claim any bicycles advertised for donation purposes, as herein provided, shall be conclusive proof that the bicycle has been abandoned to the city and the city may thereafter deal with same as the full owner thereof for the purposes here provided. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:295, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-117. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
    All funds received from the sale of the vehicle under the sections above shall be transmitted to the director of finance, and he shall deduct therefrom and transfer to the general fund all amounts due for removal and impounding, advertisements, cost of appraisement and sale, including the usual constable's commission, and the balance, if any, to be credited to an account for the owner for one year from date of sale, and if not then claimed, it shall be transferred to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:296, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-118-20-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES ON ARREST 

Sec. 20-128. - Penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by other provisions of this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:300, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-129. - Procedure of police officers. 
    Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before a judge for the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest shall take the name, address and operator's license number of the person, the registered number of the motor vehicle involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the city a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him in the court at a time at least five days after such alleged violation to be specified in the citation. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:301, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-130. - Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants and complaints. 
    Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or any traffic ordinance of this city shall deposit the original and two duplicate copies of the citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to be delivered to the court and the duplicate copies to the central records section of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:302, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-131. - When copy of citation shall be deemed a lawful complaint. 
    If the form of citation provided under section 20-129 includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of this state in respect to a complaint of affidavit charging commission of the offense alleged in the citation to have been committed, then such citation when filed with a court having jurisdiction shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint or affidavit for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:306, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-132. - Failure to obey citation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a traffic citation has been issued to fail to appear in response to the citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such citation was originally issued. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:307, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-133. - Citation on illegally parked vehicle. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation on a form provided by the city for the driver to answer to the charge against him within 24 hours during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:308, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 20-346 et seq. 
Sec. 20-134. - Failure to comply with traffic citation attached to parked vehicle. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of 24 hours the police department shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that is such letter is disregarded for a period of 15 days a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:309, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-135. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:310, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-136. - When warrant to be issued. 
    If any person fails to comply with a traffic citation given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in court, of if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the judge shall issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:311, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-137. - Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. 
    All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be forwarded to the director of finance who shall deposit the fines to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:312, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-138-20-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 20-150. - Authority to install traffic-control devices. 
    The city shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic-control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:40, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-151. - Obedience to official traffic-control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device application thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:42, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:231(A). 
Sec. 20-152. - When official traffic-control devices required for enforcement purposes. 
    No provisions of this chapter for which official traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:43, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:231(B). 
Sec. 20-153. - Official traffic-control devices; presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:44, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Pedestrians subject to traffic- and pedestrian-control signals, § 20-475(b). 
Sec. 20-154. - Traffic-control signals. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or color-lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, and such lights shall be indicated and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection and make such movement as indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in this section, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal alone is thereby warned that the related green signal is being terminated or that a red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red signal is exhibited. 
b.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in this section, a pedestrian facing a steady yellow signal is thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red signal is exhibited and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if none, then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown, except as provided in subsection (3)c. below. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if none, then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown, except as provided in subsection (3)c. below. 
c.  Except when a sign prohibits a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street, after stopping as required by subsections (3)a. or (3)b. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(4)  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in this section, a pedestrian facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal shall not enter the roadway. 
(5)  If any official-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(6)  A motorist approaching a traffic signal which does not have any signal lens illuminated shall come to a full and complete stop before entering the intersection and shall proceed through the intersection only after being sure it is safe to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:45, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Pedestrians subject to traffic- and pedestrian-control signals, § 20-475. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:232. 
Sec. 20-155. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing or continuous yellow (caution signal): When a yellow lens is continuously lighted or is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersections or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of the drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules set forth in section 20-232. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:47, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:234. 
Sec. 20-156. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highway of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the police department is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:48, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, § 13-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:236. 
Sec. 20-157. - Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:49, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-158. - Authority to establish play streets. 
    The city shall have the authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:50, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-159. - Play streets; effect of designation. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:51, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-160. - City to designate crosswalks, and to establish safety zones and school crosswalks. 
    The city is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary; 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
(3)  To establish school crosswalks at places throughout the city where, in his opinion, they are necessary, because of traffic conditions, the proximity of schools to streets, or because of their use as a means of access to and from any school location and areas of population adjacent thereto. Such school crosswalks, and a distance of 250 feet on either side thereof, shall constitute "School Zones," as defined herein, and shall be subject to such speed limits, or other traffic regulations applicable to "School Zones." For the purposes of properly designating any such school crosswalks and the distances adjacent thereto as provided for herein, the traffic engineer shall cause appropriate signs, signals or other devices as may be required or necessary to be erected for the purpose of adequately apprising traffic of the existence of such zones, and to safeguard the school children using the same. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:53, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-161. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:53, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Driving on roadways laned for traffic, R.S. 31:79. 
Secs. 20-162-20-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OVERTAKING AND PASSING; USE OF ROADWAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Driving on right side of roadway; overtaking and passing; use of roadway, T.S. 32:71 et seq. 

Sec. 20-172. - Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) hereof. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:60, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:71. 
Sec. 20-173. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:61, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:72. 
Sec. 20-174. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
    The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:62, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:73. 
Sec. 20-175. - When overtaking on the right is permitted. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving vehicles in each direction; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right side only under the conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:63, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:74. 
Sec. 20-176. - Limitations on overtaking on the left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless authorized by the provisions of this division and unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction of any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and if the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:64, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:75. 
Sec. 20-177. - Further limitations on driving on left of center of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching or upon the crest of a grade of a curb in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction; 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor under the conditions described in section 20-174, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:65, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:76. 
Sec. 20-178. - No-passing zones. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine those portions of any highway under its jurisdiction where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(b)  When signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone as set forth in paragraph (a), no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within such no passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length. 
(c)  This section does not apply under the conditions described in subsection 20-172(a)(2), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:66, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:77. 
Sec. 20-179. - One-way roadways. 
(a)  The traffic engineer may designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
(b)  Upon a roadway so designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:67, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:78. 
Sec. 20-180. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices. 
(3)  Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:68, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:79. 
Sec. 20-181. - Following too closely. 
(a)  Driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(b)  The driver of any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence district and which is following another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or other vehicle. 
(c)  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each vehicle or combination of vehicles to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:69, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:81. 
Sec. 20-182. - Driving on divided highways. 
    Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section except through an opening in such physical barrier, or section or space or at a cross-over intersection as established. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:70, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:82. 
Sec. 20-183. - Restricted access. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by the public authority. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:71, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:262. 
Sec. 20-184. - Driving in parking lane prohibited. 
    Where parking is permitted in a lane of traffic immediately adjacent to the curb, no vehicle shall travel in such lane of traffic except for the purpose of stopping or parking, or for the purpose of making a turn, and when making a turn only within 50 feet from the intersection where the turn is to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:72, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-185. - Drag racing and racing on public roads. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall drive any vehicle upon the streets of this city in any race, speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration, or for the purpose of making speed record, and no person shall in any manner participate in any such race, speed competition, drag race, test of physical endurance, exhibition, or purpose of making a speed record. 
(b)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, "drag racing" is defined as the operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, for the purpose of comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration of such vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit upon the streets of this city. 
(c)  Penalty for noncompliance. Whoever operates a vehicle not in accordance with this section shall be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:73, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:65. 
Secs. 20-186-20-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RIGHT-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Right-of-way, R.S. 32:121 et seq. 

Sec. 20-196. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The right-of-way rule declared in paragraph (a) is modified at through highways and otherwise stated in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:80, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:121. 
Sec. 20-197. - Vehicle turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:81, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:122. 
Sec. 20-198. - Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs properly placed by the traffic engineer. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. Provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:82, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:123. 
Sec. 20-199. - Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:83, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:124. 
Sec. 20-200. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an audible signal meeting the requirements of the state highway regulatory act, and visual signals meeting the requirements of such act, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:84, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:125. 
Sec. 20-201. - Through streets designated. 
    All those streets declared to be through streets shall have the right-of-way over the intersecting streets, except where otherwise designated by a traffic-control device. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:85, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-202. - Authority to erect stop signs and yield right-of-way signs. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and declares a through street, it shall be the duty of the city to place and maintain a stop sign or a yield right-of-way sign on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals. 
(b)  The city is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular traffic hazards exist and have stop signs, yield signs and other similar traffic-control devices erected and put into operation whenever it shall deem an intersectional traffic hazard to exist in order to preserve the safety of vehicular traffic within the city and parish. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:86, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-203. - Intersections where stop required. 
    The city is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at or yield the right-of-way at one or more entrances to any such intersections, and shall erect a sign at every place where a stop or yield of right-of-way is required. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:87, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-204-20-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND TURNING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Turning, starting and stopping and signals therefor, R.S. 32:101 et seq. 

Sec. 20-214. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot shall do as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right-hand turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection, road-way, driveway, alley, building or parking lot, where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot, and after entering the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot to the left of the center of the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot. 
(3)  Left turn on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot, where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot shall approach the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, roadway, driveway, alley, building or parking lot, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:100, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:101. 
Sec. 20-215. - Turning on curve or crest prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:101, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:102. 
Sec. 20-216. - Moving parked vehicle. 
    No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:102, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:103. 
Sec. 20-217. - Turning movements and required signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in section 20-214, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or drive-way, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is an opportunity to give such signal. 
(d)  The signals provided for in subsection 20-218(b) shall be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, or start from a parked position, and shall not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy of "do pass" signals to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:103, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:104. 
Sec. 20-218. - Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal when required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b). 
(b)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the vehicle is so constructed, loaded or operated as to prevent the hand and arm signal from being visible both to the front and to the rear. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:104, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:105. 
Sec. 20-219. - Method of giving hand and arm signals. 
    All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:105, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:106. 
Sec. 20-220. - Authority to place and obedience to turn markers. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to designate traffic lanes within or adjacent to intersections for left turns or right turns only. 
(b)  Where such signs or markers are in place, no vehicle shall proceed in any direction except that indicated by such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:106, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-221. - Authority to place and obedience to restricted signs. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of the day, and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever such signs are in place, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:107, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-222. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:108, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-223-20-231. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 

Sec. 20-232. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:110, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Railroads, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:171. 
Sec. 20-233. - All vehicles must stop at certain railroad grade crossings. 
    The city is hereby authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected the driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:111, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Railroads, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:172. 
Sec. 20-234. - Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks. 
(b)  No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. 
(c)  This section shall not apply at street-railway grade crossings within a business or residence district. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:112, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Railroads, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:173. 
Sec. 20-235. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or, if there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:113, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions pertaining to bicyclists, § 20-313. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:124. 
Sec. 20-236. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus, when there is in operation on the school bus a visual signal denoting same, and said driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed, or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this section for any school bus driver to stop said bus for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers without first actuating a visual signal denoting same. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:114, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:80. 
Sec. 20-237. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle it is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:115, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-238-20-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

Sec. 20-248. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:120, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-249. - One-way streets and alleys. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in Section 20-251 vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:121, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:78. 
Sec. 20-250. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)  The police department or city is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereof upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed during periods of constructions, repairs or other periods when, in the opinion of the city or the police department, all or a portion of such street or streets, or lanes, should not be used by traffic. The city or the police department may erect signs temporarily designating the lanes to be used or not to be used and the direction of traffic flow. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to United States Postal vehicles in the operation of their designated postal routes. However, the United Stated Postal vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic travelling in the designated direction of traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:122, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 069, 9-27-94) 
Sec. 20-251. - One-way streets designated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and in violation of the provisions of this section for any person to drive or operate a vehicle on the following one-way streets in the directions indicated: governing authority. 
Street Direction  
(1)  Barker's Alley between Constitution and Railroad Avenue ..... Easterly 
(2)  Clay Street, between Plaquemine Street and Court Street ..... Northerly 
(3)  W.W. Harleaux Street, between Marshall Street and Fleniken Lane ..... Easterly 
(4)  Captain T. Harris Street, between Ephriam Street and Marshall Street ..... Westerly 
(5)  Union Street, between Plaquemine Street and Court Street ..... Northerly 
(6)  Webster Street, between Court Street and Plaquemine Street ..... Northerly 
(7)  Wilbert Street, between Court Street and Plaquemine Street ..... Northerly 
(8)  Louisiana Highway One South (Eden Street) ..... Southerly 
(9)  Louisiana Highway One North (Church Street) ..... Northerly 
(10)  Plaquemine Street, between Louisiana Highway One South (Eden Street) and Railroad Avenue ..... Westerly 
(11)  St. Clement Avenue, between Regina Street and Thomas Street, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the time school is in session ..... Easterly 
(12)  Ephriam Street, between Meriam Street and W.W. Harleaux ..... Southerly 
(13)  Ash Street ..... Northerly 
(14)  Baist Street, between Meriam Street and W. W. Harleaux ..... Northerly 
(15)  Regina Street, between St. Clement Avenue and Price Street, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the time school is in session ..... Southerly 
(16)  Price Street, between Regina Street and Sebastian Street, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the time school is in session ..... Westerly 
(b)  The one-way designation of Meriam Street shall be suspended during a funeral procession, provided that notification is given to the chief of police at least 24 hours prior to the funeral procession. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:123, 12-11-84; Amend. of 2-25-86; Amend. of 5-22-90; Ord. No. 052, 10-26-93; Ord. No. 119, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 122, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 132, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 141, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 142, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 203, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 204, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 207, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 263, 2-12-08; Ord. No. 292, 11-18-09) 
Secs. 20-252-20-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Speed regulations pertaining to bicyclists, § 20-312. 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, R.S. 32:61 et seq. 

Sec. 20-262. - Basic rule. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curb, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:130, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:64. 
Sec. 20-263. - Maximum limits. 
(a)  Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with section 20-262, no driver shall drive his vehicle in excess of the speed limit posted on that street or highway on which the vehicle is being operated. 
(b)  Subject to the restrictions imposed by section 20-262, where there are no signs posted indicating speed limits, the speed limit applicable to that street or roadway shall be 30 miles per hour, and no driver shall drive his vehicle in excess thereof. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be driven at a greater rate of speed than 15 miles per hour on either side of the street in a school zone during the periods as established by the city and as posted in the school area. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be driven in excess of one-half of the maximum speed limits allowed in the area while making a turn at a corner. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:131, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-264. - Prima facie limits. 
    It is hereby determined that the speed limit of 30 miles per hour required under subsection 20-263(b) is more rigid than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles upon certain streets and highways, by reason of the designation and sign posting of such streets as through streets or by reason of widely spaced intersections, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon these streets or portions thereof described in section 20-266 shall be as therein stated, which speed so declared shall be effective at all times when signs are erected giving notice thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:131, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-265. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
    The city is hereby authorized to regulate the timing of all traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall direct appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:133, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-266. - Speed restrictions-Generally. 
    The speed limit for automobiles and all other vehicles, within the limits of the city, shall be as follows: 
(1)  On Louisiana Highway No. 1, from the northern limits of the city to the point where said highway is intersected by Laville Street, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  On said Louisiana Highway No. 1, from Laville Street to its intersection with Depot Street, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  On Louisiana Highway No. 1, Eden Street and Church Street between its intersection with Depot Street and its intersection with State Route Louisiana Highway 75 (Belleview Road), the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(4)  On Railroad Avenue (both east and west sides) between Main and Fort Streets, and on all streets in the city east of the Texas & Pacific Railroad between Bayou Plaquemine and Fort Street, including Fort Street, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(5)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the speed limit within the limits of the city shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(6)  On Sherburne Street from Railroad Avenue west to Ferdinand Street, and Ferdinand Street from Sherburne Street to Belleview Road, also known as Louisiana Highway 75, the speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(7)  On Warren Street (River Road, Louisiana Highway 988) the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:135, 12-11-84; Amend. of 7-9-85, § 20:134; Amend. of 1-27-87; Amend. of 7-12-88) 
Secs. 20-267-20-276. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SERIOUS TRAFFIC OFFENSES 

Sec. 20-277. - Operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
(a)  (1)  The crime of operating a vehicle while intoxicated is the operating of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance when: 
a.  The operator is under the influence of alcoholic beverages; or 
b.  The operator's blood alcohol concentration is 0.08 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of blood; or 
c.  The operator is under the influence of any controlled dangerous substance listed in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V as set forth in R.S. 40:964; or 
d.  The operator is under the influence of a combination of alcohol and one or more drugs which are not controlled dangerous substances and which are legally obtainable with or without a prescription and the label on the container of the prescription drug or the manufacturer's package of the drug contains a warning against combining the medication with alcohol. 
e.  The operator is under the influence of one or more drugs which are not controlled dangerous substances and which are legally obtainable with or without a prescription and the influence is caused by the operator knowingly consuming quantities of the drug or drugs which substantially exceed the dosage prescribed by the physician or the dosage recommended by the manufacturer of the drug. 
(2)  A valid driver's license shall not be an element of the offense, and the lack thereof shall not be a defense to a prosecution for operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
(b)  (1)  On a first conviction, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the offender shall be fined not less than $300.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and shall be imprisoned for not less than ten days nor more than six months. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
a.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve two days in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program; or 
b.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform four eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least half of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program, participate in a court-approved substance abuse program, and participate in a court-approve driver improvement program. An offender who participates in a litter abatement or collection program pursuant to this subparagraph shall have no cause of action for damages against the entity conducting the program or supervising his participation therein, including a municipality, parish, sheriff, or other entity, nor against any official, employee, or agent of such entity, for any injury or loss suffered by him during or arising out of his participation in the program, if such injury or loss is a direct result of the lack of supervision or act or omission of the supervisor, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the entity or its official, employee, or agent. 
(2)  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.15 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of blood, at least 48 hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (b)(1)a. or b. of this section. 
(c)  (1)  On a conviction of a second offense, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary except as provided in subsection (3) of this subsection, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than $750.00, nor more than $1,000.00, and shall be imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months. At least 48 hours of the sentence imposed shall be served without benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Nothing herein shall prohibit a court from sentencing a defendant to home incarceration, if otherwise allowed under the provisions of article 894.2 of the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
a.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve 15 days in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program; or 
b.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform 30 eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least half of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program, and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program, and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program. An offender who participates in a litter abatement or collection program pursuant to this subparagraph shall have no cause of action for damages against the entity conducting the program or supervising his participation therein, including a municipality, parish, sheriff, or other entity, nor against any official, employee, or agent of such entity, for any injury or loss suffered by him during or arising out of his participation therein, if such injury or loss is a direct result of the lack of supervision or act or omission of the supervisor, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the entity or its official, employee, or agent. 
(2)  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.15 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of blood, at least 96 hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (1)a. or b. of this subsection. 
(3)  a.  An offender sentences to home incarceration shall be supervised and shall be subject to any of the conditions of probation. The court shall specify the condition of home incarceration which shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
1.  Electronic monitoring. 
2.  Curfew restrictions. 
3.  Home visitation at least once per month by the department of public safety and corrections. 
b.  The court shall also require the offender to obtain employment and to participate in a court-approved driver improvement program at his expense. The activities of the offender outside of his home shall be limited to traveling to and from work, church services, Alcoholic Anonymous meetings, or a court-approved driver improvement program. 
c.  Offenders sentenced to home incarceration required under the provisions of this section shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure article 894.2. 
(d)  (1)  For purpose of determining whether a defendant has a prior conviction for violation of this section, a conviction under either R.S. 14:32.1, vehicular homicide; R.S. 14:39.1, vehicular negligent injuring; or R.S. 14:39.2, first degree vehicular negligent injuring; or a conviction under the laws of any state or an ordinance of a municipality, town, or similar political subdivision of another state, which prohibits the operation of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance while intoxicated, while impaired, or while under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or any controlled dangerous substance shall constitute a prior conviction. This determination shall be made by the court as a matter of law. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a prior conviction shall not include a conviction for an offense under this section or R.S. 14:32.1 or R.S. 14:39.1 or under a comparable statute or ordinance of another jurisdiction, as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, if committed more than ten years prior to the commission of the crime for which the defendant is being tried and such conviction shall not be considered in the assessment of penalties hereunder. However, periods of time during which the offender was incarcerated in a penal institution in this or any other state shall be excluded in computing the ten-year period. Subsections (b) and (c) shall include a screening procedure to determine the portions of the program which may be applicable and appropriate for individual offenders. 
(e)  "Community service activities" as used in this section may include duty in any morgue, coroner's office, or emergency treatment room of a state-operated hospital or other state-operated emergency treatment facility, with the consent of the administrator of the morgue, coroner's office, hospital, or facility. 
(f)  An offender ordered to participate in a substance abuse program required by the provisions of this section shall pay the cost incurred in participating in the program. Failure to make such payment shall subject the offender to revocation of probation, unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. If the court determines that the offender in unable to pay, the state shall pay for the cost of the substance abuse treatment required by this section. An offender sentenced to home incarceration and to participate in a driver improvement program shall pay the cost incurred in participating in home incarceration and a drive improvement program unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. 
(g)  This subsection shall be cited as the "Child Endangerment Law." When the state proves in addition to the elements of the crime as set forth in subsection (a) of this section that a minor child 12 years of age or younger was a passenger in the motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of motorized conveyance at the time of the commission of the offense, of the sentence imposed by the court, the execution of the minimum mandatory sentence provided by subsection (b) or (c) of this section, as appropriate, shall not be suspended. 
(h)  In addition to any penalties imposed under this section, upon conviction of a second offense, any vehicle, while being operated by the offender, shall be equipped with a functioning ignition interlock device in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 15:306. This requirement shall remain in effect for a period of not less than six months. In addition, the device shall remain installed and operative during any period that the offender's operator's license is suspended under law and for any additional period as determined by the court. 
(i)  The offence of reckless driving, as defined in this division, shall be a responsive verdict to the charges under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:140, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 075, 3-28-95; Ord. No. 189, 10-14-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:98. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages and minors, § 9-149 et seq. 
Sec. 20-278. - Operating a vehicle under the influence of alcoholic beverages; implied consent to chemical test; effect of refusal to submit to tests. 
(a)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to have given his consent to submit to a chemical test of his breath, for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of his blood, if he is either involved in any collision which results in property damage, personal injury or death, or is cited, charged or arrested for a violation of any state law or ordinance of this city relating to a moving vehicle upon the request of a law enforcement officer who has reason to believe such person was driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol in violation of section 20-277 or R.S. 14:98. If such person refuses to submit to such test, none shall be given. 
(b)  If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test of his breath, as provided herein, evidence of his refusal shall be admissible in any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways of the city and it shall be presumed that the person refusing the test was under the influence of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question whether the person was under the influence of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section has no application to a civil action or proceeding. 
State Law reference- Implied consent, R.S. 32:661. 
Sec. 20-279. - Reckless driving. 
(a)  Reckless driving is the operation of any motor vehicle upon the streets of the city, or upon any private road or driveway, as defined herein, in a criminally negligent or reckless manner. 
(b)  Any person who operates a vehicle at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life or property of any other person shall be guilty of reckless driving. 
(c)  Failure to maintain control, as defined in this division, shall be a responsive verdict to charges under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:142, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:99. 
Sec. 20-280. - Careless driving. 
    Any person who drives any motor vehicle in a careless and imprudent manner, without due regard for the width, grade, curves, corner, traffic and use of streets and highways and all other attendant circumstances, is guilty of careless driving. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:143, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-281. - Failure to maintain control. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to maintain reasonable and proper control of the vehicle while operating the vehicle on the streets of the city or upon any private road, parking lot or driveway. 
(b)  If a driver is involved in a collision after crossing the median of a divided roadway or after crossing into the oncoming lane of traffic on a two-lane street, or collides with the rear of a car which has lawfully stopped in a traffic lane or at a traffic signal, such driver shall be guilty of failure to maintain proper control of his vehicle and such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of this violation. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:144, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-282. - Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer. 
(a)  Any driver of a motor vehicle who willfully fails or refuses to bring his vehicle to a stop, or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing police vehicle, when given visual or audible signal to bring the vehicle to a stop, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, emergency light or siren. The officer giving such signal shall be in uniform, prominently displaying his badge of office, and his vehicle shall be appropriately marked showing it to be an official police vehicle. 
(b)  Every person convicted of fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days, or by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:145, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Resisting an officer, § 9-36; simple escape, § 9-42. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108.1. 
Secs. 20-283-20-292. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - KINDS AND CLASSES OF TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN HIGHWAYS 

Sec. 20-293. - Load restrictions upon vehicles using certain streets. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to place load restriction signs on the streets and roads of the city. 
(b)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following weight and load restrictions shall apply on the streets and roads of the city: 
(1)  No person shall operate any commercial vehicle exceeding 15,000 pounds axle weight at any time on any street other than a freight route as designated by article V, sections 20-440 through 20-444; provided, however, that service vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and for the purpose of providing public transportation or service to the various residences and establishments located on the above-designated streets. 
(2)  Where the condition and strength of street is such that a lighter load restriction is needed to prevent damage to the street, the department of public works may determine and post signs for the lighter load. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:200, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-294. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle exceeding the axle weight established by the department of public works, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
(b)  All trucks exceeding the axle weight of 15,000 pounds shall be restricted to the streets shown in section 20-441, except where local pickups and deliveries require travel on other routes. The department of public works shall erect signs on each of the streets shown in section 20-441 designating each of such streets as a truck route, and when such signs have been so erected, no truck exceeding an axle weight of 15,000 pounds shall be operated on any other streets than those set forth in section 20-441, except for the purpose of local pickups and deliveries as provided above. Where pickups and deliveries are required to be made, they shall be made in a direct traffic pattern from the nearest designated truck route. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:201, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-295. - Moving houses and heavy equipment regulated; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to move any house or heavy equipment over the streets and roads of this city between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. without a permit. However, a person may move a condemned house, structure, building, trailer or edifice out of the city limits with a proper permit from the city. Further, any house, structure, building, trailer or edifice which is moved into the city must be approved by the city inspector prior to its placement within the city limits. Disclosure of the location of the condemned building must be given to the city inspector. 
(b)  The terms "house" and "heavy equipment," as used above, shall refer only to those structures or equipment which require two or more lanes of travel space and/or the raising or removal of overhead lines and wires for movement; provided, that such terms shall also apply to any moving vehicle which, under normal city driving conditions, cannot reach and maintain a speed of at least 25 miles per hour, assuming no other obstacles require lower speed. 
(c)  The violation of the above shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor the violator shall, at the discretion of the judge, be subject to a fine of $100.00 and/or ten) days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:204, 12-11-84; Amend of 2-13-90) 
Sec. 20-296. - Obstruction of street. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful to obstruct a highway of commerce intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner by the placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, navigable waterway, road, street, highway, thoroughfare or runway of an airport which will render movement thereon more difficult. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:205, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Obstructing public passages, R.S. 14:100.1. 
Secs. 20-297-20-306. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and bicycles, R.S. 32:190 et seq. 

Sec. 20-307. - Effect of regulations. 
(a)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this division. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this division. 
(c)  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:225.1, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-308. - Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring risks of the road applicable to the driver of the vehicle, except as to special regulations in this division and except as to those provisions of laws and/ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20-225.2, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:194. 
Sec. 20-309. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, sign and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:225.3, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-310. - Riding on bicycles. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time that the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:225.4, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:195. 
Sec. 20-311. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:225.5, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:197. 
Sec. 20-312. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:225.6, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Speed restrictions for motor vehicles, § 20-262 et seq. 
Sec. 20-313. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area, and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:226, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions pertaining to motor vehicles, § 20-235. 
Sec. 20-314. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:227, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Riding on moving railroad stock by unauthorized persons prohibited, § 9-178; clinging to motor vehicles by persons outside vehicle prohibited, § 20-89; motorcycles clinging to motor vehicles prohibited, § 20-333. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:196. 
Sec. 20-315. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:228, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-316. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:229, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Authority of police to impound bicycles left unattended, § 20-112. 
Sec. 20-317. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  Whenever any person rides a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signals before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:230, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-318. - Lamps and other equipment on bicycles. 
(a)  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights of a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the brake wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:231, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:329. 
Sec. 20-319. - Penalty. 
(a)  Every person over the age of 17 years convicted of a violation of any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine of not more than $25.00 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days. 
(b)  Persons under 17 years of age in violation of any provisions of this division may be charged before the juvenile division of the city court. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:232, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-320-20-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - SPECIAL RULES FOR MOTORCYCLES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and bicycles, R.S. 32:190 et seq. 

Sec. 20-330. - Traffic laws apply to persons operating motorcycles. 
    Every person operating a motorcycle shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter, except as to special regulations in this division and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:240, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions for bicyclists, § 20-308. 
Sec. 20-331. - Riding on motorcycles. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle or other article which prevents him from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
(d)  No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:241, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions for bicyclists, § 20-310. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:191. 
Sec. 20-332. - Operating motorcycles on roadways laned for traffic. 
(a)  All motorcycles are entitled to full use of a lane and no motor vehicles shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorcycle of the full use of a lane. This subsection shall not apply to motorcycles operated two abreast in a single lane. 
(b)  The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle overtaken. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorcycle between the lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
(d)  Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane. 
(e)  Paragraphs (b) and (c) shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:242, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:191.1. 
Sec. 20-333. - Clinging to other vehicles. 
    No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or the motorcycle to any other vehicle on a street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:243, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Riding on moving railroad stock by unauthorized persons prohibited, § 9-178; clinging to motor vehicles by persons outside vehicle prohibited, § 20-89; clinging to motor vehicles by persons riding bicycles prohibited, § 20-314. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:196. 
Sec. 20-334. - Footrests and handlebars. 
(a)  Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a side-car or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for such passenger. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars more than 15 inches in height above that portion of the seat occupied by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:244, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:191.3. 
Sec. 20-335. - Equipment for motorcycle riders. 
(a)  No person shall operate or ride upon a motorcycle unless he is wearing protective headgear which complies with the standards established by the state under the State Highway Regulatory Act. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorcycle unless he is wearing an eye-protective device of a type approved by the state under the State Highway Regulatory Act. 
(c)  Paragraph (b) shall not apply to persons riding within an enclosed cab, or to those operating a motorcycle with a windscreen. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:245, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:190, 32:190.1. 
Secs. 20-336-30-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Parking, standing and stopping, R.S. 32:141 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - METHOD OF PARKING 

Sec. 20-346. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
    No person shall stand/or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:150, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:144. 
Sec. 20-347. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)  The city shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets without interfering with traffic. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:151, 12-1184) 
Sec. 20-348. - Obedience to angle parking signs or markings. 
    Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the city for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:152, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-349. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a roadway outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(c)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:153, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:141. 
Secs. 20-350-20-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES 

Sec. 20-360. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; no signs required; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 25 feet of a crosswalk or curbline at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city traffic engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly signposted); 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street evacuation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
(15)  On the driver's left-hand side of any two-way street; 
(16)  At any place where the curb has officially been painted red; 
(17)  Within any zone or officially marked place designated as a fire lane at all schools, hospitals, churches and other places of public assembly, as well as commercial and shopping facilities, and apartment complexes; 
(18)  Within a lane of traffic that is clearly marked by lines to identify it as a lane for the movement of traffic. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  Whoever shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $15.00 nor more than $50.00, to be determined at the discretion of the presiding judge. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:160, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:143. 
Sec. 20-361. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:161, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-362. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:162, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-363. - Time limitations on parking on any street. 
    No person shall permit his vehicle to remain parked on any street for a period of time longer than nine hours of any 24-hour period beginning at 6:00 a.m. of one day to 6:00 a.m. of the next day, and the vehicle can only be so parked if parking is specifically permitted under other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:164, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-364. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; or 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:165, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-365. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides on any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(1)  The city declares that parking on St. Clement Avenue, from Thomas Street to Regina Street, and parking on Thomas Street, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. is hereby prohibited. 
(2)  The no parking designation shall be suspended during a funeral procession, provided that notification is given to the chief of police at least 24 hours prior to the funeral procession. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 12:166, 12-11-84; Ord. No. 188, 8-12-03) 
Sec. 20-366. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to provide for no parking on one or both sides of narrow streets where traffic and other conditions require and traffic and engineering surveys indicate that such action is necessary. The term "narrow street," as used herein, shall be defined to mean any street having a width of less than 50 feet right-of-way and a road surface of less than 18 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such streets in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:167, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-367. - Parking or standing on one-way streets. 
    The city is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place no person shall stand/or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:168, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-368. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    If a highway includes two or more specific roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand/or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:169, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-369. - No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:170, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-370. - Removal, tow away and impounding of vehicles parked in prohibited parking zones. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in any prohibited parking zone designated by a red painted curb. The police department is hereby authorized to remove, tow away and impound or have removed, towed away and impounded by commercial towing service any vehicle so illegally parked. 
(b)  The owner of any vehicle found illegally parked and so towed away, in addition to any regular citation and fine, shall be liable for all towing charges imposed for removing said illegally parked vehicle, such towing and removal charges not to exceed $15.00 if the vehicle is redeemed within 24 hours after removal. The towing and removal charge and any storage charges shall be paid before the vehicle is released to the owner. 
(c)  The police department is authorized to use any contract towing or wrecker service to handle officially impounded vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:171, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Duty of police to enforce traffic laws, § 20-25; authority of police to remove traffic obstructions, § 20-111; authority of police to impound, § 20-112. 
Sec. 20-371. - Parking on neutral ground, parks, rights-of-way, sidewalks and other public and private places prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited places enumerated. No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle or permit a vehicle registered in his name to be stopped, standing or parked, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law and directions of a police officer or traffic parking-control device, at any of the following places: 
(1)  Upon a neutral ground, right-of-way, sidewalk, strip of land between a property line and street curb, or other public way; 
(2)  Upon any area of property comprising parks, playgrounds, recreational areas or facilities owned or operated by the recreation and parks commission that has not been specifically designated for parking and which interferes with the designed purpose thereof; 
(3)  Upon privately owned property without the prior authorization and consent of the owner thereof. 
(b)  Police authority to impound. The police department is authorized to remove, tow away and impound, or have removed, towed away and impounded by commercial towing service any vehicle parked or stored on neutral grounds or on or across sidewalks, rights-of-ways and other public ways. 
(c)  Authority to use contract towing service. The police department is authorized to use any contract towing or wrecker service now under contract to handle officially impounded vehicles. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Whoever shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00, and/or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days, such sentence to be at the discretion of the sentencing judge. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:172, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-372. - Parking for handicapped persons; penalty for violation. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine the need for and to designate by proper signs areas on public streets and in publicly owned parking facilities which are to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing a license plate issued to a handicapped driver. The city shall determine and designate the appropriate signs and/or markings to be used to designate such parking areas. 
(b)  Owners of privately owned parking areas may designate certain spaces within those parking areas to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing the license plate issued to a handicapped driver. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than one bearing a license issued to a handicapped driver in an area, either publicly owned or privately owned, which has been designated as being reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing licenses issued to handicapped drivers where such parking space has been marked in the fashion designated by the traffic engineer. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined $50.00 for the first offense, and for the second or successive offenses the penalty shall be a fine of $100.00 for each such offense. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:174, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Parking for disabled persons, R.S. 40:1742. 
Sec. 20-373. - Parking for designated city officials and/or vehicles. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine the need for and to designate by proper sign or written communication areas adjacent to the city hall which are to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles driven by city officials and/or city vehicles so identified with the appropriate city emblem. The city shall determine and designate the appropriate signs, writings and/or markings to be used to designate such parking areas and/or spaces adjacent to city hall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a duly elected or appointed city official or city vehicle, so identified, which has been designated as being reserved for the above exclusive use where such parking space has been marked in the fashion to so indicate. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined $50.00 for the first offense. For the second successive offenses, the penalty shall be a fine of $100.00 for each such offense. 
(Amend. of 8-27-85, § 20:196.2) 
Sec. 20-373.1. - Parking for police vehicles, business and designated police officers and/or vehicles. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine the need for and to designate by proper sign or written communication areas adjacent to the Plaquemine Police Station which are reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles driven by police officers, police officials, and/or persons having business with the Plaquemine Police Department. The city shall determine and designate the appropriate signs, writings and/or markings to be used to designate such parking areas and/or spaces adjacent to the Plaquemine Police Station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than police officers, police officials, and/or persons having business with the Plaquemine Police Department which has been designated as being reserved for the above exclusive use where such parking space has been marked in the fashion to so indicate. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined $50.00 for the first offense. For the second successive offenses, the penalty shall be a fine of $100.00 for each such offense. 
(Ord. No. 098, 2-25-97) 
Sec. 20-374. - Thirty-minute parking. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to determine the need for and to designate the proper sign or written communication areas around or near the city hall which are to be reserved for 30-minute parking by those person utilizing the parking areas around or near city hall. The city shall determine and designate the appropriate signs, markings and/or writings to be used to designate such 30-minute parking areas and/or spaces adjacent to or around the city hall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in excess of 30 minutes in any 30-minute parking space, so identified, which has been designated as being a 30-minute parking space, and where such parking space has been marked in the fashion to so indicate. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined $25.00 for the first offense. For the second [and] successive offenses, the penalty shall be a fine of $50.00 for each such offense. 
(Ord. No. 1076, 8-8-89) 
Sec. 20-375. - Parking of tank vehicles or transport vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous waste means any waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, or chemical characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed, which apply to wastes identified and designated as hazardous waste by the State of Louisiana and/or United States of America. 
    Hazardous material means any gaseous, liquid or solid material which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or biological composition poses a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, the environment or property, and as defined by R.S. 32:1502(5). 
    Tank vehicle means any trailer or other receptacle used, utilized or capable of transporting flammable or combustible liquids or other materials, or any other hazardous waste and/or hazardous materials. 
    Transport vehicle means any motor vehicle, rail freight car, freight container, cargo tank, tank trailer or vessel used to transport flammables, combustibles or any other hazardous materials or hazardous wastes. 
    Waste means garbage; refuse; sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations and from community activities. 
(b)  No person shall leave unattended, within the city limits, except in a locked and fenced or otherwise enclosed area, any tank vehicle or transport vehicle containing or having contained flammable or combustible liquids, gases, solids or semisolids, waste, hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of leaving unattended, within the city limits, any tank vehicle or transport vehicle containing or having contained flammable or combustible liquids, gases, solids or semisolids, waste, hazardous materials or hazardous waste. parking a motor vehicle carrying, transporting and/or storing waste and/or hazardous waste shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 302, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 20-376. - Prohibition of parking commercial vehicles in residentially zoned areas. 
(a)  No person who owns or has custody or control of any commercial vehicle shall park or store such vehicle in any residentially zoned area. 
(b)  "Commercial vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, all motorized and non-motorized tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, tractor-trailer rigs, eighteen wheeler rigs, eighteen wheeler trailers. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the parking of commercial vehicles if they are, at the time, engaged in the following activity: 
(1)  Loading or unloading property; or 
(2)  Parked or left standing as a result of mechanical breakdown so as to allow for the performance of emergency repairs on the commercial vehicle, or while waiting for a tow operator for a period not to exceed two hours. 
(3)  Emergency vehicles of any political subdivision of the State of Louisiana or of a public utility, while the driver of such vehicle is engaged in the necessary performance of public emergency duties. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or any rule or regulation established under the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 329, 1-15-13) 
Secs. 20-377-20-382. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES 

Sec. 20-383. - City to designate curb loading zone. 
    The city is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this division are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:180, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-384. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:181, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-385. - Standing in freight loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily, not longer than three minutes, at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:182, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-386. - Loading zone designated. 
    The south side of Main Street extending from Eden Street west to the entrance to the Citizens Bank parking lot shall be designated as a loading zone only. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:183, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-387-20-396. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 

Sec. 20-397. - Application of division. 
    The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:190, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-398. - Regulations not exclusive. 
    The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:191, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-399. - Parking prohibited on certain designated streets; two-hour parking. 
(a)  Parking of any vehicle by any person is prohibited on the following streets and portions of streets in the city: 
(1)  Barker's Alley, south side, between Constitution Street and Railroad Avenue. 
(2)  Bayou Road, between Bayou Plaquemine Bridge and the part of Bayou Road adjacent to the property occupied by the Citizens Bank and Trust Company. 
(3)  Church Street, west side, between Meriam Street and Haase Street. 
(4)  Court Street, north side, between Eden Street and Constitution Street. 
(5)  Court Street, south side, between Webster Street and Clay Street. 
(6)  Eden Street, east side, between Plaquemine Street and Meriam Street. 
(7)  Federal Street, east side, between Court Street and Haase Street. 
(8)  Fort Street, north side, between Railroad Avenue and First Street. 
(9)  Marshall Street, west side, Bubba Street to Meriam Street. 
(10)  Meriam Street, south side, from Ephriam Street to Eden Street. 
(11)  Meriam Street, south side, from Oak Street to Ash Street. 
(12)  Mulberry Street, east side. 
(13)  Peters Street, west side. 
(14)  Plaquemine Street, between Constitution Street and Liberty Street. 
(15)  Plaquemine Street, south side, between Railroad Avenue and Bayou Road. 
(16)  Wilbert Street, east side, between Long Street and Plaquemine Street. 
(17)  Wilbert Street, west side, between Long Street and Plaquemine Street. 
(18)  Baist Street, west side of Baist Street from Chinn Street to Fort Street. 
(19)  Emde Street, east side and west side between Plaquemine Street and Court Street. 
(b)  A maximum of two hours parking for vehicles shall be permitted on the east and west sides of the service road between Government and Trosclair streets. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:192, 12-11-84; Amend. of 2-14-89; Amend of 9-26-89; Ord. No. 265, 5-13-08) 
Editor's note- An amendment enacted Sept. 26, 1989, revised § 20-399 by adding a subsection (a)(17) thereto. Inasmuch as subsection (a)(17) already existed, the editor has included these new provisions as subsection (a)(18). 
Cross reference- Two-hour parking on Plaquemine Street, § 20-416. 
Sec. 20-400. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
    Whenever signs are erected on any public street pursuant to schedules hereafter adopted or an appropriate order of the city pursuant to the provisions of section 20-13, regulating stopping, standing or parking during certain hours on certain streets, no person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle between the hours specified on the sign, except Sundays and other public holidays. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:193, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-401. - Parking restricted in a parking meter zone. 
    No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter zone except in compliance with parking meter regulations fixed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:194, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-402. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance of this city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty of the city to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:195, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-403. - Parking time limit on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a longer period of time than two hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and other public holidays, and upon any of the streets described in section 20-13. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:196, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-404. - Parking on Callais and Meriam Streets. 
    It is hereby declared illegal and unlawful to park any type of motor vehicle on the west side of Callais Street, between Haase Street and Meriam Street. It is further declared illegal and unlawful to park any type of motor vehicle on the south side of Meriam Street, beginning at the corner of Callais Street and Meriam Street, and extending a distance 15 feet past the Plaquemine Central Fire Station. 
(Ord. No. 15, 11-12-91) 
Secs. 20-405-20-439. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 147, adopted Nov. 14, 2000, repealed, Div. 5, which pertained to parking meter zones and derived from Ord. No. 1017 A, §§ 20:209-20:224, adopted Dec. 11, 1984. 
ARTICLE V. - FREIGHT ROUTES 

Sec. 20-440. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of a fire department, law enforcement departments, ambulances and like vehicles. 
    Freight-carrying vehicle means every motor vehicle designed for and used primarily as a carrier of freight transported for commercial and business purposes, which vehicle is licensed for 6,000 pounds or more. This shall not include pickup or panel trucks unless they are so heavily loaded with such freight as to exceed 6,000 pounds gross weight and shall never include any primarily passenger-carrying vehicle. 
    Gross weight means the weight of any vehicle and/or combination of vehicles or trailers without load on all axles including the steering axle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Vehicle means every device by which persons or things may be transported upon a public highway or bridge. A trailer or semi-trailer shall constitute a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:337, 12-11-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; definitions pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic generally, § 20-1; definitions pertaining to parking meter zones, § 20-414. 
Sec. 20-441. - Freight routes designated. 
    The following streets, highways and thoroughfares shall be designated as freight routes: 
(1)  Louisiana Highway 1: All that portion of Louisiana Highway 1 which is located within the corporate boundaries of the city flowing south (Eden Street) and north (Church Street), less and except that portion of what is known as Church Street between Fort Street and Broadway Street. 
(2)  Laville Street: All that portion of Laville Street which is located within the corporate boundaries of the city from the point of said street's intersection with Louisiana Highway 1 to the point of intersection with Short Street. 
(3)  Short Street: All that portion of Short Street which is located within the corporate boundaries of the city lying between Laville Street and D'Albor Street. 
(4)  D'Albor Street: All that portion of D'Albor Street which is located within the corporate boundaries of the city from the point of said street's intersection with Short Street to the point of said street's intersection with Louisiana Highway 988. 
(5)  Highway 988: All that portion of Highway 988 which is located within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(6)  Highway 3066: All that portion of Louisiana Highway 3066 (Court Street and Bayou Road) located within the corporate limits of the city west of Louisiana Highway 1 (Church Street). 
(7)  Highway 75: All that portion of Louisiana Highway 75 located within the corporate boundaries of the city (Belleview Road). 
(8)  Bayou Road: All that portion of Bayou Road which is located within the corporate boundaries of the city lying between Louisiana Highway 1 and Iberville Street. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:338, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-442. - Requirements. 
    All freight-carrying vehicles operating within the corporate boundaries of the city shall operate only upon designated freight routes, and comply with all requirements of the Louisiana Highway Regulatory Act, R.S. 32:1- through R.S. 32:399. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:339, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-443. - Exclusions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to a freight-carrying vehicle making delivery to a specific destination within the corporate boundaries of the city, providing said vehicle operates upon designated freight routes to the point nearest its intended delivery destination. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:340, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-444. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any operator of a freight-carrying vehicle found in violation of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:341, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-445-20-454. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARADES 

Sec. 20-455. - Defined. 
    "Parade," for the purposes of this article, is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in this city. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:350, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-456. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:351, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-457. - Same-Application. 
(a)  To be filed with police chief. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(b)  Time limitations on filing. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than five days nor more than ten days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  Required information. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designated to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(d)  Authority of police chief to consider applications submitted less than five days before parade. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than five days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(e)  Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee of $5.00. This fee may be waived in whole or in part by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:352, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-458. - Standards for issuance. 
    The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and/orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of this city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to this city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of this city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonably delays en route; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:353, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-459. - Notice of rejection. 
    If the chief of police disapproves the application under this article, he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:354, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-460. - Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:355, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-461. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:356, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-462. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and/ordinances. 
(b)  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:357, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-463. - Revocation. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:358, 12-11-84) 
Sec. 20-464. - Penalty. 
    Whoever shall violate the above parade regulations shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:359, 12-11-84) 
Secs. 20-465-20-474. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Roller skating on sidewalks prohibited, § 17-1; use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted, § 20-29; riding bicycles and play vehicles on sidewalks, § 20-317. 
State Law reference- Pedestrians' rights and duties, R.S. 32:211 et seq. 

Sec. 20-475. - Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations. 
(a)  A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals as provided in sections 20-153 and 20-154. 
(c)  At all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:90, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:211. 
Sec. 20-476. - Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Paragraph (a) shall not apply under the conditions stated in Section 20-477(b). 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:91, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:212. 
Sec. 20-477. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:92, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:213. 
Sec. 20-478. - Drivers to exercise due care. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:93, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:214. 
Sec. 20-479. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:94, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:215. 
Sec. 20-480. - Pedestrians on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrians to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:95, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:216. 
Sec. 20-481. - Pedestrians soliciting rides, business, employment or contributions of a charitable nature. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway or upon the shoulder of any street or roadway or upon a neutral ground of any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride. 
(b)  No person shall be upon or go upon any street or roadway or shall be upon or go upon any shoulder of any street or roadway nor shall any person be upon or go upon any neutral ground of any street or roadway for purpose of soliciting employment, business or charitable contributions of any kind from the occupant of any vehicle without authorization from the chief of police. 
(c)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:96, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:218. 
Sec. 20-482. - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:97, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:288. 
Sec. 20-483. - Pedestrians' right-of-way on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:98, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:219. 
Sec. 20-484. - Obstruction of walk. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful to willfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building, structure, watercraft or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein. 
(Ord. No. 1017-A, § 20:99, 12-11-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:100.1. 
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; garbage and refuse, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 15; railroads, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; design standards for public use in service areas in subdivisions, § 18-19. 
State Law reference- Public utilities generally, R.S. 33:4161 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Removal of tree branches, etc., obstructing utility lines. 
    The city shall have authority to use its discretion in removing any obstructing tree branches, etc., in regard to the utility lines owned and maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 824-A, 6-22-71) 
Sec. 21-2. - Utility pole rental fee. 
    The city shall charge an annual utility pole rental fee of $8.00 per pole. The annual pole rental fee shall be made payable to the city and due on or before July 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 164, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 21-3. - Denial of utility service for misstatement of fact. 
(a)  All applications for utility service with the city shall be required to execute a statement that utility service is not being sought for another. 
(b)  Any misstatement or suppression of fact in the statement that utility service is not being sought for another is grounds for disconnection or denial of utility service from the city. 
(Ord. No. 169, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 21-4. - Prohibition to use fire hydrants for swimming pools; utility adjustment. 
(a)  The city is prohibited from using its fire hydrants to fill any swimming pool, underground or aboveground. The residents' swimming pool must be filled with metered water. 
(b)  The city is permitted, through its mayor, to allow a one-time sewer adjustment when a new swimming pool is initially filled. 
(Ord. No. 182, 4-8-03) 
Secs. 21-5-21-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 21-16. - Water leak policy. 
(a)  The city encourages its utility customers to minimize energy costs and conserve resources. To promote this policy, the city's water leak policy procedure is set forth as follows, to-wit: 
(b)  When the water leak is on the utility customer's side of the water meter, the procedure is as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  A water leak is identified by the utility customer, city personnel, or the city inspector. A customer may contact the city light and water office to request assistance in identifying possible water leaks. 
(2)  When a water leak is identified by city, a door hanger will be left at the site with a follow-up letter mailed to utility customer. 
(3)  Such water leak repair can be made by utility customer or by a certified plumber. 
(4)  In the event the water leak is minimal, requiring very little labor and materials (for example, 15 minutes or less and only one clamp needed to stop the leak), the city may repair the water leak without charge. 
(5)  Water leak repair must be made within a reasonable time of the city's notification. In the event the leak is not repaired within a reasonable time, the city will be authorized to disconnect all utilities until repair is made. A copy of all letters and/or notification to the customer shall be sent to the city selectman of the customer. 
(6)  Upon completion of repair, customer must advise the city light and water plant business office. Customer can provide a plumber's certification as evidence that the repair has been completed. 
(7)  The city will inspect and certify the completed repair. 
(8)  Upon city certification, customer may receive a water billing credit. Such credit will be reflected in the customer's next monthly billing, if entitled. Such refund credit will not be made in a cash payment. The amount of billing credit will be calculated by the city, using the city's base cost of service for water and sewerage services. The city shall use the customer's previous water/sewerage consumption to determine the base cost of service for water and sewerage services. 
(9)  There can only be one credit per year at service address. 
(10)  Any service address that is currently vacant and such water leak has been identified and not repaired before the next occupancy, the city will not authorize utilities connection until proper repair is made and certified. Notice can be sent to the tenant and landlord. 
(11)  Any service address that is currently occupied and a water leak has been identified and not repaired, the city will not authorize utility connection until proper repair is made and certified. Notice can be sent to the tenant and landlord. 
(12)  Properties that are currently under the city's HUD/Section 8 program will follow these guidelines: 
a.  If the service address is currently occupied and a water leak has been identified either by the utility customer or city personnel, then the city will suspend landlord payment until the water leak is completed. 
b.  If the service address is currently vacant and such repairs have not been made before the next tenant occupancy, then the city will suspend landlord payment until proper repair is made. 
(13)  After the credit/adjustment is made for the customer's water usage, the file is closed. 
(Ord. No. 279, 2-10-09) 
Sec. 21-17. - City-side leaks. 
(a)  This section outlines the city's procedure for water leaks which are located on the city's side. City is responsible only for water leak repair from the front side of the water connection to the street intersection. 
(b)  In the event there is an identified water leak on the city's side, such as a water meter malfunction, which has been determined to have been registered through the customer's water meter: 
(1)  The city will notify utility customer; 
(2)  A work order is created to fix the water leak; 
(3)  The city will make repair at its own cost, and 
(4)  The utility customer may be entitled to an adjustment on the next month's utility billing. The amount of the adjustment will be calculated by the city, using the city's cost of service for water and sewerage services. 
(c)  In the event an identified water leak is determined to be on the city's side, but water usage was determined not to have registered through the customer's water meter, no adjustment will given. 
(d)  In the event the water usage is out of line due to a defective meter: 
(1)  The city will notify utility customer; 
(2)  A work order is created to fix the water leak; 
(3)  The city will replace the defective meter at its own cost, and 
(4)  The utility customer may be entitled to an adjustment on the next month's utility billing. The amount of the adjustment will be calculated by the city, using the city's cost of service for water and sewerage services. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  If the water leak cannot be located, a work order is created for the water crew to perform a complete check of the customer's plumbing for the water leak. Once located, follow the procedure set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 279, 2-10-09) 
Sec. 21-18. - Cross-connection control device or method required. 
    Each existing or new structure is required to implement and maintain an adequate cross-connection control device or method for backflow prevention as mandated under state law and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-19. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply only to this article. For those terms not defined in this article, the definitions contained in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code 2000 Edition (LSPC, 2000 Edition), and as amended, shall apply. 
    Administrative authority means the City of Plaquemine Utilities Department, or any agent, employee, officer, department, or board of the city designated to enforce this article. 
    Approved means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification or standard stated or cited in the code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and authority of the administrative authority. 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment means an air gap meeting ASME Standard A 112.1.2-1991 (R1998) "air Gaps in Plumbing Systems" or a backflow prevention assembly which is listed by the University of Southern California-Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR) as having met the requirements of ANSI/AWWA Standard C510-97 or ASSE Standard 1015-1993, "Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assemblies", or ANSI/AWWA Standard C511-97 or ASSE Standard 1013-1993, "Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Assemblies" for containment. The listing shall include the limitations, of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly must also be listed by the ASSE in Table 606 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition or other testing agency approved by the administrative authority. This term shall additionally include those backflow prevention assemblies meeting ANSI/ASSE Standard 1047-1995, "Backflow Preventer, Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly", or ANSI/ASSE Standard 1048-1995, Backflow Preventer, Double Check Detector Assembly." (These detector assembly devices are often times used on fire protection/fire sprinkler systems to detect and monitor unauthorized water usage.) 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment in fire protection system means a backflow prevention assembly listed in Table 606 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition to be used in a fire protection system which also meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and the requirement of the standard Codes adopted by the City of Plaquemine. Devices sized smaller than 21/2 inches which have not been listed by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and tested by Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) may be allowed if approved by the state fire marshal, and such device is listed in Table 606 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition. Any such device under this definition shall minimally meet the definition of an "approved backflow prevention assembly for containment." In addition, the particular type of device to be used for a particular application/degree of hazard shall be selected and installed in accord with the requirements of Table D104 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition. 
    Approved testing agency means an organization primarily established for purposes of testing to approved standards and approved by the administrative authority (e.g., American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), American Water Works Association (AWWA), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM), Underwriters Laboratory (UL), University of Southern California-Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR), etc.). 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the water purveyor's approved public water supply such as, but not limited to, a private well, pond or river. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substance into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any sources other than its intended source. 
    Backflow connection means any arrangement whereby backflow can occur. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or method to prevent backflow into the potable water system. 
    Backflow prevention assembly general tester means those individuals holding a testing certificate from a nationally recognized backflow certification organization approved by the state health officer. Such individuals are not required to be a licensed plumber and are authorized to perform tests of backflow prevention devices and methods. When such devices or methods are located on private property, a backflow prevention assembly general tester is not authorized to install, repair, or maintain such devices or methods. A general tester may perform installation, maintenance or repairs, if the backflow prevention device is on public property, after having obtained approval from the water purveyor. 
    Backflow prevention assembly technician means a water supply protection specialist licensed by the State Plumbing Board of Louisiana pursuant to R.S. 37:1361 et seq., and its implementing regulations (LAC46; LV.101 et seq.). All water supply protection specialists are Louisiana licensed plumbers who hold such a special endorsement on their plumbing license. Such individuals are authorized to test, install, repair, and maintain backflow prevention devices and methods. 
    Back-pressure backflow means backflow due to an increased pressure above the supply pressure. This may be due to pumps, boilers, gravity or other sources of pressure. 
    Back-siphonage means the flowing back of used, contaminated, or polluted water from a plumbing fixture or vessel into a water supply pipe due to a negative pressure in such pipe (see "backflow"). 
    Code. The word "code" or "this Code," when used alone, shall mean these regulations, subsequent amendments thereto or any emergency rule or regulation which the administrative authority having jurisdiction may lawfully adopt. 
    Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of an air gap or backflow prevention assembly immediately following the water meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste. Also defined as "high hazard." 
    Cross-connection means any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system, and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition. 
    Customer means the owner, operator, or occupant of a building or property which has a water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator of a private water system which has a water service from a public water system. "Customer" shall not include any residential connection used for dwelling purposed, unless: i. the residence is also used as a business premises and the home-based business or occupation involves operation of a home-based business or occupation which the water purveyor or city inspector deems a potentially significant the high hazard to the city water supply; ii. the domestic water service provided is also used for a landscape irrigation system; or iii. a separate water service has been installed for landscape irrigation and other nondomestic purposes. 
    Degree of hazard means the rating of a cross-connection or water service which indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution. 
    Domestic sewage means the liquid and water-borne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private sewage disposal system. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two independently acting internally loaded check valves, four properly located test cocks, and two isolation valves. 
    Existing work means a plumbing system, or any part thereof which has been installed prior to the effective date of this Code. 
    Fire protection system means any system used for fire protection or suppression with a direct connection to the public water supply, including but not limited to sprinklers, stand-pipes, and siamese connections. 
    High hazard. See "contamination." 
    High hazard cross connection means a cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to the public health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste. 
    Industrial waste means any and all liquid or water-borne waste from industrial or commercial processes, except domestic sewage. 
    Isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention assembly is located at the cross-connection rather than at the water service entrance. 
    Labeled means equipment or materials bearing a label or listings agency. 
    Liquid water means the discharge from any fixture, appliance or appurtenance in connection with a plumbing system which does not receive fecal matter. 
    Listed means equipment or materials included in a list published by a listing agency that maintains periodic inspection or current production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or material complies with approved standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. 
    Listing agency means equipment or materials included in a list published by a listing agency that maintains periodic inspection or current production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or material complies with approved standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specific manner. (e.g., USC-FCCHR,ASSE, etc.) 
    Low hazard. See "pollution." 
    Low hazard cross-connection means a cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. 
    Main means the principal artery of any system of continuous piping to which branches may be connected. 
    May is a permissive terms. 
    Pharmaceutical-grade antifreeze means a food-grade antifreeze such as an inhibited propylene glýcol-based fluid. 
    Point of entry means the point of connection to the potable water system. 
    Point of introduction means the point to which any additive is introduced to the water supply system. 
    Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. Also defined as "low hazard." 
    Potable water means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the state and city departments of health. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two independently acting internally loaded check valves, a differential pressure relief valve, four properly located test cocks, and two isolation valves. 
    Sewage means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is a mandatory term. 
    Section D 106 refers to the Section D marked D 106 in appendix D of the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition. 
    Table D 104 refers to the table marked D 104 in appendix D of the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition (known as the containment device table). 
    Table D 105 refers to the table marked D105 in appendix D of the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition (known as the fixture isolation table). 
    Water service. Depending of the context "water service" means the physical connection between a public water system and a customer's building, property, or private water system, or the act of providing potable water to a customer. 
    Water supply system means the water supply system of the building or premises consisting of the building supply pipe, the water distributing pipes and the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves and all appurtenances carrying or supplying potable water in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
    Water purveyor means the City of Plaquemine Public Utility Department. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-20. - Administrative authority. 
(a)  The water purveyor shall have the right to enter, with the consent of the customer, or upon the basis of a suitable warrant issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for cross-connections. 
(b)  The State of Louisiana will approve training programs for "backflow prevention assembly technicians" and register "backflow prevention assembly technicians" who successfully complete a training program approved by the State Plumbing Board of Louisiana as per R.S. 37:1367(G) and LAC 46:LV.310, all of which applies to licensed plumbers. In addition, the state health officer, through the LSAC, 2000 Edition, does accept certain persons as "general testers" per Section D108.1.1 thereof. Such individuals are known and defined herein as "backflow prevention assembly general testers." The limitations of jurisdiction/authority of "backflow prevention assembly general testers" are described within said definition. 
(c)  The administrative authority shall collect a fee of $25.00 for each inspection done by the water purveyor. The inspection will only be for the water purveyor to make sure that the air gap for backflow prevention device is in place and is the proper cross connection control device or method used in accord with Table D104 and Section D106. 
(d)  The administrative authority and the water purveyor shall maintain records of cross-connection hazard surveys, and the installation, testing, and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies installed for containment purposes. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the administrative authority and water purveyor and authorized to take additional actions which may not be specifically covered herein that are deemed necessary to protect the City of Plaquemine's water supply from potential or actual cross connections in accord with the requirements of the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-21. - Water services. 
(a)  New water services. 
(1)  Plans shall be submitted to the water purveyor for review on all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard. 
(2)  The water purveyor shall approve the type of backflow prevention assembly or method required for containment based on the requirement of Table D104 and degree of hazard. If a cross-connection is not listed in Table D104, the water purveyor shall use Table B1 of the "Manual for the Selection, Installation, Maintenance, and Field Testing of Backflow Prevention Devices" (CAN/CSA Standard B64.10-1994) as a guide to determine the type of device to require. (This document is referred to in Table 606 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition.) 
(3)  The water purveyor shall require the installation of the appropriate backflow prevention assembly or method for containment before the initiation of water service. 
(b)  Existing water service. 
(1)  Any changes of or additions to existing water services shall be treated as new water services fro the purpose of this ordinance. 
(2)  Within six months after adoption of this ordinance [from which this section derives], the administrative authority shall publish and make available to each customer a copy of the standards used to determine the degree of hazard. 
(3)  Each customer shall survey the activities and processes which receives water service and shall report to the water purveyor if cross-connections exist and the degree of hazard. Upon a finding of hazard, the customer shall cause the appropriate backflow prevention assembly or method to be installed in a timely fashion. 
(4)  For existing water services, the water purveyor may inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross-connections are found the water purveyor shall: 
a.  Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow; or 
b.  Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly or method for containment required by the water purveyor has been installed. 
(5)  Failure of the water purveyor to notify a customer that the customer has a high hazard cross-connection and should install backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment in no way relieves the customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-22. - Customer duties. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross-connections exist without approved backflow protection within the customer's premises starting at the point of service from the public potable water system. 
(b)  The customer shall, at the customer's own expense, cause installation, operation, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies required by the administrative authority. The customer shall advise the water purveyor in advance of when a device is to be tested to allow the water purveyor the opportunity to witness the test. 
(c)  Within 15 days after testing and/or repairs are completed, the customer shall provide the administrative authority with copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow prevention assembly on a form provided by the administrative authority. 
(d)  In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately notify the water purveyor of the incident and take steps to confine the contamination or pollution. Water service will not be restored until corrective action is taken and approved after inspection by the water purveyor. 
(e)  In accordance with Section D108.3.4 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition, the customer shall maintain records of installations, tests, repairs, overhauls, or replacements of backflow prevention devices or methods for at least five years and upon request, such records shall be made available to the administrative authority. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-23. - Requirements. 
(a)  Water purveyor requirements: 
(1)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the water purveyor will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the customer by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made. Ordinarily, 90 days will be allowed, however, this time period may be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s) in question. 
(2)  The water purveyor will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer or an air gap for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to insure satisfactory operation. 
(3)  The water purveyor shall notify the customer by letter of any failure to comply at the time of the first reinspection or immediately following the first reinspection. The water purveyor will allow an additional 15 days for the correction. In the event the customer fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second reinspection, the water purveyor will notify the customer by letter that the water service to the customer's premises will be terminated within five days from the customer's receipt of such letter. In the event that the customer informs the water purveyor of extenuation circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the water purveyor but in no case will exceed an additional 30 days. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, if the water purveyor determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(5)  The water purveyor shall have on file a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers and/or repairers. All charges for these test, repairs, etc., will be paid by the customer of the building or property. 
(6)  The water purveyor will begin initial premise inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of the program by the city council and mayor, during the calendar year (2005). Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises. 
(b)  Customer requirements: 
(1)  The customer shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises. 
(2)  The customer, after having been informed by a letter from the water purveyor, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and test or have tested, any and all backflow prevention devices or methods on his premises. 
(3)  The customer shall correct any malfunction of the backflow prevention device or method which is revealed by periodic testing. 
(4)  The customer shall inform the water purveyor of any proposed or modified cross-connection and also any existing cross-connection of which the customer is aware but has not been found by the water purveyor. 
(5)  The customer shall not install a bypass around any backflow prevention device or method unless there is a backflow prevention device or method of the same type on the by pass. Customers who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s) or method(s) must supply additional devices or methods necessary to allow testing to take place. 
(6)  The customer shall install backflow prevention devices or methods in a manner approved by the water purveyor and in conformance with the installation requirements of Section 606 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition. In addition, devices having an atmospheric port or discharge shall be installed such that the port or discharge point is located at least 24 inches above the highest flood level which may have occurred in the previous ten-year period. 
(7)  The customer shall install only backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the water purveyor. 
(8)  Any customer having a private well, auxiliary water supply or other private water source must have a permit if the well, auxiliary water supply or source is cross-connected to the water purveyor's system. Permission to cross-connect may be denied by the water purveyor. The customer may be required to install a backflow prevention device or method at the service entrance if a private water source is maintained, even if it is not cross-connected to the water purveyor's system. 
(9)  In the event the customer installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purposes which is on the water purveyor's side of the backflow prevention device or method, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer installed. 
(10)  The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semiannual device or method testing, retesting in the case that the device or method fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance with the water purveyor's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-24. - Required backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment. 
(a)  Water service assemblies. An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required for water services having one or more potential cross-connections which the administrative authority classifies as high hazard as defined by tables D104 and D105. 
(b)  Fire protection system assemblies: 
(1)  All proposed installations of fire suppression systems shall be reviewed by the state fire marshall for inspections to determine the appropriate type of backflow prevention devices or methods required. 
(2)  For all proposed fire suppression systems using antifreeze, a reduced pressure principle (#10 on Table D104) backflow prevention device shall be installed at the point of entry. The customer shall provide the city with the design and chemical usage of the fire suppression system. 
(3)  All existing fire suppression systems shall meet the requirements of section 21-23 above. An inspection by a fire suppression specialist shall be done to determine whether antifreeze has been utilized in the suppressions system. The inspection shall be done at the expense of the customer. If it cannot be certified that antifreeze has been used, then a backflow prevention device shall be installed as prescribed by Table D104 and as approved by the City of Plaquemine Inspection Department. Installation shall be at the expense of the customer. The required backflow prevention devices or methods shall be installed at the time of the system is repaired or changed, or within 12 months after adoption of this ordinance [from which this section is derived], whichever occurs first. 
(4)  In the event cross-connections, such as those found in using auxiliary water supply systems or in providing other water additives such as foaming agents, are necessary for the proper operation of the fire suppression system, then an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-25. - Registration. 
(a)  Technician registration. Any backflow prevention assembly technician licensed by the State of Louisiana must register with the administrative authority before performing work within the City of Plaquemine. Any licensed backflow prevention assembly technician shall include his or her state registration number on all correspondence and forms required by or associated with this article. 
(b)  General tester registration. Any backflow prevention assembly general tester shall present a copy of his/her testing certificate from a nationally recognized backflow certification organization and shall register with the administrative authority before performing work within the City of Plaquemine. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-25.1. - Noncompliance by registered technicians or general testers. 
(a)  The required backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment shall be installed in the manner recommended by the manufacturer and in accord with the requirements of Section 606 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition, immediately following the meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system from contamination or pollution between the backflow prevention assembly or methods and the water main. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to be protected from flooding. The port or discharge point shall be installed such that it is located at least 24 inches above the highest flood level which may have occurred in the previous ten-year period. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall not be installed in underground vaults or pits, unless a gravity drainage system (designed by a Louisiana registered engineer) for the particular site has been approved by the stat health officer. (The intent of the exception to this section is to possibly allow below grade installations on particular sites or lots having sufficiently hilly ground at the proposed location of the device such that when the vault or pit is constructed it may be equipped with positive gravity drainage openings as to prevent any part of the device from being submerged. A recommended design standard for such an installation may be found in Sections 606.4.1 and 606.4.2 of the 1994 Standard Plumbing Code.) 
(d)  All backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be protected from freezing. Those devices used for seasonal services may be removed in lieu of being protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician prior to service being reactivated. 
(e)  If hot water is used within the water supply system, thermal expansion shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly or method for containment in accordance with Section 613.2 of the LSPC, 2000 Edition. 
(f)  Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or methods to a suitable drain through an air gap. 
(g)  No backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be installed in a place where they would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to over an electrical panel, or above ceiling level. 
(h)  If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment is unacceptable to the customer, another backflow prevention assembly or method of equivalent or higher protection, sized to handle the temporary water flow needed during the time of testing or repair, shall be installed in parallel piping. 
(i)  All backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be installed so that they are accessible for testing. 
(j)  All shut-off valves shall conform with the current edition of the 2000 Edition, Louisiana State Plumbing Code requirements for either ball or resilient seat gate valves. Full port ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two inches or smaller, and full port resilient wedge-type shut off valves on assemblies installed in piping larger than two inches. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-25.2. - Testing of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be performed by a backflow prevention assembly technician or by a backflow prevention assembly general tester registered with the administrative authority. The costs of test required in the following paragraphs shall be borne by the customer. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be tested upon installation; when cleaned, repaired, or overhauled; when relocated; and, shall be tested and inspected least once annually. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested in accordance with CAN/CSA Standard B64.10-1994 or ASSE Standard 5010-1998. 
(c)  Backflow prevention assemblies or methods which are in place, but have been out of operation for more than three months, shall be tested before being put back into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies or methods used in seasonal applications shall be tested before being put into operation each season. 
(d)  Any backflow prevention assembly or method which fails a periodic test shall be repaired or replaced by a backflow prevention assembly technician when such assembly is located on private property. When such a device is located on public property, a backflow prevention assembly general tester may repair or replace the device if authorized by the water purveyor. When water service has been terminated for noncompliance, the backflow prevention assembly or method shall be repaired or replaced prior to the resumption of water service. Backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be re-tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician or by backflow prevention assembly general tester immediately after repair or replacement. 
(e)  The City of Plaquemine Inspection Department may require backflow prevention assemblies or methods to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement. 
(f)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall report the testing of backflow prevention assembly or method to the customer and to the administrative authority within 15 days of the test. 
(g)  The administrative authority may require, at its own cost, additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies or methods as it shall deem necessary to verify test procedures and results. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-25.3. - Repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies or methods on private property shall be performed by a licensed plumber holding a special "water supply protection specialist" endorsement on his plumbing license, herein defined a "backflow prevention assembly technician." 
(b)  After obtaining approval from the water purveyor, a "backflow prevention assembly general tester" may perform repairs to backflow prevention assemblies or methods located on public property. 
(c)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall not change the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly or method during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer replacement parts, if available; if not available, shall use replacement parts approved by the department of inspections. 
(d)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall report and repair, overhaul, or replacement of any backflow prevention assembly or method to the customer and to the City of Plaquemine Inspections Department for the form provided by the City of Plaquemine Inspection Department within 15 days of the repair. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-25.4. - Customer noncompliance. 
    The water service may be discontinued in the case of noncompliance with this ordinance. Noncompliance includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refusal to allow the administrative authority or water purveyor access to the property to inspect for cross-connection; 
(2)  Removal of a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority; 
(3)  Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority; 
(4)  Providing inadequate backflow prevention when potential or actual cross connections exist; 
(5)  Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority; 
(6)  Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly or method as required by the administrative authority; 
(7)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 21-25.5. - Penalty for violation. 
    Apart from any other penalties or sanctions imposed by local or state laws, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with Section 13 of Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Plaquemine, Louisiana. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 311, 9-27-11) 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERAGE SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances relating to sewer districts saved from repeal, § 1-5(10); sewer connections with regard to plumbing code, § 6-32. 
State Law reference- Sewage disposal generally, R.S. 33:3881 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-26. - Connection to city system required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw out, dispose or bury, within the corporate limits of the city or in the area of the police jurisdiction of the city, any human excreta of any kind whatsoever or to dispose of such excreta in any manner other than by proper connection to the sewerage system of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw out, dispose or allow to run within the corporate limits of the city, or in the area of the police jurisdiction of the city, any waste waters from kitchens, kitchen sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, clothes machines, washing machines or tubs, and any and all other kinds of waste waters usually found on public and or private premises, or to dispose of said waste waters in any manner other than through the sewerage system of the city. 
(c)  Should it be determined by the city that any place or premises by failure of its having connected with the city sewerage system constitutes a nuisance, the city shall serve notice on the owner of the premises giving him 30 days within which to make proper sewerage connections and upon failure so to do, said person shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-13. 
(d)  It is hereby further provided that in addition to any other charges in connection with the connection of sewer, gas and water lines that the provisions set out in subsections (e) and (f) below shall also be in addition hereto. 
(e)  In connection with the tap connection of a sewerage line, there shall be a fee in the amount of $175.00. In connection with the tap connection of five-eighths-inch gas line, there shall be a fee in the amount of $125.00. In connection with the tap connection of a three-quarter-inch water line, there shall be a fee in the amount of $125.00. 
(f)  It is further provided that $25.00 shall be added per one-quarter inch above the standard three-quarter-inch or five eighths-inch tap up to two inches. Any tap connection above two inches shall require $125.00, plus materials and labor costs. These additional charges shall be applicable to gas and water services only. 
(Code 1967, §§ 14-1, 14-2; Amend. of 1-9-90) 
Sec. 21-27. - Unsanitary connections. 
    Any sanitary connections with the sewerage system of the city or any changes in connection therewith found by the city officers to be unsanitary or a nuisance is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 14-3) 
Sec. 21-28. - Privies, cesspools, etc., to be eliminated after connection to sewer system. 
    In all cases where sewerage connections have been made by property holders to the sewerage system of the city the then existing cesspools or septic tanks, pits or yard privies, or other means of sewage or waste water disposal, shall be eliminated, removed or filled in such a manner as to eliminate any and all nuisances. 
(Code 1967, § 14-4) 
Sec. 21-29. - Sanitary disposal facilities required. 
(a)  All places within the corporate limits of the city where people reside, are employed or congregate, shall be provided with a sanitary method for the disposal of human excreta and wastewater. It shall be the duty of the property owner to provide and install such sanitary method of excreta and wastewater disposal. 
(b)  All installations of sanitary devices shall be in accordance with article III of chapter 6. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the occupants of all premises in the city to maintain sanitary disposal devices in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(d)  The city's duly authorized representatives shall personally inspect all sewage disposal devices and such representatives are hereby empowered and authorized to enter any and all premises in the city in the discharge of their duties at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1967, §§ 14-5-14-8) 
Sec. 21-30. - Deposit from septic tank in sewers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump the contents of a septic tank into the sewer system of the city or into any outlet which leads into such sewer system. 
(Code 1967, § 14-9) 
Sec. 21-31. - Deposit of wastes on ground. 
    It shall be unlawful for any occupant of any premises in the city, whether it be a house, outbuilding, trailer, tent or other means of habitation, to dump or throw any sewerage or wastewater on the surface of the ground or empty the same in any ditch, other than the sewerage system of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 14-10) 
Sec. 21-32. - Facilities required for trailers, tents, camps, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of property in the city to permit trailers, tents, camps or other means of habitation to use any lot, yard or other premises in the city without first providing adequate sewerage disposal facilities for the occupants thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 14-11) 
Sec. 21-33. - Disposal of oil or other waste matter into navigable streams. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drain or permit to be drained or to dispose of in any other manner, oil or other waste matter, which may tend to pollute fresh water, into Bayou Plaquemine or any navigable stream which runs through, within or at the corporate limits of the city. This section shall further apply to such drainage into storm sewers or other drainage outlets which drain into or toward such stream or bayou. 
(Code 1967, § 14-12) 
DIVISION 2. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 21-34. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this division shall be as follows: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C. expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain shall mean the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension of the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties, have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Director shall mean the director of utilities of the city or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-35. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-36. - Private sewage disposal. 
    The disposal of sewage by means other than the use of the available sanitary sewage system shall be in accordance with local parish and state law. The disposal of sewage by private disposal systems shall be permissible only in those instances where service from the available sanitary sewage system is not available. 
Sec. 21-37. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and tested by the director, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and state. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof; the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M., W.E.F. Manual of Practice No. 9, and the 10 States Standards shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M., the W.E.F. Manual of Practice No. 9, and the 10 States Standards. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-38. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quality, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc. either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewerage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration of such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treat ability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
a.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F, 65 degrees C. 
b.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees F, zero and 65 degrees C. 
c.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
d.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
e.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, cyanide, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director and/or the Office of Water Resources, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. 
f.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
g.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
h.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of (9.5). 
i.  Materials which exert or cause: 
(i)  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
(ii)  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(iii)  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirement in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
(iv)  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" and defined herein. 
j.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
k.  Waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l. 
(5)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 21-38, and which in the judgment of the director, and/or the Office of Water Resources, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
a.  Reject the wastes, 
b.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, 
c.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
d.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 21-67. 
If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director, and the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(6)  Grease, oil, sand interceptors and/or other appropriate devices shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for single family private living quarters. All interceptors and/or other appropriate devices shall be a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to the readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(7)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(8)  When required by the director, the owner of any property services by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(9)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(10)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial or commercial concern whereby a commercial or industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment thereof, by the industrial or commercial concern. The amount of payment shall be determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 239, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 21-39. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-40. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division. The director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and sources of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 21-38(c)(9). 
(c)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-41. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this division except section 21-39 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 21-38, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 224, 11-8-05) 
Secs. 21-42-21-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 21-46-21-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, § 2-1 et seq.; personnel board, § 2-64 et seq.; playground and recreation board, § 14-16 et seq.; municipal planning commission, § 15-16 et seq.; regional planning commission, § 15-46 et seq.; planning board of adjustment, § 15-61 et seq. 

Sec. 21-55.1. - Creation; number; appointment. 
    There is hereby created a municipal industrial advisory committee, which shall consist of seven members, which may consist of individuals or corporations, all to be appointed by the mayor and with the advice and consent of the board of selectmen of the city. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-1, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.2. - Qualifications and terms of office compensation. 
    All members shall have education or experience in electrical, chemical or mechanical engineering, instrumentation or financial management, or other needed expertise in the operation of utility systems. All members shall serve until their resignation or removal by the board of selectmen. All members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 948-A § 19-2, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.3. - Organization. 
    Immediately after the appointment of the industrial advisory committee they shall meet and organize by electing from their members a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. They shall then formulate and adopt rules for transacting business and shall keep a record of its findings, determinations and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-3, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.4. - Expenses; liabilities. 
    The city shall assume all expenses incurred by the committee, upon request and approval by the board, and shall assume all liabilities incurred by said committee or its members while acting in their official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-4, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.5. - Powers. 
    The committee as a whole or through any of its members shall have the power to inspect or examine any equipment, documents or other related matter in regard to the electrical utility system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-5, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.6. - Purpose and function. 
    The purpose of the industrial advisory committee shall be to advise and assist the city in operating and maintaining its electrical utility system. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-6, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.7. - Recommendations. 
    Recommendations and suggestions formulated by the committee concerning the improvement of the operation of the Plaquemine Utility System shall be submitted in writing to the mayor and board of selectmen for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-7, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.8. - Commitment by the city. 
(a)  The city shall be committed to respect and evaluate without prejudice the opinions and recommendations of the industrial advisory committee. 
(b)  The city shall acknowledge the goodwill and generosity of those institutions and individuals who contribute their expertise to the industrial advisory committee. 
(c)  At no time will the city criticize any institution concerning its role or membership in the industrial advisory committee. 
(d)  Contributing institutions and members associated with the industrial advisory committee shall respect the confidentiality of information they receive while associated with said committee. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-8, 8-26-80) 
Sec. 21-55.9. - Goals. 
    It shall be the goal of the industrial advisory committee to increase the output, efficiency and maintenance of the Plaquemine Utility System, and to resolve the financial practicability of operating the Plaquemine Utility System at its obtainable efficiency. 
(Ord. No. 948-A, § 19-9, 8-26-80) 
ARTICLE V. - GAS 
(RESERVED) 

Secs. 21-56-21-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 21-67. - Minimum security deposit schedule and refunds; temporary utility services. 
(a)  At the time application is made for utility service, the applicant must deposit with the city as a security deposit at its office, for which receipt shall be given, an amount as stated or computed below: 
(1)  Residential water service (each separate meter shall constitute a separate account) ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Residential electric service (each separate meter shall constitute a separate account) ..... 125.00 
(3)  Residential gas service (each separate meter shall constitute a separate account) ..... 100.00 
(4)  Residential rental house/apartment water service (each separate meter shall constitute a separate account) ..... 50.00 
(5)  Residential rental house/apartment electric service (each separate meter shall constitute a separate account) ..... 150.00 
(6)  Residential rental house/apartment gas service (each separate meter shall constitute a separate account) ..... 100.00 
(7)  Commercial utility deposit. Security deposits for new commercial utility service shall be computed as follows: 
a.  If a new commercial customer's estimated average monthly balance for electrical, water and gas service, as determined solely by the city, is determined to be under $400.00 per month, the commercial customer's utility deposit shall be as follows: 
1.  Electrical service ..... $ 175.00 
2.  Gas service ..... 125.00 
3.  Water service ..... 100.00 
b.  If a new commercial customer's estimated average monthly balance for electrical, water and gas service, as determined solely by the city, is determined to be greater than $400.00 per month but less than $800.00, per month, the commercial customer's utility deposit shall be two months of the commercial customer's estimated average monthly balance. 
c.  If a new commercial customer's projected average monthly balance for electrical, water and gas service, as determined solely by the city, is determined to be greater than $800.00, per month, the commercial customer's utility deposit shall be obligated and required to obtain a bond executed by the commercial customer as principal and a solvent surety company qualified to do business in the State of Louisiana as surety, conditioned that the principal therein shall timely and faithfully pay to the city any and all sums due for utility services. Upon expiration, said bond shall be renewed. Failure to renew shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of services or other action deemed necessary by the city. In no event shall a surety bond executed by a personal surety be permitted to substitute for the required security deposit. 
1.  The commercial customer may substitute an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution located within the corporate limits of the city in instead of the surety bond required in subsection (7)c. 
2.  In the event the commercial customer is unable to obtain a surety bond as required in subsection (7)c. or an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution located within the corporate limits of the city, the commercial customer's utility deposits shall be two months of the commercial customer's estimated average monthly balance. 
(b)  Upon termination of utility services or upon filing either voluntary or involuntary, a petition for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code, the security deposits thus provided for shall be applied to any remaining utility charges outstanding at the time of final customer disconnect or considered prepetition debt under the United States Bankruptcy Code. After application of such funds to the remaining utility charges, any surplus shall be applied toward the payment of any other outstanding financial obligations that the customer has with the city. 
(c)  Solely within the discretion of the city, residential customer hardship utility deposits may be permitted. However, the residential customer's hardship electric service deposit must be paid in full at the time of connection. The residential customer's hardship gas and water deposits shall be paid within 60 days after connection. Residential rental house/apartment utility applicants shall not be permitted hardship utility deposits. 
(1)  In the event residential customers and/or residential rental house/apartment utility applicant has a previous balance for utility services with the city, the residential customer and/or residential rental house/apartment utility applicant shall be required to completely satisfy the outstanding balance due the city and make full utility deposits before connections. 
(d)  Effective June 1, 1981, and thereafter, the utility collector of revenue may authorize refunds of security deposits on residential customers who have established a good payment record. To qualify for such a refund of deposits, the customer must have maintained his account on a current basis for a minimum period of at least 48 consecutive months. Residents or customers who have established a good payment record as provided for in this subsection shall be permitted to transfer their good payment record from one account to another in the event of a change of address and without the necessity of furnishing a new security deposit, and they shall likewise be permitted to add service at their existing resident without having to furnish a new or additional security deposit. 
(e)  In the event any residential customer or commercial customer establishing a good payment record as outlined in subsection (d) hereinabove should later fail to maintain their account on a current basis and such service is discontinued in accordance with the provisions for such action set forth elsewhere in this article, then and in that event, the customer shall be required to post the security deposit, and/or the bond in lieu thereof, at the time such service is reconnected to the residence or commercial place of business and such security deposit or bond shall be required until the customer has reestablished a good payment record for the consecutive months outlined in subsection (d) above, multiplied by two. 
(f)  Temporary utility services are utility services provided to customers for temporary work/vacancy of rental property or new construction and utility services are for a short period of time. 
(1)  Fees for temporary utility services are: 
a.  Contractor with city license, $25.00 plus usage; 
b.  Contractor without city license, full deposit plus usage; 
c.  Owner of rental property, $10.00 plus usage occupying of the house, store or building of the prior utility customer within 30 days of the date of death of the deceased customer. 
(2)  Temporary utility service shall be for 90 days. Temporary utility service can be extended for an additional 90 days upon notification to the city utility office. After 180 days, full utility deposit shall be required, unless new construction and failure to complete certified by contractor/owner. 
(Ord. No. 957, 5-26-81; Ord. No. 181, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 216, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 223, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-68. - Rates; average monthly payment agreement. 
(a)  Utility rates charged by the city shall be as presently established or as hereinafter amended from time to time. Such rates are on file in the city light and water plant business office. 
(b)  The mayor or his designee is authorized to enter an average monthly utility agreement, with city light and water plant utility customer(s), under the terms and conditions as set forth in said agreement, on file with the city light and water plant business office. 
(Ord. No. 195, 11-12-03; Ord. No. 199, 1-7-04; Ord. No. 227, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 231, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 233, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 330, 3-20-13; Ord. No. 345, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 352, 4-14-15; Ord. No. 352A, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 21-69. - Billing. 
(a)  All utility bills rendered by the city shall be mailed out on the last day of each month and the net amount shall be due by the twentieth day of the month the bill is rendered. After the twentieth day of the month, the gross amount of the utility bill shall include a one percent penalty. Delinquent notices shall be mailed out the twenty-first day of the month and the customer will be given until the twenty-fifth day of the month to pay the gross amount of the utility bill. If the bill is not paid by the twenty-fifth day of the month, all utilities shall be disconnected on the next working day. In the event the current gross amount is not paid by end of the current month, an additional four (4) percent penalty shall be added to the unpaid gross amount. 
(b)  All accounts will be under the supervision and control of the office manager of the city light and water plant. All "cutoffs" are included herein. 
(c)  The collector of the utility bills for the city will be directly under the office manager. 
(Code 1967, § 13-1; Ord. No. 928, 2-21-79; Ord. No. 970, 1-26-82; Amend. of 1-9-90) 
Sec. 21-70. - Delinquent payments; cutting off service. 
(a)  Any consumer being delinquent in the payment in full of a utility bill issued in their name in excess of ten days shall have all services discontinued; and the account will be turned over to the city attorney for collection; and the consumer will be charged for all cost of the proceedings required to collect the balance, together with attorney fees in the amount of 25 percent of the amount collected, along with all legal interest from date of judicial demand. 
(b)  There shall be an additional reconnection charge to each customer whose services are discontinued under this section of $10.00 per service. 
(c)  Any utility deposit in the name of the consumer being delinquent under this section, shall be used to offset the delinquent utility account. 
(Code 1967, § 13-1; Ord. No. 928, 2-21-79; Ord. No. 970, 1-26-82; Ord. No. 216, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 21-70.1. - Utility agreements with delinquent customers. 
(a)  The city is authorized, through the mayor, to enter utility agreements with delinquent customers to pay back past due utility bills. 
(b)  The city is authorized, through the mayor, to enter an agreement with a delinquent customer which contains the following terms: 
(1)  Subtract all penalties from the delinquent account, multiply the balance by ten percent; 
(2)  Add the ten percent amount to the balance; 
(3)  Divide the balance by 12 months, representing the monthly amount due by the delinquent customer to maintain the delinquent customer's utility service. 
(4)  The city will not accept partial payments. 
(c)  In the event the delinquent customer fails to pay the current charges and the monthly delinquent amount, the city is authorized to disconnect current utility services and demand payment of all amounts due. 
(d)  The city, through the mayor, is authorized to adopt policies necessary to administer the above delinquent customer agreement. 
(e)  Taking into consideration the fiscal condition of the city, budget of the city, and/or past history of the customer, it shall be within the discretion of the mayor to enter into a utility payment agreement with a delinquent customer. 
(Ord. No. 111, 8-11-98) 
Sec. 21-70.2. - LaMATS Offset Claims Program. 
    Any charges levied herein which remain unpaid 90 days past the due date shall be subject to collection through the Louisiana Municipal Advisory and Technical Services Bureau Corporation Offset Claims Program. Overdue charges will be offset from the individual income tax refund of the consumer. Should payment be collected through the offset claims program, a fee of $25.00 will be charged the consumer, in addition to all other charges, interest, and penalties collected. Pursuant to R.S. 33:361, the agreement with the Louisiana Municipal Advisory and Technical Services Bureau Corporation for participation in the offset claims program in the form attached hereto is approved, and the mayor is authorized to execute it. 
(Ord. No. 137, 4-18-00) 
Sec. 21-71. - Notice for past due accounts. 
    The following notice shall be sent to persons past due in paying their utility bills: 
"IMPORTANT NOTICE 
"CITY LIGHT AND WATER PLANT 
P.O. Drawer 777 
Plaquemine, Louisiana 70764 
"(Consumer's name) _____ DATE: ____________ 
ACCOUNT NO.: ____________ 
    "According to our records your utility bill dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ is now past due. We must receive payment of $ ____________ by 12 o'clock noon ____________ / ____________ / ____________ in our office at City Hall, 209 Main Street, Plaquemine, Louisiana, 70764. 
    "UTILITY SERVICES WILL BE DISCONTINUED WITHOUT FURTHER NOTICE. An additional $10.00 per utility, reconnecting charge will be added to the above amount if services are discontinued. 
    "THIS NOTICE REPRESENTS AMOUNT ____________ DAYS PAST DUE. 
"City Light & Water Plant 
P.O. Drawer 777 
Plaquemine, Louisiana 70764 
    "In the event that you dispute the amount of this bill you have a right to have your account reviewed by the City Light and Water Plant manager; Phone #687-6841, PRIOR TO ABOVE TERMINATION DATE. 
    "IF YOU HAVE ALREADY PAID THIS BILL PLEASE DISREGARD THIS NOTICE." 
(Ord. No. 917, 11-22-77) 
Sec. 21-72. - Parties occupying or vacating premises to be responsible for light and water bills; deceased customers. 
(a)  The party(ies) occupying a house, store or building wherein utilities are being furnished by the city shall be held responsible for the utility bills, and shall notify the city utility office of his/her/its/their vacating or occupying of the house, store or building. 
(b)  The party(ies) occupying a house, store, or building, whose prior utility customer is deceased, wherein utilities are being furnished by the city shall be held responsible for the utility bills, and shall notify the city utility office of his/her/its/their occupying of the house, store or building of the prior utility customer within 30 days of the date of death of the deceased customer. 
(1)  The party(ies) occupying a house, store, or building, whose prior utility customer is deceased, wherein utilities are being furnished by the city shall be obligated to make a new deposit with the city utility office. 
a.  The party(ies) occupying a house, store or building, whose prior utility customer is deceased may have the utility deposit of the deceased customer transferred into the name of the party(ies) occupying the house, store or building. 
b.  The party(ies) occupying a house, store or building, in the event the deceased customer's utility deposit is transferred into the name of the party(ies) occupying the house, store, or building shall execute an agreement with the city to hold the city harmless from any and all liability from any and all claims, demands, damages, causes of actions, suits, interventions, costs, attorneys fees, liens or other legal action that might be brought against said city and its insurers by themselves and/or any person, form or corporation on their behalf arising out of or directly or indirectly connected with the aforementioned transfer of the deceased person's utility deposit into the name of the party(ies) occupying the house, store or building and others, including any and all claims that may be asserted by way of indemnity or contribution based upon contract, tort or otherwise, and further including but not limited to any claim brought by any entity or person based on or arising under common law, civil law or equity. 
(2)  In the event the party(ies) occupying a house, store, or building, whose prior utility customer is deceased, do not comply with the provisions of this section, the city is authorized to disconnect utility services to the deceased customer's house, store or building. 
(c)  There shall be exempted from this section the surviving spouse when the utility services are delivered to the spouse's family home. 
(d)  The city shall not be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any person legally entitled to the possession and/or ownership of the utility deposit of the deceased person for transferring the utility deposit to the party(ies) occupying the house, store or building. 
(Code 1967, § 13-2; Ord. No. 222, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 21-73. - Third-party notification. 
(a)  Any utility customer so desiring may designate a third person to be notified prior to said customer's termination for any reason. 
(b)  Any designation of a third person must be in writing giving the full name, address and telephone number of said person. 
(c)  Designation as a third person will not be considered in any manner to subject said person to financial liability for said consumer's bill. 
(Ord. No. 970, 1-26-82) 
Sec. 21-74. - Appeal rights. 
    Each customer's bill shall contain, in legible form, a notice advising said customer of his appeal rights in regard to said bill, as follows: 
"IMPORTANT NOTICE 
    "This bill is due on or before the 20th day of the month it is rendered, and is payable at City Hall, 209 Main Street, Plaquemine, Louisiana 70764. 
    "Any customer being delinquent in payment in full of any utility bill in excess of 10 days shall have all utility services discontinued without further notice. 
    "An additional $10.00 per utility, reconnecting charge will be added if services are discontinued. 
    "In the event that you dispute the amount of this bill you have a right to have your account reviewed by the City Light and Water Plant Manager; Phone No. 687-6841, prior to the expiration of the above termination period." 
(Ord. No. 970, 1-26-82) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 21-73. 
Sec. 21-75. - Security lights. 
(a)  Should the consumer request a security light to be provided by the city light and water plant, the consumer shall be responsible for the following costs, fees and service charges. Whenever the city light and water plant installs a security light with a pole furnished by the city light and water plant, the consumer shall pay for the cost of the pole, ten percent plus $50.00. If the installation of the security light is without a pole provided by the city light and water plant, the consumer shall be responsible for a fee of $50.00. 
(b)  The monthly rental charge for a 100-watt security light shall be $8.00. The monthly rental charge for 250-watt security light shall be $13.00. 
(Amend. of 1-9-90) 
Sec. 21-76. - Bankrupt utility customers. 
(a)  In the event a utility customer files, either voluntary or involuntary, a petition for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code, the customer's utility deposit shall be used to offset the prepetition utility debt due the city from the customer. 
(b)  Within 20 days after the date of the order for relief when a utility customer files, either voluntary or involuntary, a petition for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code, he/she shall provide adequate assurance of payment for services after the date of the order from relief a deposit in the amount set forth in section 21-67. 
(c)  A customer's failure to provide adequate assurance of payment for service within 20 days after the date of the order from relief a deposit in the amount set forth in section 21-67 shall constitute grounds for the city to refuse and/or discontinue utility service to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 216, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 21-77. - Service to net metering facilities. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "net metering" shall mean the generation of electric power by an electric customer of the city's utility system (system) and the measurement of electric energy flow both into and out of the customer's facilities for the purpose of offsetting the customer's liability for electric energy from the system by the customer's production of electric energy. 
(b)  Net metering facilities shall be permitted to interconnect with the system only in conformity with such terms and conditions as may be specified by the mayor or his designee. The mayor or his designee may require any customer desiring to interconnect net metering facilities with the system to execute an interconnection agreement with the system, and the mayor or his designee is hereby authorized to execute such agreements on behalf of the system and the city. The interconnection agreement shall contain such terms and conditions which the city considers necessary to permit the interconnection of net metering facilities to the system. Such terms and conditions may be, but are not limited to, access to any and all rights of ways to inspect, repair, monitor the net metering facilities, requiring the acquisition of a permit to construct the net metering facilities, the solar array shall be located on a residential lot behind the front setback line, the solar array shall not infringe on any easement or sight distance requirements and shall not violate any city ordinance or subdivision restrictions/regulation, and the maximum height for the solar array, measured from ground level to the highest point on the array shall not exceed 15 feet. The application to interconnect the net metering facilities shall meet the following criteria: (1) the net metering facility is inverter-based; (2) the net metering facility has a capacity of 10 kw or less; and (3) the net metering facility is certified by the city. 
(c)  Any customer interconnecting net metering facilities with the system shall, in all cases, be fully responsible for the protection of the system and of person and property caused by the interconnection of the customer's net metering facilities, including, but not limited to, (1) protection from harm to any personnel or damage to any equipment; (2) unacceptable levels of stability of the system; or (3) operation of the system outside of established parameters affecting the quality of service to other customers connected to the system. Once interconnected to the system, net metering facilities shall not be modified without prior notice to and prior approval by the mayor or his designee. Further, once the net metering facility is interconnected to the system, the city shall not require a net metering customer to test or perform maintenance on his/her net metering facility except for the following: (i) an annual test in which the net metering facility is disconnected from the system's distribution equipment to ensure the inverter stops delivering power to the grid; (ii) any manufacturer recommended testing or maintenance; (iii) any post-installation testing necessary to ensure compliance with IEEE 1547 or to ensure safety; and (iv) documentation is required for testing done yearly and needs to be submitted to the city. 
(d)  In addition to any and all charges specified in subsection (c) of this section, any customer interconnecting net metering facilities to the system shall be responsible, at said customer's sole cost and expense, to pay any and all costs, charges, and expenses necessary to cause interconnected net metering facilities to remain compatible in all respects with the system. The system shall not in any respect be responsible for establishment or continuation of any configuration of the system to allow net metering facilities to remain compatible. 
(e)  Monthly billing. Each month, the net metering (NM) customer shall be billed charges under the currently effective rate schedule applicable to that customer. Under net metering, only the kilowatt-hour (kWh) billing unites will be used to apply to rates and render a bill. The method of billing the NM customer will rely on whether the system provides more or less electricity to the NM customer than that customer generates and feeds back to the system during a billing month, as follows: 
(1)  If the electricity supplied by the system exceeds the electricity generated by the NM customer and fed back to the system during the billing month, the NM customer shall be billed for the net KWHs in accordance with the currently effective rate schedule applicable to that customer. 
(2)  If the electricity generated and fed back to the system by the NM customer exceeds the electricity supplied by the system for a billing month, the NM customer shall be credited during the next billing period for the excess kWh generated and fed back to the system. 
(3)  All net excess kWh credits will be carried over each month until the NM customer terminates service and a final bill is rendered. For the final month the NM customer takes service, the system shall issue a check to the NM customer for the balance of any net kWh credit carried over due to net excess generation. The rate applied to the remaining kWh credits shall be at the system's avoided cost as set forth below. 
(4)  The rate at which the net kWh credited for a NM customer at the final bill shall be net excess kWh credit for NM customer. 
(5)  The net excess credit rate shall be adjusted annually by the mayor or his designee based on the system's newly calculated avoided costs, for the most recent fiscal year (ending October 31). The new credit rate will be applied each year starting with the November billing cycle. 
(f)  The system shall furnish and install a standard bi-directional kilowatt-hour meter for NM customers. The NM customer shall provide and install a meter socket for the bi-directional kilowatt-hour meter and any related interconnection equipment per the system's technical requirements, safety standards, and performance standards. The NM customer shall be responsible for all costs associated with installation of the bi-directional kilowatt-hour meter and any testing of the meter deemed necessary by the system. 
(Ord. No. 308, 6-14-11) 
Chapter 22 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Railroads, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Municipal consent required for operation of public carrier vehicles, R.S. 45:200.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Identification sign required. 
    Every vehicle used for public transportation of passengers in every class of service shall have prominently displayed a painted sign on the body of the vehicle with the name of the person operating the vehicle; such sign to be in bold legible type. 
(Code 1967, § 17-5) 
Sec. 22-2. - Unsafe vehicles. 
    No vehicle used for public transportation of passengers in every class of service shall be used in any such service if, from use, dilapidation, wear or other causes, it is dangerous or unsafe for the carriage of passengers. The mayor and board of selectmen or any person or officer designated by them, shall have the right at any time and all times to examine and inspect any such vehicle for the purpose of determining whether or not the same is safe for the carriage of passengers. 
(Code 1967, § 17-5) 
Sec. 22-3. - No parking areas designated. 
    No taxicab or other motor vehicle transporting passengers for hire, operating by virtue of a permit as provided in this chapter, shall park on: 
(1)  Barker Street, between Railroad Avenue and Division Street; 
(2)  Eden Street, between Main Street and Meriam Street; 
(3)  Louisiana State Highway No. 1, between the south end of Bayou Plaquemine Bridge and Main Street; 
(4)  Main Street, between Church Street and Division or Iberville Street; 
(5)  Plaquemine Street, between Church Street and Constitution Street; 
(6)  Railroad Avenue, between Main Street and Meriam Street. 
Except for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1967, § 17-6) 
Sec. 22-4. - Stations required for buses. 
    All buses entering or leaving the city where passengers are taken on or discharged in the limits of the city, shall erect and provide a station where the passengers may be discharged and taken on, at some point within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 17-8) 
Sec. 22-5. - Parking of buses; authority to take on and discharge passengers at hotels. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any bus on the streets, or for any bus to stop to take on, or to discharge passengers on any of the streets in the city save and excepting buses shall have the authority to stop at hotels to take on passengers for points out of the city or discharge passengers at hotels who are to register at such hotels. 
(Code 1967, § 17-9) 
Sec. 22-6. - Exceptions to chapter provisions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any other vehicle operating under a certificate issued by the public service commission of the state or the interstate commerce commission or which is controlled and regulated by either of such commissions, nor to any motor vehicle passing through the city with passengers who have been received as such outside the city limits, provided that such vehicle does not take on, pick up or receive any passengers while inside the city limits. 
(Code 1967, § 17-12) 
Sec. 22-7. - Towing equipment and wrecker service-General requirements. 
    Sections 22-7 through 22-9 shall establish regulatory authority over those persons engaged in the business of towing and storing vehicles and/or storing vehicles in the city. 
(a)  Sections 22-7 through 22-9 shall apply to any person or entity engaged in the business of towing vehicles in the city. 
(b)  Sections 22-7 through 22-9 shall apply to all towing and businesses which receive direct or indirect compensation for towing and/or storage services. 
(c)  Possession, operation, and/or ownership of a vehicle bearing a Louisiana tow truck license plate shall constitute proof that a person or entity is engaged in the towing businesses described in this section. 
(d)  Sections 22-7 through 22-9 shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Car carriers that are capable of carrying five or more vehicles and have Interstate Commerce Commission (IOC) and/or Louisiana Public Service Commission (LPSC) operating authority. 
(2)  Tow trucks that are owned by a governmental entity and that are not used for commercial purposes. 
(3)  Tow trucks that are registered in another state having IOC and/or LPSC operating authority and that are operating in Louisiana within the laws and regulations for such operations. 
(4)  Tow trucks that are owned by a business not engaged in towing and/or storage for direct or indirect compensation. 
(e)  Nothing in this section exempts any towing company, tow service, tow truck driver, and/or towing vehicles, from any other federal and/or state laws or regulations dealing with commercial vehicles, equipment and commercial drivers licensing. 
(f)  All persons operating tow trucks shall be aware of, and comply with as appropriate, both federal and state laws governing commercial vehicle operations, including but not limited to the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations found in Code of Federal Regulations, 49 CFR parts 100 through 399, the state regulations found in Louisiana Administrative Code, title 55 LAC and the commercial driver's license regulations as provided in R.S. 32:401 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 264, 4-8-08) 
Sec. 22-8. - Same-Tow service operations. 
    All business engaged in the operation of towing services in the city shall: 
(1)  Have never been convicted or have served any portion of a sentence for felony conviction of the offenses set forth under state law within five years preceding his application; or 
(2)  Have never been convicted of a crime for which an offender may be sentenced to death or imprisonment at hard labor as defined in R.S. 14:2(4) (convicted of a felony) nor served any portion of a sentence for such conviction within five years preceding his application. 
(3)  Have never been convicted of any traffic offense and/or violation which could cause the driver to have his commercial driver's license suspended and/or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 264, 4-8-08) 
Sec. 22-9. - Same-Rotating wrecker log. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized and directed to maintain a rotating wrecker log of all tow truck operations and wrecker services desiring to participate in a rotating wrecker log program within the city. Placement on the rotation list shall be limited to wrecker services either holding an occupation license with the city or those wrecker services which are permitted by the city to hold a special wrecker permit. Placement on the rotation list will be determined by the date of receipt of the service operator's application and/or request to the chief of police. 
(1)  Any holder of a city occupational license which provides wrecker or towing service as a part of its business shall be eligible for participation in the rotating wrecker log program upon a showing of compliance with this section. 
(2)  Any towing or wrecker service which does not hold a city occupational license shall be required to obtain a wrecker permit prior to placement on the city's rotating wrecker log. Application for a wrecker permit shall be obtained at the office of the city chief of police. Any applicants for a wrecker permit shall furnish to the tax collector all requirements of the Louisiana Towing and Storage Act and rules promulgated thereunder. The annual permit fee shall be $125.00. 
(b)  Police personnel shall honor any bona fide owner's request for a specific wrecker service. In the event there is no special request by such bona fide owner, the police department shall summon the next available wrecker service from the police rotating wrecker log. Nothing contained herein shall establish a contract for hire between the city and the wrecker service. The wrecker service driver shall be held to be the legal agent of the towing service, and any verbal or written estimate of the cost of towing service shall be binding on the towing service. 
(c)  All wrecker service operators called to service from the rotating wrecker log are required to respond to the scene of the callout within 30 minutes of the call. 
(d)  The chief of police is authorized to enforce the provisions of sections 22-7 through 22-9, and is directed to cooperate with the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections relative to compliance with towing recovery and storage rules and regulations of that department. In addition thereto, the chief of police is authorized to suspend any wrecker service or tow truck operator from the wrecker rotation log due to the wrecker service's failure to respond to a callout within 30 minutes of the call. 
(Ord. No. 264, 4-8-08) 
Secs. 22-10-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATOR'S PERMIT 

Sec. 22-21. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or other motor vehicle transporting passengers for hire on the streets or public places in the city without having first applied for and received from the mayor and board of selectmen a permit to operate same as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 17-1) 
Sec. 22-22. - Insurance, bond prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  Insurance. No permit shall be granted under this article to any person to operate taxicabs, or other motor vehicles transporting passengers for hire on the streets or public places of the city until such person shall have first filed with the city clerk, for each and every vehicle so operated or employed, a liability and property damage insurance policy of a public liability insurance company authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of $50,000.00/$100,000.00, for personal injury liability, and $25,000.00 for property damage liability; which shall contain the stipulation that in the event any person who may sustain damages in his person or property as a result of the negligence of the person conducting such business or of his agent, servant or employee, he shall have his right of action on the policy to the same extent as if the policy was made and executed directly in favor of the claimant for such damages. 
(b)  Indemnity bond. In lieu of such policy of insurance such person may deposit with the city clerk for each and every vehicle operated or employed, an indemnity bond executed by such person as principal, and by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, which indemnity bond shall give the same protection to persons as the policy of insurance hereinabove mentioned. 
(c)  Amounts to be carried. The amounts of insurance policies or bonds shall always be maintained at the stipulated figures, and such policies or bonds shall not be void upon first recovery but shall be actionable again from time to time until the full amounts thereof shall have been reduced by payment for damages under the terms of the policy or bonds or the provisions of this chapter, and additional policies or bonds shall be furnished by such person covering the amount or amounts so paid, so that at all times policies or bonds for the entire sum required shall be carried on each and every vehicle used, employed or operated in the manner aforesaid. 
(d)  Notice of cancellation. The policy of insurance or bond required to be deposited or filed with the city clerk as hereinabove provided, shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than 30 days' written notice to the mayor and board of selectmen before cancellation thereof. Notice of cancellation shall not relieve the company issuing such policy or bond, as the case may be, of liability for any injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. 
(e)  Deposit of money or other bonds. In lieu of the insurance policy or bond hereinabove provided for, such person may deposit with the city clerk, money of the United States or bonds of the city, including the paving certificates thereof or bonds of the parish or bonds representing a general obligation of the state, or of the United States of America, in an amount equal to the amount of the insurance policy or indemnity bond required of such person under the foregoing provisions of this section; which deposit of money or securities, as the case may be shall be held by the city clerk subject to the payment as hereinabove provided for the insurance policy or indemnity bond, and which said deposit shall give the same protection to persons as the insurance policy or bond hereinabove mentioned. 
The bonds authorized to be deposited hereunder shall be accepted on the basis of their par value, and the amounts of the deposit made, whether in money or bonds, shall always be maintained at the figures stated. 
The money or bonds deposited with the city clerk shall be subject to seizure of any claimant under final judgment of the character hereinabove stipulated, obtained in any of the courts of this state or any of the federal courts in this state against the person depositing the same, subject, however, to the limitations of liability hereinabove prescribed. 
(f)  Duties of city clerk. The city clerk shall deposit the money or bonds deposited with it as is herein provided in a special account in a bank approved by the mayor and board of selectmen and incorporated under the laws of the state and domiciled in the city. 
The city clerk shall issue a signed receipt for each deposit made, to the depositor, thereof which receipt shall state the name of the depositor, the date on which the deposit is made, the amount of the deposit and that the deposit is made in accordance with the terms of this section, and, if the deposit or any portion thereof consists of securities, the receipt shall set forth a full description of the same. 
(g)  Return of deposits. If any such person shall have made a deposit of money or securities with the city clerk as is hereinabove provided for, and shall withdraw from such service one or more of the vehicles covering which the deposit has been made, and shall surrender for cancellation the permit issued for such vehicle, together with the receipt for the deposit made, such person shall be permitted to withdraw the deposit made for such vehicle, provided, however, that he shall first submit to the mayor and board of selectmen satisfactory proof that there are no outstanding claims entitled to be paid therefrom under the provisions of this section, and provided further, that no deposit covering any such vehicle shall, under any circumstances, be withdrawn by the depositor thereof until more than one year has elapsed since the withdrawal of the vehicle from such service and the surrender of the permit issued for such vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 17-7) 
Sec. 22-23. - Posting of permit card. 
    There shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside each taxicab or motor vehicle transporting passengers for hire, for which a permit shall have been issued, a permit card which will be in such form as from time to time may be prescribed by the mayor and board of selectmen, but in all instances shall contain the mayor and board of selectmen permit number and the name and address of the person to whom issued. 
(Code 1967, § 17-5) 
Sec. 22-24. - Operation after revocation or suspension of permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab or motor vehicle transporting passengers for hire on the streets of the city after revocation of the permit issued therefor or during the period of its suspension. 
(Code 1967, § 17-2) 
Secs. 22-25-22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 22-36. - Required. 
    No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle, permitted under the provisions of this chapter, on the streets of the city until a written driver's permit to do so has been obtained from the mayor and board of selectmen or their duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1967, § 17-3) 
Sec. 22-37. - Questionnaire. 
    Before a driver's permit can be legally granted the operator or driver of a vehicle under this article shall fill out and file with the mayor and board of selectmen, or its designated representative, a questionnaire containing such items of information as are considered desirable, and on such form as may be prescribed by the mayor or board of selectmen; any misrepresentation or false statement shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 17-3) 
Sec. 22-38. - Causes for denial. 
    A driver's permit under this article may not, in the discretion of the mayor and board of selectmen, be issued to any of the following: 
(1)  Any person operating a vehicle for hire where the owner or operator has failed to comply with the terms of this chapter; 
(2)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state and whose citizenship has not been restored; 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of a house of ill fame; or who is directly or indirectly connected therewith or interested therein; or who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime opposed to decency and morality; 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of drunk driving or who has been convicted more than once of reckless driving or of speeding; 
(5)  Any person who is under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1967, § 17-4) 
Sec. 22-39. - Transfer. 
    A driver's permit under this article shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1967, § 17-4) 
Sec. 22-40. - Suspension, revocation. 
    The mayor and board of selectmen may revoke or suspend any driver's permit under this article previously issued by it for any of the causes mentioned in section 22-38. Such driver's permit may also be revoked or suspended because of three convictions for violating city, parish or state traffic regulations, or for failure to comply in any respect with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 17-4) 
Chapter 23 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 287, adopted Sept. 8, 2009, amended Ch. 23 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 23 derived from Ord. No. 281, adopted Apri1 4, 2009; and Ord. No. 282, adopted May 12, 2009. 
Cross reference- Ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property saved from repeal, § 1-5(11); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public property, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Zoning by municipalities, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Title, purpose and authority. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as "City of Plaquemine Zoning Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of the City of Plaquemine Zoning Ordinance is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Plaquemine in accordance with the comprehensive general plan by: 
(1)  Dividing the city in zoning districts and regulating the use and intensity of use of the land, buildings, and surrounding space; 
(2)  Controlling and regulating growth and development to ensure adequate transportation, water, electricity, sewers, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
(3)  Providing standards for dwelling units which protect access to decent, sound, and sanitary housing and meet the city's and parish's fair share of housing needs; 
(4)  Providing adequate open space for privacy, light, and air; 
(5)  Providing protection against fire, flood, and other dangers; 
(6)  Protecting the quality of the environment; 
(7)  Conserving and enhancing the value of property; and 
(8)  Protecting residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural areas from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses. 
(c)  Authority. These regulations are enacted pursuant R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 
(d)  Scope. 
(1)  The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, addition, alteration, moving, repair and use of any building, structure, parcel of land or sign within the city, except work located primarily in a public way, public utility towers and poles and public utilities unless specifically mentioned in this chapter. 
(2)  Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(3)  In fulfilling these purposes, this chapter is intended to benefit the public as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons. Although, through the implementation, administration and enforcement of this code, benefits and detriments will be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals, such is merely a byproduct of the overall benefit to the whole community. Therefore, unintentional breaches of the obligations of administration and enforcement imposed on the jurisdiction hereby shall not be enforceable in tort. 
(e)  Illegal uses. Uses that were illegally established prior to the adoption of this chapter shall remain illegal. 
(f)  Interpretations. It is recognized that all possible uses and variations of uses that might arise cannot reasonably be listed or categorized. Mixed uses/sites or any use not specifically mentioned or about which there is any question shall be administratively classified by comparison with other uses identified in the zones described in this chapter. If the proposed use resembles identified uses in terms of intensity and character, and is consistent with the purpose of this code and the individual zone's classification, it shall be considered as a permitted/nonpermitted use within a general zone classification, subject to the regulations for the use it most nearly resembles. If a use does not resemble other identified allowable uses within a zone, it may be permitted as determined by the hearing body in public hearing as an amendment to this chapter pursuant to sections 23-116 through 23-121. 
(g)  Liability. The city inspector or designee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties described in this chapter, shall not be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the city inspector or employee because such act or omission performed by the city inspector or employee in the enforcement of any provisions of such chapter or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this chapter or enforced by the enforcement agency shall be defended by the jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting there from shall be assumed by the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-2. - Permits and approvals. 
(a)  General. All departments, officials and employees who are charged with the duty or authority to issue permits or approvals shall issue no permit or approval for uses or purposes where the same would be in conflict with this chapter. Any permit or approval, if issued in conflict with this code, shall be null and void. 
(b)  Expiration or cancellation. Each license, permit or approval issued shall expire after one hundred (180) days if no work is undertaken or such use or activity is not established, unless a different time of issuance of the license or permit is allowed in this chapter, or unless an extension is granted by the issuing agency prior to expiration. 
    Failure to comply fully with the terms of any permit, license or approval shall be permitted to be grounds for cancellation or revocation. Action to cancel any license, permit or approval shall be permitted to be taken on proper grounds by the city inspector. Cancellation of a permit or approval by the zoning board and/or the city shall be permitted to be appealed in the same manner as its original action. 
(c)  Validity of license, permits and approvals. For the issuance of any license, permit or approval for which the zoning board and/or city is responsible, the city inspector shall require that the development or use in question proceed only in accordance with the terms of such license, permit or approval, including any requirements or conditions established as a condition of issuance. Except as specifically provided for in this chapter and conditions of approval, the securing of one required review or approval shall not exempt the recipient from the necessity of securing any other required review or approval. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code or the International Mechanical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
(b)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(c)  When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning given herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory apartment: A residential unit within a residential building. 
    Accessory use: A use naturally and normally incidental to, and subordinate to, the main use of the land or building. 
    Adult day care: A facility, operated for profit or not, in which care basic services are provided through its ownership or management for part of a day to three or more persons who are 18 years of age or older, not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage, and who require such services. Care is typically provided to a given individual for fewer than 18 hours each day, although the facility may be open 24 hours each day. 
    Agriculture: The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, farm animals, livestock, horticulture, gardening, beekeeping and aquiculture. 
    Alley: A public or private right-of-way designed to serve as a secondary means of access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street; a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Amusement enterprise: A use devoted to entertainment, such as theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, pool and billiard halls, miniature golf courses, dance halls, palm reading, amusement arcades, bingo halls, and similar uses. 
    Apartment hotel: A building or portion thereof, designed for containing both individual guest rooms and suites of rooms and dwelling units. 
    Apartment house: A residential building designed or used for three or more dwelling units. 
    Assisted living facility: Any group housing and services program for two or more unrelated adults, by whatever name it is called, that makes available, at a minimum, one meal a day and housekeeping services and provides personal care services directly or through a formal written agreement. 
    Automotive repair, major: An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including paint, body and fender, and major engine and engine part overhaul, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
    Automotive repair, minor: An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar mechanical equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune ups, and transmission work, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
    Automobile rental and/or sales: A business selling or renting of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, recreational vehicles. 
    Auto service station: A premises used for the retail sale of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries and accessories, including installation and minor repairs customarily incidental to those items. 
    Auto car wash: A premises primarily engaged in washing, waging, and polishing motor vehicles, or in furnishing facilities for the self-service washing of motor vehicles. 
    Bakery: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of bakery products. The products may be purchased from others or made on the premises. 
    Beauty/barber shop: An establishment primarily offering one or more of the following: 
(1)  Cutting, trimming, shampooing and styling of hair, 
(2)  Weaving, coloring, waving of hair, 
(3)  Shaving and trimming men's beards, 
(4)  Providing facials, and 
(5)  Applying makeup (except permanent makeup). 
    Also known as men's or women's hair stylist shops. 
    Bed and breakfast inn: An owner-occupied, single-family detached dwelling unit in which a guest room or guest rooms are provided, for compensation, as overnight accommodations for transient visitors, and in which breakfast is customarily included in the charge for the room. A bed and breakfast establishment is subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence, and it is not a hotel, motel, rooming, lodging house or other use defined or regulated elsewhere in this chapter. A maximum of three rooms and six guests are allowed in a bed and breakfast; providing tourist lodging services within rooms of a residence or within a separate accessory structure on the same lot and served by the same water meter and electric meter as the principal structure. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for housing or the enclosure of person, animals or chattels, or anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Building height: The vertical distance at any and all points on the site between the base and the highest point of the building. 
    Block: A tract of land bounded by dedicated streets, which has been subdivided for building development. 
    Buffer: Landscaping, open space or walls that are used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances 
    Casino/gaming facility: An establishment primarily for the purpose of playing or operating games of chance or mixed chance and skill on which money may be wagered, for which a license has been issued by the Louisiana Gaming Control Board and includes a bingo hall. 
    Child care center: A facility licensed by the Louisiana Department of Human Services as a "child care center" and that, for part or all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, and at least twice a week, offers or provides child care to children who do not have the same parentage. Such a center may include, but is not limited to, a nonpublic nursery school. 
    Church: A building designed for public worship, including a separate parsonage or rectory and/or community meeting hall and the area surrounding and/or adjacent to the building designed for public worship used for parking and/or fountains, but excluding a school, a community athletic field, or a developed athletic field or stadium, all of which are considered distinct uses. 
    Club or lodge: A building housing an association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit common object, [such] as literature, science, politics, good fellowship, etc., meeting periodically, limited to members, with residential occupancy account for not more than one-third gross floor area occupied by the use. 
    Commercial office: A retail service business in which the service is produced or delivered in an office setting rather than a store or shop setting, such as a real estate office, travel agency, insurance agency, or property management business. 
    Condominium: A multifamily dwelling unit, within which designated units or apartments are conveyed fee simple title, with an undivided interest in the building's common elements, to include, but not be limited to, halls, stairs, elevators, roof, parking space, and the land when the building is not constructed on leased land. 
    Convenience restaurant: See: Restaurant, convenience. 
    Convenience store: A retail store of no more than 3,600 square feet specializing in limited selection of food and personal and home care items, or a combination of such items and the sale of automotive fuels, but excluding any business selling alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption. 
    Convenience store, neighborhood: A retail store of no more than 2,000 square feet specializing in a limited selection of food and personal and home care items, but excluding any business selling automotive fuels or alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption. 
    Congregate housing: Institutional housing for the aged, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for a period exceeding 24 hours, one or more personal services for adults, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, who require such services. Personal services means services in addition to housing and food services, which include but are not limited to personal assistance with bathing, dressing, ambulation, housekeeping, supervision, eating; supervision of self administered medications; and assistance with securing health care from appropriate sources. 
    Cultural building: A building, such as a library, museum, or archive which has as its main purpose presenting cultural displays for the public or has permitted educational use; and not conducted as private gainful business. 
    Day care nursery: A business or institution where organized care or instruction is imparted to children under the age of seven years. 
    Day care-1: An establishment with a maximum of five children at any one time within a dwelling not including members of the family residing on the premises. Such care may include after-school care for youths. 
    Density: The number of dwelling units that are allowed on an area of land, which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets contained within the development. 
    Domestic shelter: A temporary shelter for individuals affected by domestic violence. Such use shall be operated by a public or nonprofit entity and may provide temporary boarding, lodging, counseling and support services. 
    Drug store: An establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, proprietary drugs, and nonprescription medicines, and which may also carry a number of related lines, such as cosmetics, toiletries, tobacco, and novelty merchandise. 
    Dry cleaning facility: An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing laundry and dry cleaning equipment and pressing machines for commercial and industrial use. Also includes coin-operated washers and dryers. 
    Duplex: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other; a two-family dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit: A dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one family; provided however that the term "dwelling unit" shall not be deemed to include rooming, boarding or lodging houses or hotels, motels, tourist homes or other similar places offering overnight accommodations for transients. 
    Dwelling: A building designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. See also: single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, garden home, townhouse, mobile home, and modular home. 
    Family: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house. 
    Family day care home: A facility registered by the Louisiana Department of Human Resources as a "family day care home" and within which care is given to a child younger than 13 years old or to a developmentally disabled person younger than 21 years old in place of parental care for less than 24 hours a day, in a residence other than the child's residence, for which the provider is paid in cash or in kind. 
    Front yard: The required open space, the full width of the lot, measured from the street line and which limits the closest location of any building on the lot, exclusive of overhanging eaves, gutters, or cornices; see also: front depth. 
    Funeral home: An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment. 
    Garden home: A dwelling designed to be occupied by a single family, built on a lot line but separated from any other building by open space on all sides. 
    Garage apartment: A living unit for not more than one family erected above a garage. 
    Gasoline station: A retail business which is principally devoted to the sale of motor vehicle fuels, and which may include as accessory uses the sale of automotive lubricants, tires, batteries and accessories, automotive service, short-term rental of light trucks and trailers, and the sale of a limited range of food and consumer items for the convenience of travelers, but excluding any sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption and may be permitted also to include a freestanding automatic car wash. 
    Government building: A publicly owned facility providing government services, such as social services, administrative service and the like. 
    Group home: A facility which houses six or more residents who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption. Those facilities may offer, in addition to lodging, accommodations, meals, resident support services, counseling, guidance, and varying levels of medical care. The following group homes are defined by type: 
(1)  Small group home: A home of six residents unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption that provides a living environment for residents who operate as a functional equivalent of a family. 
(2)  Medium-sized group home: A home with more than six but less than 15 residents unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption that provides a living environment for residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family. 
(3)  Large group home: A home with 15 or more residents that provides a suitable living environment for residents. 
    Health club: See also: Recreational facility. 
    Historic district: A district designated by the city as an area containing significant concentrations, linkage or continuity of buildings, structures, sites areas or lands which are united by architectural, historical, archaeological or cultural importance or significance such that the area requires protection and preservation. 
    Home-based business: See Home occupation. 
    Home occupation: A routine and customary nonresidential use conducted within or administered from a portion of dwelling or its permitted accessory building, and which is: 
(1)  Clearly accessory to the dwelling, 
(2)  Primarily conducted by resident(s) of the dwelling, and 
(3)  Meets the standards of this chapter. 
    May also be referred as home-based business. 
    Household care facility: A facility which provides residence and care to not more than nine persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are with elderly, or disabled, or orphaned, abandoned, abused or neglected children or victims of domestic violence or temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster or financial setbacks, living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Hospital: An institution providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel (or motel): A building in which there are six or more guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation and where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. 
    In-home day care: A residential dwelling used to house and provide supervision and care for seven or more children under five years of age. 
    Industry , or industrial: A land use involving processing, manufacturing, or warehousing or the outdoor storage of goods or materials intended for processing or manufacturing or the outdoor storage of machinery or equipment to be used by the business at another location rather than being offered for sale or rent, all as distinguished from wholesale or retail trade and services. A laboratory which is not incidental or accessory to another use, such as a health clinic or a hospital, is also an industrial use. 
    Junk yard: A lot where the primary purpose is the storage of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, or the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery. 
    Landfill: A lot where the primary purpose is the disposal of ordinary waste generated by the populous of the city. 
    Large-scale golf course: Community development while providing for a more flexible placing of buildings on land, allowing for the grouping of green spaces and support facilities, and providing for flexibility in architectural design, excluding miniature golf facilities. 
    Laundry facility: A commercial enterprise where washing machines and clothes dryers are provided for public use for a fee. 
    Lodge: See also: Club. 
    Long-term care facility: An institution such as a hospice, nursing home, sanitarium or rehabilitation center, in which patients are attended for a relatively extended period, as distinguished from a hospital or other institution for acute care and short-term therapy. 
    Lot: A parcel of land occupied by, or which may hereafter be occupied by, a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces and parking spaces as are required under this chapter, and having its principal frontage on an officially approved street or place. 
    Lot area: The total horizontal area within lot lines of a lot. 
    Lot of record: A lot that is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of court of Iberville Parish; or a parcel of land that became legally established and defined by deed or act of sale on or before June 12, 1959. 
    Lot width: The average horizontal distance between lot lines measured at right angles to the front and rear of the lot. 
    Main building: A building in which is considered the main or principal use of the lot on which the building is located. 
    Manufactured home: A single-family dwelling unit constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with United States Department of Housing and Urban Development requirements for manufactured housing, which dwelling unit: 
(1)  Is comprised of two or more fully enclosed parallel sections each not less than 12 feet wide by 36 feet long; 
(2)  Was originally constructed with and now has a composition of wood shake, shingle, coated metal or similar roof of not less than 3:12 pitch, and 
(3)  Has exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site built Uniform Building Code single-family residences. 
    Manufactured home park: Two or more manufactured homes, mobile homes, or recreational vehicles used as dwelling units on a single parcel or lot. 
    Manufacturing facility: A facility primarily engaged in manufacturing of fabricated products, including the alteration, remodeling or repair of industrial or commercial supplies or consumer goods. 
    Medical office: An establishment in which one or more physicians, dentists, or other health care professionals and their allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their professions. A medical office may include a dental or medical laboratory, but may not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery and may not be open for after-hours emergency care. 
    Miniwarehouse: A business in which separate storage units are rented to individuals who are entitled to exclusive and independent access to their respective units. May also be referred to as storage-only building, self-storage or ministorage. 
    Mobile home: A single-family dwelling unit transportable in one or more sections that are eight feet or more in width and 32 feet or more in length, built on a permanent chassis designed to be sued as a permanent dwelling unit and constructed before June 15, 1976. 
    Mortuary: An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment. 
    Movie-rental store: See also: Video tape rental. 
    Multifamily dwelling: a building, or portion thereof, used and designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in such building. 
    Neighborhood convenience store: See also: Convenience store, neighborhood. 
    Newspaper: A commercial establishment primarily engaged in gathering news, publishing and/or printing newspapers. 
    Nonconforming use: A use of land or building, which use lawfully existing at the time the provisions of this chapter become applicable to such land, but do not conform to regulations as specified in this chapter. 
    Office building: A building designed for, or used as, the office of professional, commercial, industrial, religious, institutional or public persons or organizations, provided no goods wares or merchandise shall be prepared or sold on any premises, except that in an office building which has five or more floors, goods, wares or merchandise may be sold on the street level. 
    Owner: The person or entity who has legal title to property, or who has effective custody and control of property. 
    Parking: An area used for the parking vehicles. 
    Parking space: One automobile parking space shall be an area not less than eight feet by 20 feet and the access to the parking space from a public street or alley shall be provided in addition to the space necessary for the parking. 
    Personal care home: A use providing residential and support services to persons who are age 60 and over, have physical disabilities and/or have mental retardation, and who as a result need oversight and assistance with daily activities, such as meal preparation. 
    Planned unit development: Residential buildings where the entire site is planned in such a manner that the various dwelling units, either attached or detached, are arranged in groups or clusters on those portions of the site most conducive to development, designed in such a manner that each dwelling unit may be sold separately from all other dwelling units, and where all owners of dwelling units also own an interest in recreational facilities, parking facilities, landscaped open space, natural open space or any combination thereof along with other appurtenant facilities. 
    Portable bank building: Any building, vehicle or structure, originally manufactured commercially and not homemade, to be used as a banking structure. Said structure may be movable and have no foundation other than ground, concrete, wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, skirting or pillars, and may be equipped with wheels or other structure shall be considered a trailer under the definitions of this section. 
    Preschool/day care: A facility, other than a residential building, receiving seven or more children under five years of age for group care and/or educational development for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. 
    Principal use: A use that fulfills a primary function of a household, establishment, institutional or other entity. 
    Printing shop: An establishment primarily engaged in commercial printing and/or digital printing (except lithographic, gravure, screen, or flexographic printing) without publishing (except books, grey goods, and manifold business forms. 
    Professional office: An office which is not an accessory to another use and which is primarily used by professional practitioners and their assistants to perform or deliver professional services, but excluding a health clinic or a veterinary clinic. 
    Professional school: A school devoted to giving instruction in vocational, professional, musical, dramatic, artistic, athletic, or other special subjects and typically operated for commercial gain. 
    Public park/playground: A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for outdoor active or passive recreational uses. 
    Public safety building: A public building that has as its primary function the protection of the public, such as a police station or fire station. 
    Recreational facility: A facility primarily for participation by the public in athletic activities. Recreational facility includes country clubs and athletic clubs. It shall not include facilities accessory to a private residence used only by the owner and guests or arenas or stadiums used primarily for spectators to watch athletic events. 
    Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type portable structure without a permanent foundation designed and manufactured for recreational use, which can be towed, hauled or driven. The term includes, but is not limited to, self-propelled motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer. 
    Renovation: Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than ordinary repair. 
    Residential garden: A small, private scale of cultivation and design with mixed vegetation. May also be referred to as domestic or cottage garden or a garden associated with a residential dwelling. 
    Restaurant: An establishment where its primary purpose is to sell and serve meals to the public; includes cafes, cafeterias, sandwich shops; a business in which the sale of alcoholic beverages produces 50 percent or more of gross revenue is a bar, lounge and/or night club. 
    Restaurant, limited: An establishment engaged in the retail sale of prepared food and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption; a business which is prohibited from the sale or consumption of alcohol on site. 
    Restaurant, convenience: A restaurant such as soda fountain, ice cream parlor, sandwich shop, cafe, or coffee shop, excluding any restaurant offering live entertainment or alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
    Retail shopping: A store or shop engaged in the sale of commodities or goods to individual consumers for personal use rather than resale. Retail shopping shall not include, as either a primary or accessory use, automobile oriented uses, the sale, rental, storage, service, or repair of any motor vehicles, or any use separately listed in a zone. 
    School: A public or private educational institution that offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study as required by the state. 
    Self-storage: See also: Miniwarehouse. 
    Setback: The distance from the adjacent street line in which no building or use shall be erected or maintained. 
    Single-family dwelling: A detached building designed exclusively for one family; a family shall consists of one or more persons who are related by blood or marriage living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities or a group of not more than four persons living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities on a non profit, cost sharing basis. Domestic servants employed and residing on the premises shall be considered as part of the family. 
    Shopping center (or shopping mall): A complex consisting of primarily a one-story or two-story building or buildings containing not less than four independently operated stores or shops developed under one comprehensive plan where the ground-floor stores or shops generally have access directly to a sidewalk or parking lot, and where all stores and shops are served by a common parking lot. 
    Special exception use: A use for which the city planning and zoning board and the city may grant permission following a hearing and findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and provided the use complies with standards of this chapter and any conditions established by the board and city. 
    Spot zoning: The rezoning of a small parcel of land for a use classification incompatible with that of the surrounding area, for the benefit of the owner of such property and to the detriment of other owners or the community, or without any substantial public purpose. 
    Storage-only building: See also: Miniwarehouse. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground. 
    Street: A thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Townhouse: A building containing two or more attached dwelling units with no unit above another unit and each unit located on a separate lot within a development. 
    Theater: See also: Amusement enterprise. 
    Trailer: Any vehicle, building or structure originally manufactured as a movable, covered or uncovered, used for living, sleeping, storage purposes, churches or any other legitimate purposes, having no foundation other than the ground, concrete, wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, skirting, or pillars or which is, has been or reasonable may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the vehicle from place to place, whether by motor power or other means. 
    Training facility: See also: Recreational facility. 
    Transportation center: A lot which contains a train station, bus depot, local bus stops, or any combination of transportation facilities, and which serves as a main artery of public transportation. 
    Truck stop: A facility oriented to the servicing of and sale of fuel to truckers, and providing support facilities for truck drivers. Such truck stop may also be a qualified video poker truck stop facility, in accordance with Louisiana Gaming Control Board. 
    Trucking facility: A facility primarily engaged in furnishing both trucking and storage services, including household goods and special services. 
    Use: The purpose for which the land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Variance: A modification of density, bulk, area or any other dimensional requirement of this chapter where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not the results of any action taken by the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship and/or practical difficulty. 
    Video tape rental: An establishment primarily engaged in renting recorded video tapes, disks, video recorders and players and sale of recorded tapes and disks to the general public for personal or household use. Also known as movie rental store. 
    Warehouse: A building or premises used for short and/or long term storage in connection with production and marketing or in connection with manufacturing, freight handling, and retailing. 
    Yard: An open space at existing ground level between a building and the adjoining lot lines. 
    Yard, front: a yard extending across the front of a lot or plot between the side yards and being the minimum distance between the street line and the building, or any projection thereof, other than steps and cornices. 
    Yard, side: a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and being the minimum distance between a side lot line and the side of the building of any projections other than steps or cornices. 
    Zero lot line: a dwelling designed to be occupied by a single family, built on a lot line, but separate from any other building by open space on all sides. May also be referred to as "Garden home". 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 294, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 316, 4-24-12) 
Secs. 23-4-23-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Districts authorized, R.S. 33:4722. 

Sec. 23-16. - Zoning map. 
(a)  Zoning districts established by this chapter are bounded and defined, as shown in the official zoning map of the city, which, together with all explanatory materials contained thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The zoning designation for any parcel of property in the city is contained on the official zoning map of the city, as well as the individual parcel designation set forth in appendix A, attached to and incorporated in the zoning map by reference, in the official records of the city inspector's office and the city clerk's office, which is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 295, 3-9-10; Ord. No 350, 3-24-15) 
Sec. 23-17. - Zoning boundaries-Interpretation. 
    The following rules shall be used in interpreting the precise location of lines on the zoning map of the city: 
(1)  Lines following streets, alleys, rail tracks, or streams, rivers or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed to follow the center of the street, alley, rail track, or stream, river or other continuously flowing watercourse. 
(2)  Where a street or lot lay out on the ground or as recorded differs from the street or lot lay out on the zoning map, the city inspector's office's zoning designation shall be the zoning district for the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-18. - Designated zones. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into 14 districts, designated as follows: 
(1) R-10 Residential single-family dwelling only (2) R-9 Residential (3) R-6 Residential (4) R-4 Residential (5) R-2 Residential (6) B-8 Business (7) C-6 Commercial (8) C-4 Commercial (9) A-2 Alcohol (10) Ag Agricultural (11) Ind Industry-Industrial (12) HR Historic Residential (13) HB Historic Business and/or Office (14) HC Historic Commercial  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-19. - Enumeration of districts. 
    Historic district designations in effect on the date of enactment of this article, including design treatment level assignments and defined elements of design, shall continue in effect and shall be administered according to the appropriate sections of the Code. For reference, these districts are: 
(1)  Garden District-Locally recognized; 
(2)  W.W. Harleaux-Captain T. Talbot Harris District-Locally recognized; 
(3)  Turnerville District-Locally recognized; 
(4)  Plaquemine National Register Historic District; 
(5)  Plaquemine Local Historic District; 
(6)  Individual properties or sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places within the city. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-20. - Boundary of districts. 
(a)  Designation of the Plaquemine Historic District. There are hereby established under the provisions of R.S. chapter 25, title 731 et seq. as amended, the following historic district. Supplemental and illustrative maps serve as a guide, which is on record in the city clerk's office and Plaquemine Main Street Program office. 
(b)  [City Historic District.] The City Historic District shall be delineated as follows. The boundaries of the historic preservation district shall be coextensive with the city limits. Within the historic preservation district, there may be separate areas established from time to time in which differing regulations apply. No provisions of these regulations shall apply to structures or appurtenances related thereto until such have been brought within a designated area. 
(c)  [National Register Historic District.] The boundary of the Plaquemine National Register Historic District described above includes only the property south on Foundry Street, includes all the property north and south on Fort Street, includes all the property east and west on Railroad Avenue, includes only the property east on Hamilton Street, and includes all the property north and south on Main Street. 
(d)  [Inclusion of certain structures, etc.] In the determination of those structures and appurtenances related thereto which are to be found within an area, conflict is to be resolved in favor of inclusion rather than exclusion. 
(e)  [Plaquemine Historic District.] The Plaquemine Historic District is established as the area designated as "Plaquemine Historic District" beginning at the northwest corner of Foundry Street, being the point of beginning; thence traveling east to a point that intersects with the Mississippi River; thence traveling south along the Mississippi River to its intersection with Seminary Street, continuing south along Seminary Street to its intersection with Fort Street; thence traveling westerly along Fort Street to its intersection with Railroad Avenue; thence traveling northerly along Railroad Avenue to its intersection of Court Street, then traveling west on Court Street to a point in the middle of the block between Constitution Street and Liberty Street; thence traveling north to a point in the middle of the block between Court Street and Plaquemine Street; thence traveling west to a point in the middle of the block between Court Street and Plaquemine Street, west of Railroad Avenue; thence traveling north to a point in the middle of the block of Barker's Alley and Main Street; thence traveling west to Federal Street; thence traveling south three-quarters of the block between Main Street and Plaquemine Street; thence west to the intersection of the extension of Hamilton Street; thence north along Hamilton Street to Main Street; thence traveling east to Railroad Avenue; thence traveling north along the railroad track of Louisiana Highway One to the intersection with Louisiana Highway One and Louisiana Highway 988 (Kurzweg Street); then continuing along Kurzweg Street in a westerly direction to point of beginning with Foundry Street. 
    This district is also known as the Plaquemine Main Street District, which comprises the Historic Residential, Historic Business and/or Office and Historic Commercial districts. This area includes the Plaquemine National Register Historic District and the City Historic District. A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the City Clerk's Office and Main Street Program Office. 
(f)  [Locally recognized districts.] The city's locally recognized districts include 
(1)  Area one. The area designated as the "Garden District of Plaquemine" from the intersection of Railroad Avenue South and Fort Street to the intersection of Fort Street and Marshall Street, traveling south along Marshall Street to the intersection of Marshall Street and LaBauve Street, traveling easterly along LaBauve Street to the intersection of LaBauve Street and Railroad Avenue South, thence traveling along Railroad Avenue South to the intersection of Fort Street and Railroad Avenue South which is the point of beginning. It is further designated as the area of the Garden District of Plaquemine that area bounded east by Eden Street, south by Desobry Street, west by the railroad tracts, and north by Fort Street. A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program office. 
(2)  Area two. : The area designated as the "Old Turnerville District" from Laville Street to the Mississippi River Levee, bounded by Laville Street, the Mississippi River levee, Bayou Plaquemine and Louisiana Highway One. A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program office. 
(3)  Area three. The area designated as the "W.W. Harleaux-Captain T. Talbot Harris District" encompasses a portion of the entire streets. W.W. Harleaux Street boundary begins at the intersection of Haase Street and Railroad Avenue, traveling in a westward direction to the intersection of Haase Street and Bayou Road (Louisiana Highway 3066). The entirety of Osage Street is renamed to Captain Talbot Harris Street, which begins at the intersection of Captain Talbot Harris Street (formerly Osage Street) and First Street and ends at the intersection of Captain Talbot Harris Street and W.W. Harleaux (formerly Haase Street). A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program office. 
(g)  [Included properties.] The city's locally recognized areas along the boundaries include properties on both sides of the streets so designated, unless otherwise stated. 
(h)  [Regulation of locally recognized areas.] The city's locally recognized areas shall not be governed nor regulated under the Plaquemine Historic District rules and regulations. Such areas may adopt special zoning regulations or restrictions, as deemed appropriate. 
(i)  [Regulation of Plaquemine Historic District.] The Plaquemine Historic District shall be governed and regulated under the Plaquemine Historic District rules and regulations set forth herein and the bylaws of the historic district commission, as contained in City Code chapter 24. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-21. - Zoning categories of historic district. 
(a)  The following zoning districts shall be established in the Plaquemine Historic District: 
HR Historic Residential HB Historic Business and/or Office HC Historic Commercial  
(b)  Refer to section 23-37, Zoning schedule, for allowable uses within these districts. 
(c)  Where street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the zoning map, the Plaquemine Historic Commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(d)  Any property with a nonconforming use within the historic district as of the effective date of this chapter shall be accepted. If a nonconforming use ceases to function as nonconformity for six months, the property shall revert to the zoning district of the majority of the adjoining properties within the block of the nonconforming property. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 23-22-23-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 23-37. - Zoning schedule. 
    Within the 14 districts established by this chapter the following regulations shall apply: 
(1) R-10 Residential District (2) R-9 Residential District (3) R-6 Residential District (4) R-4 Residential District (5) R-2 Residential District (6) HR Historic District Residential (7) HB Historic Business and/or Office (8) HC Historic District Commercial (9) B-8 Business District (10) C-6 Commercial District (11) C-4 Commercial District (12) A-2 Alcohol District (13) Ind Industrial-Industry (14) Ag Agricultural District  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-38. - Residential districts; general provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of the R-10 and R-9, and districts is to develop and preserve single-family detached dwellings in suitable environments in a variety of densities to meet the varying requirements of the residents of the city. 
(2)  The purpose of the R-6 and R-4 districts is to permit a more intense but compatible use of land in or near single-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings which, because of size, topography, or adjacent land use, the land [is] most appropriately used at a higher density. 
(3)  The purpose of the R-2 district is to develop and preserve single-family and multifamily dwellings which, because of size, topography, or adjacent land use, the land is most appropriately used at a higher density. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses of land or a building as listed in this section shall be permitted in the district as indicated. No land or building shall be used in a manner other than a use permitted in the district in which such land or building is located, except: 
(1)  When the use was lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter, subject to the provisions of sections 23-101 through 23-106 (nonconforming use). 
(2)  When the use is a special use conforming with the requirements of this section and section 23-123 (Special use permit); or 
(3)  When the use is an accessory use. 
(c)  Special uses. Special uses of land or building as listed in this section may be permitted in the district upon review by the city planning and zoning board and approved by the board of selectmen as required in section 23-123 (Special use permit). No special use may be permitted other than a special use specifically permitted in the district in which such land or building is located, except the city planning and zoning board may allow land uses not specifically listed as a special use in the district if it is clearly similar in nature to the listed uses. Such special use permit may be granted only to current property owner and is nontransferable. 
(d)  Accessory uses or buildings. An accessory use or building to a permitted use or building shall be permitted, subject to restrictions in this section for the district in which the building or land is located. 
(e)  Size requirements. Lot size requirements, yard requirements and building bulk limitations shall meet the requirements specified under each zoning district. 
(f)  Design review. Design review by the city inspector and the city planning and zoning board shall be required consistent with section 23-117 (Design review). 
(g)  Group home density restrictions. No adult residential facility, mental retardation facility, juvenile care facility, drug rehabilitation facility or similar type community, group residential facility shall be within 2,500 feet in radius of any other adult residential facility, mental retardation facility, juvenile care facility, drug rehabilitation facility or similar type community group residential facility. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 294, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 23-39. - R-10 Residential district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses and buildings are permitted in the R-10 district: single-family dwelling. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the R-10 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123: none. 
(c)  Setback restrictions> Buildings in the R-10 district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Front Side Rear Minimum feet 25 10 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the R-10 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 9,000 square feet minimum 75 feet minimum 35 feet minimum  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-40. - R-9 Residential district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-9 district: single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplex (75-foot minimum lot width and one duplex per lot), public library, preschool through college preparatory, gardens, playground, golf courses. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the R-9 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123 of this chapter: pre-school/day care, beauty/barber shop (no signage allowed), professional office (two or less employees, including principal, no signage allowed), storage-only building, church. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the R-9 district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 25 10 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the R-9 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 9,000 square feet minimum 75 feet minimum 35 feet maximum  
(e)  Miscellaneous. Zero lot line permitted. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 353, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 23-41. - R-6 Residential district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-6 district: single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling limited to duplex (limit 60-foot width, one per lot; condominium (limit 60-foot lot width, one per lot); bed and breakfast inn, garage apartment, preschool through college preparatory, public library, public safety building, garden, golf course, governmental building, public playground/park, townhouse (limit 60-foot lot width, one per lot). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the R-6 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123 of this chapter: beauty/barber shop (no signage allowed), professional office with two or less employees, includes principal and no signage allowed), storage only building, church, club/lodge, cultural building. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the R-10 district must meet the following minimum set back restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 25 10 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the r-6 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 6,000 square feet minimum 60 feet minimum, duplexes two units only 35 feet maximum  
(e)  Zero lot line dwelling permitted. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 316, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 353, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 23-42. - R-4 Residential district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district: single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling limited to duplex (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot, see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot), domestic shelter, garage apartment, garden, governmental building, public library, public safety building, school (preschool through college preparatory), townhouse. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the R-4 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123 of this chapter: beauty/barber shop (no signage allowed), professional office with two or less employees, includes principal and no signage allowed, storage only building, church, club/lodge, cultural building. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the R-4 district must meet the following minimum set back restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the R-4 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 4,500 square feet minimum 50 feet minimum, except duplexes 60 feet, condominiums 60 feet, two units only, townhouse 60 feet, two units only, duplexes two units only 35 feet maximum  
(e)  Zero lot line dwelling permitted. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 316, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 353, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 23-43. - R-2 Residential district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district: single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling limited to duplex (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot, bed and breakfast inn, condominium, see lot width restrictions), domestic shelter, garage apartment, garden, public library, public safety building, school (preschool through college preparatory), townhouse (see lot width restrictions). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the R-2 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123 of this chapter: beauty/barber shop (no signage allowed), funeral home, mortuary, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal, no signage allowed), cemetery, planned unit development, school (pre-school/day care), sandwich/snack/sweet shop, mini-warehouse, small lawn service, small pest control service, zero lot line dwelling, church, club/lodge, cultural building. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the R-2 district must meet the following minimum set back restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the R-2 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 3,000 square feet minimum 50 feet minimum except duplexes, 60 feet minimum, two units only 35 feet maximum  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 316, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 353, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 23-44. - Agricultural district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Agricultural district: any agricultural use, but not limited to dwellings, maintenance/storage buildings and other such uses necessary for the principal use. 
(b)  Special uses. : The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the Agricultural district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123: preschool/day care; domestic shelter; small, medium and large group homes; and planned unit development. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the Ag district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 30 15 60  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the Agricultural district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 10 acres minimum 400 feet minimum 35 feet maximum  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-45. - Business/Commercial/Alcohol districts, general provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of the B-8 district is to provide and preserve convenient, pleasant, neighborhood shopping and services in a low density, low scale environment to meet the personal needs of the residents of the city. 
(2)  The purpose of the C-6 district is to provide and preserve convenient and pleasant shopping and services in a low density, low scale environment to meet the personal needs of the residents of the city. 
(3)  The purpose of the C-4 district is to provide a larger scale, community focal point, higher density shopping and service environment, where appropriate, to meet the personal needs of the residents of the city. 
(4)  The purpose of the A-2 (Alcohol) district is to provide specific criteria for the on-site alcohol consumption as the primary sales for a business. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses of land or a building as listed in this section shall be permitted in the district as indicated. No land or building shall be used in a manner other than a use permitted in the district in which such land or building is located, except: 
(1)  When the use was lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter, subject to the provisions of sections 23-91 to 23-96 (Nonconforming use); 
(2)  When the use is a special use conforming with the requirements of this section and section 23-123; or 
(3)  When the use is an accessory use. 
(c)  Special uses. Special uses of land or a building as listed in this section may be permitted in the district upon review by the planning and zoning board as required by section 23-123. No special use may be permitted other than a special use specifically permitted in the district in which such land or building is located, except the planning and zoning commission board may allow land uses not specifically listed as a special use in the district if it is clearly similar in nature to the listed uses. 
(d)  Accessory uses or buildings. An accessory use or building to a permitted use or building shall be permitted, subject to restrictions in this section for the district in which the building or land is located. 
(e)  Size requirements. Lot size requirements, yard requirements and building bulk limitations shall meet the requirements specified under each zoning district in this section. 
(f)  Design review . Design review by the city inspector or his designee shall be required consistent with section 23-117 (Design review). 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-46. - B-8 Business district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-8 district: Single-family dwelling, duplex (see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium, garage apartment, townhouse; any small retail business or service which is established for the convenience of the neighboring residents such as: Church, club/lodge, garden, public library, school (preschool through college preparatory), public park/playground, barber/beauty shop, neighborhood convenience store, daycare 1, dry cleaning, funeral home, mortuary, small grocery store, professional office (four or less employees, including principal), small restaurant (no alcohol sales and/or alcohol consumption on premises). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the B-8 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123 of this article: None. 
(c)  Setback restrictions: Buildings in the B-8 district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the B-8 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 4,500 square feet minimum 50 feet minimum except duplexes 60 feet, condominiums 60 feet, two units only, townhouses 60 feet, two units only, duplexes minimum two units only 35 feet maximum  
(e)  Zero lot line dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 316, 4-24-12) 
Sec. 23-47. - C-6 Commercial district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the C-6 district: Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplex (see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium (see lot width restrictions), garage apartment, townhouse (see lot width restrictions); any retail business or service which is established for the convenience of the neighboring residents including: Adult day care, amusement center, assisted living facility, auto car wash, auto sales, automobile parking lot, bakery, beauty/barber shop, cemetery, church, club/lodge, commercial office, congregate housing, convenience store, cultural building, daycare 1, drug store, dry cleaning and laundry facility, funeral home, gasoline station, grocery store, small grocery store, group home such as small, medium and large group home, neighborhood convenience store, governmental building, household care facility, hotel/motel, long term care facility, medical office, mini-warehouse, mortuary, newspaper, nursing home, permanent and portable bank and bank structure, planned unit development (PUD), public park/playground, printing shop, professional office, public library, recreational facility, limited restaurant, school, preschool through college preparatory, small eating establishment, general, theater, video movie rental, truck stop and casino. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the C-6 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123 of this article: None. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the C-6 district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the C-6 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 4,500 square feet minimum 50 feet minimum 35 feet maximum  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 316, 4-24-12) 
Sec. 23-48. - C-4 Commercial district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the C-4 district: single-family dwelling; multifamily dwelling such as duplexes (see lot width restrictions); bed and breakfast inn; condominium (see lot width restrictions); garage apartment; townhouse (see lot width restrictions); any retail business or service which is established for the convenience of the neighboring residents: adult day care; amusement enterprise; assisted living facility; auto wash; auto rental and sales; auto repair shop and other motor vehicular service; automobile parking lot; bakery, beauty/barber shop; cemetery; church; club/lodge; congregate housing; convenience store; cultural building; governmental building; day care 1; drug store; dry cleaning facility; funeral home; garden; gasoline station; grocery store (all types); small group home; hospital; hotel/motel; household care facility; laundry facility; long term care facility; light manufacturing; medium manufacturing (eight to 50 employees); miniwarehouse; mortuary; newspaper; nursing home; offices: commercial, medical, and professional; permanent and portable bank and bank structure; planned unit development (PUD); printing shop; public library; public park/playground; public safety building; recreational facility; restaurant (all types); retail shopping; school, preschool through college preparatory; shopping center/mall; telecommunication tower; transportation terminal; truck stop and casino;, video tape rental; warehouse. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the C-4 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123: telecommunication towers, junkyards. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the C-4 district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the C-4 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 4,500 square feet minimum 60 feet minimum 35 feet maximum  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-49. - Requirements for manufactured home parks, mobile home parks, trailer parks. 
(a)  [When permitted.] Manufactured home parks, mobile home parks, trailer parks are permitted in zoning district C-4, provided that they are built to development standards as set forth below and maintained in accordance with all applicable ordinances. 
(b)  Manufactured home parks, mobile home parks, trailer parks. A manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park shall be built in accordance with the following minimum construction standards: 
(1)  Individual manufactured home, mobile home, trailer sites may be leased or rented, but not subdivided or sold. 
(2)  A minimum site of three acres will be required, with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a publicly maintained street or road. 
(3)  A maximum density will be 12 individual manufactured home, mobile home, trailer sites per acre. 
(4)  The minimum improvement requirements for private drives within the manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park will be 23 feet back to back curb in a 35-foot width between building with underground storm drainage and pavement construction of at least six inches of soil cement base and one and one-half inches of asphalted concrete surface. 
(5)  Where only one drive is to be provided, each manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park shall include an adequate circular turnaround at the rear of the property with a minimum radius of 30 feet for garbage trucks, school buses and other vehicles. 
(6)  Minimum lot size will be 30 feet front by 75 feet depth. 
(7)  Each manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park site will have two two-foot-wide concrete runners six inches thick for the manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer location and a four-inch-thick ten-foot by 20-foot concrete parking pad to be measured from the back of curb at the front of the site. 
(8)  Each manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park site shall be provided with a sanitary sewer connection and each manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park shall be provided with a collection and treatment system, public water supply, and fire hydrants as required by the city. 
(9)  There may be established a separate or optional area for overnight campers, which area shall be provided with central public facilities. 
(10)  Where a manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park is established, a solid fence or wall at least six feet high shall be provided along all side and rear property lines. 
(11)  Any manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park developed under these standards shall provide a 20-foot side and rear yard buffer if it is developed adjacent to a residential district. 
(12)  The plans and specifications for the manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park shall be submitted to the planning and zoning board for its review and recommendation, and then shall be submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen for approval. 
(13)  Where a manufactured home park, mobile home park, trailer park is established, a recreational area shall be provided at a rate of ten percent of the overall area, but shall not be required to exceed one acre in size. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-50. - Industrial districts, general provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial (Ind) district is to allow light industrial development including manufacturing, wholesaling, research and development and limited services and large scale retail activities in the city and in such a way as to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by fostering this use where compatible with the land resources. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses of land or a building as listed in this section shall be permitted in the district as indicated. No land or building shall be used in a manner other than a use permitted in the district in which such land or building is located, except: 
(1)  When the use was lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter, subject to the provisions of sections 23-91 through 23-96. 
(2)  When the use is a special use conforming with the requirements of this section and section 23-123; or 
(3)  When the use is an accessory use. 
(c)  Special uses. Special uses of land or a building as listed in this section may be permitted in the district upon review by the planning and zoning board as required by section 23-123. No special use may be permitted other than a special use specifically permitted in the district in which such land or building is located, except the planning and zoning board may allow land uses not specifically listed as a special use in the district if it is clearly similar in nature to the listed uses. 
(d)  Accessory uses or buildings. An accessory use or building to a permitted use or building shall be permitted, subject to restrictions in this section for the district in which the building or land is located. 
(e)  Size requirements. Lot size requirements, yard requirements and building bulk limitations shall meet the requirements specified under each zoning district in this section. 
(f)  Design review. Design review by the city inspector or his designee shall be required consistent with section 23-102. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-51. - Ind (Industrial) district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Industrial (Ind) district: single-family dwelling; multifamily, limited to dwelling such as duplex (see lot width restrictions); bed and breakfast inn; condominium (see lot width restrictions); garage apartment; townhouse (see lot width restrictions); amusement center; auto car wash; auto repair shop and other motor vehicle service; auto sales; automobile parking lot; bakery; barber/beauty shop; church; club/lodge; congregate housing; convenience store; cultural building; day care; drug store; dry cleaning facility; dry cleaning; electrical generation facility; funeral home; garden; gasoline station; government building; grocery store; small, medium and large group homes; recreation facility; hospital; hotel/motel; large automobile parking lot; large warehouse; laundry facility; manufacturing facility; medical office; mortuary; neighborhood convenience store; newspaper; nursing home; permanent and portable bank building; planned unit development; printing shop; professional office (more than four employees); professional offices (four less employees, including principal); public park/playground; public library; public safety building; restaurant; school (preschool through college preparatory); small grocery store; small restaurant (no alcohol sales and/or alcohol consumption on premises); storage facility; telecommunication tower; theater; truck stop and casino; trucking facility; video/movie rental; warehouse. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the Industrial (Ind) district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123: junkyard. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the Industrial (Ind) district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions . Buildings and lots in the Industrial (Ind) district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 4,500 square feet minimum 60 feet minimum 35 feet maximum  
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-52. - A-2 Alcohol district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the A-2 district: bed and breakfast, club, lodges, convenience store, restaurant, gasoline station, grocery store, hotel, motel; applicable only when on-site alcohol consumption is primary sales receipts. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the A-2 district subject to the restrictions contained in section 23-123: none. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the A-2 district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
Required Front Side Rear Minimum feet 20 5 10  
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the A-2 district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
Lot area Lot width Building height 4,500 square feet minimum 60 feet minimum 35 feet maximum  
(e)  Special restrictions. Businesses operating in the A-2 district must comply with the following ordinances: 
    Noise. : City Code sections 13-111 through 13-111.5 (noise ordinances) apply to businesses operating in the A-2 district. 
    Schools/churches. Section 3-35 applies to the proximity of A-2 business to churches, playgrounds, schools, public library. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-53. - HR Historic District Residential. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the HR district: single-family dwelling, multifamily dwellings, duplexes (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot, see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast, condominiums (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot), garage apartment, townhouses, churches, club, lodges, gardens, public library, schools (preschool through college preparatory). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the HR district: beauty/barber shop (no signage allowed), cultural/museum building, funeral home, mortuary, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal, no signage allowed), cemetery, congregate housing, small and medium group home, domestic shelter, governmental building, public safety building, planned unit development, school (preschool/day care), sandwich/snack/sweet shop, storage only building, small lawn service, small pest control service, zero lot line residences. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the HR district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
    Required front (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Required Side (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Required rear (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
(d)  Height and area restrictions . Buildings and lots in the HR district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
    Lot area (minimum square feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Lot width (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Building height (maximum feet). Subject to Plaquemine District Commission regulations. 
(e)  Special restrictions. Businesses operating in the HR district must comply with historic district commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-54. - HB Historic District Business. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the HR district: single-family dwelling, multifamily dwellings, duplexes (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot, see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast, condominiums (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot), garage apartment, townhouses, churches, club, lodges, gardens, public library, schools (preschool through college preparatory), playground, barber and beauty shops, bed and breakfast inn, neighborhood convenience store, day care, dry cleaning, funeral home, mortuary, small grocery store, professional offices (four or less employees, including principal), small restaurant (no alcohol sales and/or alcohol consumption on premises). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the HB district: cultural/museum building, funeral home, mortuary, cemetery, domestic shelter, governmental building, public safety building, planned unit development, school (preschool/day care), sandwich/snack/sweet shop, small lawn service, small pest control service, zero lot line residences. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the HB district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
    Required front (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Required side (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Required rear (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
(d)  Height and area restrictions. Buildings and lots in the HB district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
    Lot area (minimum square feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Lot width (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Building height (maximum feet). Subject to Plaquemine District Commission regulations. 
(e)  Special restrictions. Businesses operating in the HB district must comply with historic district commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-55. - HC Historic District Commercial. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the HC district: single-family dwelling, multifamily dwellings, duplexes (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot, see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast, condominiums (minimum 60-foot lot width, limit one per lot), garage apartment, townhouses, churches, club, lodges, gardens, public library, schools (preschool through college preparatory). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and buildings may be permitted in the HC district: beauty/barber shop (no signage allowed), cultural/museum building, funeral home, mortuary, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal, no signage allowed), cemetery, congregate housing, small and medium group home, domestic shelter, governmental building, public safety building, planned unit development, school (preschool/day care), sandwich/snack/sweet shop, storage only building, small lawn service, small pest control service, zero lot line residences. 
(c)  Setback restrictions. Buildings in the HC district must meet the following minimum setback restrictions: 
    Required front (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Required side (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Required rear (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
(d)  Height and area restrictions . Buildings and lots in the HC district must meet the following height and area restrictions: 
    Lot area (minimum square feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Lot width (minimum feet). Subject to Plaquemine Historic Commission regulations. 
    Building height (maximum feet). Subject to Plaquemine District Commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 23-56-23-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFF-STREET PARKING, LANDSCAPING AND FENCING 

Sec. 23-61. - General. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with this chapter whenever any building is erected, altered, enlarged, converted or increased in size or capacity or when a lot or parcel is to be used for off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-62. - Parking space requirements. 
    Parking spaces shall be in accordance with sections 23-62 through 23-75. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-63. - Required parking number. 
    The off-street parking spaces required for each use permitted by this chapter shall not be less than that found in this section, provided that any fractional parking space is computed as a whole space. 
Dwelling unit. Two per dwelling unit; 
Recreational facility. One per 100 gross square feet; 
Hotel/motel. One per sleeping unit plus one per 500 square feet of common area; 
Medical office. One per 200 gross square feet; 
Office. One per 300 gross square feet; 
Restaurant. One per 100 gross square feet; 
Retail. One per 200 gross square feet. 
School. One per 3.5 seats in assembly rooms plus one per faculty member. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-64. - Combination of uses. 
    Where there is a combination of uses on a lot, the required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of that found for each use. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-65. - Location of lot. 
    The parking spaces required by this article shall be provided on the same lot as the use. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-66. - Accessible spaces. 
    Accessible parking spaces and passenger loading zones shall be provided in accordance with the building code. Passenger loading zones shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ICC A117.1. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-67. - Parking stall dimension. 
    Parking stall dimensions shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Width. A minimum width of nine feet shall be provided for each parking stall. 
a.  Exceptions. 
i)  Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight feet wide with a minimum of 18 feet in length; 
ii)  Parallel parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight feet wide; 
iii)  The width of a parking stall shall be increased ten inches for obstructions located on either side of the stall within 14 feet of the access aisle; 
iv)  Accessible parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with ICC A117.1. 
(2)  Length. A minimum length of 20 feet shall be provided for each parking stall. 
a.  Exceptions. 
i)  Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be 18 feet in length; 
ii)  Parallel parking stalls shall be a minimum 22 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-68. - Design of parking facility. 
    The design of parking facilities shall be in accordance with sections 23-116 through 23-121. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-69. - Driveway width. 
    Every parking facility shall be provided with one or more access driveways, the width of which shall be the following: 
(1)  Private driveways. At least nine feet. 
(2)  Commercial driveways. 
a.  Twelve feet for one-way enter/exit; 
b.  Twenty-four feet for two-way enter/exit. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-70. - Driveway and ramp slopes. 
    The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp shall not exceed 20 percent. Transition slopes in driveways and ramps shall be provided in accordance with the standards set by the city inspector and the city's engineer. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-71. - Stall access. 
    Each required parking stall shall be individually and easily accessed. No automobile shall be required to back onto any public street or sidewalk to leave any parking stall when such stall serves more than two dwelling units or other than residential uses. All portions of a public lot or garage shall be accessible to other portions thereof without requiring the use of any public street. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-72. - Compact to standard stall ratio. 
    The maximum ratio of compact stalls to standard stalls in any parking area shall not exceed one to two. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-73. - Screening. 
    A screening buffer at the public right-of-way shall be provided for all parking areas. Such screening buffer design shall be considered which shall not have an adverse affect on adjacent properties nor impair or restrict motorist viewing. Breaks in the fence or wall may be provided for pedestrian connection to adjacent developments. Such screening buffer design shall be submitted at the time of permit application. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-74. - Parking stall striping. 
    All parking stalls shall be striped, except for a private garage or parking area for the exclusive use of a single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-75. - Lighting. 
    All lights illuminating a parking area shall be designed and located so as to reflect away from any street and adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-76. - Location of accessory buildings. 
(a)  General. Accessory buildings shall occupy the same lot as the main use or building. 
(b)  Separation from main building. All accessory buildings shall be separated from the main building by ten feet. 
(c)  Private garages. An accessory building used as a private garage shall be permitted to be located in the rear yard or side yard provided that setbacks are maintained and the structures do not encroach into any recorded easements. The building shall be permitted to be located in the front yard of a sloping lot if the lot has more than a ten-foot difference in elevation from midpoint of the front lot line to a point 50 feet away midway between the side lots lines. 
(d)  Storage buildings. All accessory buildings used for storage or other similar use shall be permitted to be located in any portion of the rear yard or side yard. No storage building shall be located in the front year. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-77. - Allowable projections into yards. 
(a)  General. Eaves, cornices or other similar architectural features shall be permitted to project into a required yard no more than 12 inches. Chimneys shall be permitted to project no more than two feet provided the width of any side yard is not reduced to less than 30 inches. 
(b)  Front yards. Open, unenclosed ramps, porches, platforms or landings not covered by a roof shall be permitted to extend no more than six feet into the required front yard, provided such porch does not extend above the first level and is no more than six feet above grade at any point. 
(c)  Rear yards. Windows shall be permitted to project into a required rear yard no more than six inches. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-78. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  General. Landscaping is required for all new buildings and additions over 500 square feet as defined in this section. Said landscaping shall be completed within one year from the date of occupancy of the building. 
(b)  Front yards. Front yards required by this article shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas occupied by access driveways, walls and structures. 
(c)  Street-side [side] yards. All flanking street-side side yards shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas occupied by utilities, access driveways, paved walks, walls and structure. 
(d)  Maintenance. All live landscaping required by this article shall be properly maintained. All dead or dying landscaping shall be replaced immediately and all sodded areas mowed, fertilized and irrigated on a regular basis. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-79. - Additional fencing for Business, C-6, C-4, and Industrial districts. 
    If a lot or parcel in the Business, C-6 Commercial District, C-4 Commercial district and Industrial district is next to a residential district, not separated by streets, then a solid fence, at least six feet high, shall be provided along all property lines adjoining the residential district. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-80. - Passageways. 
(a)  Residential entrances. There shall be a passageway leading from the public way to the exterior entrance of each dwelling unit in every residential building of not less than ten feet in width. The passageway shall be increased by two feet for each story over two. 
(b)  Separation between buildings. There shall be at least ten feet of clear space between every main building and accessory building on a lot. There shall be at least 20 feet of clear space between every residential building and another main building on the same lot. 
(c)  Location of passageways. Passageways shall be permitted to be located in that space set aside for required yards. Passageways shall be open and unobstructed to the sky and shall be permitted to have such projections as allowed for yards, provided the users of said passageway have a clear walkway to the public way. Any space between buildings or passageways that has less width than that prescribed herein shall not be further reduced. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-81. - Approval for and availability of essential services. 
(a)  General. All projects that require the additional use of new facilities or essential services, such as sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants, potable water, public streets, street lighting and similar services, shall obtain such approval as required by the agency providing such service prior to project approval. 
(b)  [Required.] Nonavailability of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for denying permits for additional development until such services are available. The jurisdiction is not obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available. If capacity is available, the extension of services shall be by and at the cost of the developer, unless the city agrees otherwise. All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full compliance with the city's standards for such service, and shall be subject to review, permit and inspection as required by other policies or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-82. - Home occupations. 
(a)  General. Home occupations shall be permitted in all districts, provided that the home occupation is clearly and obviously subordinate to the main use or [of the] dwelling unit for residential purposes and provided such activities do not impact or detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. Home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the primary structure on the premises. 
(b)  Conditions. 
(1)  Must be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and must under no circumstances change the residential character of the structure; 
(2)  Must be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation; 
(3)  The home occupations shall not exceed 15 percent of the floor area of the primary structure; 
(4)  Other than those related by blood, marriage or adoption, no more than one person may be employed in the home occupation; 
(5)  Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the area permitted to be used as a home occupation; 
(6)  There shall be no business, storage or warehousing of material, supplies or equipment or exterior display permitted outside of the primary dwelling unit. 
(7)  Home occupations involving beauty shops or barber shops shall require a conditional use permit; 
(8)  Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and scheduled so that not more than one patron vehicle is on the premises at the same time; 
(9)  Two additional parking spaces shall be provided on the premises, except only on [one] need be provided if the home occupations does not have an employee. Said parking shall comply with the parking requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 23-83-23-85. - Reserved. 
Sec. 23-86. - Telecommunications equipment; definitions. 
    The following definitions apply relative to zoning for telecommunication equipment: 
    Antenna means a device, dish, or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals. 
    Communications tower, as used in sections 23-86 through 23-100, shall mean a tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building. 
    Height of a communication tower is the distance from base of the tower to the top of the structure. 
    Telecommunications, as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-87. - Communications tower and antenna permitted; special uses permit. 
(a)  Districts in which special use permits are permitted; height limitations. 
(1)  C-4 district. Freestanding or guyed tower with height not exceeding 100 feet is permitted as a special use; height exceeding 100 feet requires a variance and special use permit. 
(2)  Industrial district. Freestanding or guyed tower with height not exceeding 180 feet is permitted as a special use; height exceeding 180 feet requires a variance and special use permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in section 23-123, the applicant for a special use permit for construction of a communication tower or placement of a commercial telecommunication antenna on an existing structure other than tower previously permitted must file an application accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00 and the following documents, if applicable: 
(1)  One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennas, including description of design characteristics and material; 
(2)  A site plan drawn to scale showing property boundaries, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, and existing land uses on adjacent property. A site plan is not required if antenna is to be mounted on an approved existing structure; 
(3)  A current map, or update for an existing map on file, showing locations of applicant's antennae facilities, existing towers, and proposed towers which are reflected in public records, serving any property within the city; 
(4)  A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision, standards; 
(5)  Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be located on the site; 
(6)  Written authorization from the site owner for the application; 
(7)  Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued to the applicant; 
(8)  A line of sight analysis showing the potential visual and aesthetic impacts on adjacent residential districts; 
(9)  A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days after cessation of use; 
(10)  Evidence those applicable conditions in section 23-88 are met; 
(11)  Additional information as required to determine that all applicable zoning regulations are met. 
(c)  [Support for denial.] The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that denial of a special use permit and/or variance shall be supported by substantial evidence. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-88. - Further telecommunication tower conditions. 
    Applicant must show that the following ten applicable conditions are met for a special use permit for a telecommunications tower: 
(1)  The proposed communications tower, antenna or accessory structure will be placed in a reasonably available location which will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding area and allow the facility to function in accordance with minimum standards impose by applicable communications regulations and applicant's technical design requirements. 
(2)  Applicant must show that a proposed antenna and equipment cannot be accommodated and function as required by applicable regulations and applicant's technical design requirement without unreasonable modifications on any existing or tower under the control of applicant. 
(3)  Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property which must be acquired, applicant must show that available publicly owned sites and available privately owned sites occupied by a compatible use are unsuitable for operation of the facility under applicable communications regulations and applicant's technical design requirements. 
(4)  Assuming reasonable business projections, the applicant must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate additional antennas equal in number to applicant's present and future requirements. 
(5)  Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise, fire, building and safety code requirements are met. 
(6)  A nonself-supporting communications tower must not be painted or illuminated unless provided by state or federal regulations. When lighting is required by the Federal Aviation administration or other federal or state authority, it shall be oriented inward so as not to project onto surrounding residential property. 
(7)  A permit for a proposed tower site within 1,000 feet of an existing tower shall not be issued unless the applicant certifies that the existing tower does not meet applicant's structural specifications and applicant's technical design requirements, or that a collocation agreement could not be obtained. 
(8)  Applicant must show by certificate from a registered engineer that the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must file with the planning and zoning board a written indemnification of the city and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up to one million dollars in the aggregate which may arise from operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the city in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(9)  Land development regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping, parking, access, lot size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other general zoning district regulations except setback and height, shall apply to the use. Setback and height conditions are set forth in this section and section 23-89. 
(10)  A tower must be a minimum distance equal to one-half the height of the tower from property designated historic or architecturally significant, and must be setback from all lot lines distances equal to the district setback requirement or 25 percent of the tower height, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-89. - Tower abandonment. 
(a)  In the event the use of any communication tower has been discontinued for a period of 180 days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the planning and zoning board. 
(b)  The planning and zoning board is empowered to request any and all documentation, including, but not limited to, affidavits and agreements, from the communication tower operator/owner regarding the issue of usage. 
(C)  Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional 90 days within which to: 
(1)  Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower, or 
(2)  Dismantle and remove the tower. 
    At the earlier of 91 days from date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, the special use permit and/or variance permit for the tower shall automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 23-91. - Nonconforming uses; general rule. 
    The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, provided that: 
(1)  A nonconforming use permit is obtained pursuant to section 23-127 (Nonconforming use permits); 
(2)  Upon abandonment of the use for a period of six months, the use shall not be reestablished unless it is altered to conform to the zone in which it is located; 
(3)  No structurally alterations are made except those required by law; 
(4)  No nonconforming use shall be extended, added to, or enlarged; 
(5)  In the event that a nonconforming building or use is damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its reasonable replacement value, the property shall conform to the zone in which it is located; and 
(6)  In a residential district, every nonconforming commercial or industrial use shall be converted or removed within ten years of the enactment of this chapter, unless a permit is granted pursuant to section 23-127 (Nonconforming use permits); 
(7)  In other than criminal proceedings, the owner, occupant or user shall have the burden to show that the structure, lot or use was lawfully established. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-92. - Change of zoning district. 
    Whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, any then existing nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued in the same manner as nonconforming uses which become nonconforming at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-93. - Maintenance and repair. 
    The maintenance, repair or minor alteration of a structure containing a nonconforming use shall be permitted; provided that the life of such nonconforming use shall not be unduly lengthened. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-94. - Permits for residential uses. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 23-127, any conforming commercial use in a residential district may continue beyond the ten years permitted as a special use provided that: 
(1)  The owner or operator of the nonconforming commercial use obtains a special use permit to continue such use, pursuant to section 23-123; 
(2)  The special use permit shall not authorize an increase in size or intensity of the nonconforming commercial use; and 
(3)  The special use permit is granted with consideration of the following criteria, in addition to those set forth in section 23-123: 
a.  The degree to which the commercial use serves the neighborhood; 
b.  The degree to which the commercial use is compatible with existing uses in the nearby neighborhood; and 
c.  The degree to which the commercial use enhances the nearby neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-95. - Changes of nonconforming use. 
    A change of a nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land shall not be made except to that of a conforming use. Where such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-96. - Additions. 
    All additions to nonconforming structures and parking areas shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. Additions to structures housing nonconforming uses that increase the area of a nonconforming use shall not be made. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 23-97-23-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 23-101. - General. 
(a)  Approval. Planned unit development (PUDs) shall be allowed planning and zoning board approval in any zoning district. No such planned unit development permit shall be granted unless such development will meet the use limitations of the zoning district in which it is located and meet the density and other limitations of such districts, except as such requirements may be lawfully modified as provided by this chapter. Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no way excuses the developer from the applicable requirements of a subdivision ordinance, except as modifications thereof are specifically authorized in the approval of the application for the planned unit development. 
(b)  Intent. These regulations are to encourage and provide means for effecting desirable and quality development by permitting greater flexibility and design freedom than that permitted under the basic district regulations, and to accomplish a well balanced, aesthetically satisfying city and economically desirable development of building sites within a PUD. These regulations are established to permit latitude in the development of the building site if such development is found to be in accordance with the purpose, spirit and intent of this ordinance and is found not to be hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the environment, property values or the character of the neighborhood or the health, safety and welfare of the community. It is intended to permit and encourage diversification, variation and imagination in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and heights of structures for developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified projects. It is further intended to encourage more rational and economic development with relationship to public services, and to encourage and facilitate the preservation of open lands. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-102. - Conditions. 
(a)  Area. No planned unit development shall have an area less than that approved by the planning and zoning board as adequate for the proposed development. 
(b)  Uses. A planned unit development which will contain uses not permitted in the zoning district in which it is to be located will require a change of zoning district and shall be accompanied by an application for a zoning amendment, except that any residential use shall be considered a permitted use in a planned unit development, which allows residential uses and shall be governed by density, design and other requirements of the planned unit development permit. Where a site is situated in more than one use district, the permitted uses applicable to such property in one district may be extended into the adjacent use district. 
(c)  Ownership. The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of the property. 
(d)  Design. The planning and zoning board shall require such arrangements of structures and open spaces within the site development plan as necessary to ensure that adjacent properties will not be adversely affected. 
(1)  Density. Density of land use shall in no case be more than 15 percent higher than allowed in the zoning district. 
(2)  Arrangement. Where feasible, the least height and density of buildings and uses shall be arranged around the boundaries of the development. 
(3)  Specific regulations. Lot area, width, yard, height, density and coverage regulations shall be determined by approval of the site development plan. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-103. - Open spaces. 
    Preservation, maintenance and ownership of required open spaces within the development shall be accomplished by either: 
(1)  Dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system; or 
(2)  Creating a permanent, open space easement on and over the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remain perpetually in recreational use, with ownership and maintenance being the responsibility of an owners' association established with articles of association and bylaws, which are satisfactory to the legislative body. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-104. - Landscaping. 
    Landscaping, fencing and screening related to the uses within the site and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its surroundings shall be planned and presented to the planning and zoning board for approval, together with other required plans for the development. A planting plan showing proposed tree and shrubbery plantings shall be prepared for the entire site to be developed. A grading and drainage plan shall also be submitted to the planning and zoning board with the application. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-105. - Signs. 
    The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the intensity and direction of area or floodlighting shall be detailed in the application. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-106. - Desirability. 
    The proposed use of the particular location shall be shown as necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility that will contribute to the general well being of the surrounding area. If shall also be shown that under the circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing in the vicinity of the planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-107. - Zoning and planning board determination. 
    Considerations. In carrying out the intent of this section, the planning and zoning board shall consider the following principles: 
(1)  It is the intent of this section that site and building plans for a PUD shall be prepared by a designer or team of designers having professional competence in urban planning as proposed in the application. The board shall be permitted to require the applicant to engage such professional expertise as a qualified designer or design team. 
(2)  It is not the intent of this section that control of the design of a PUD by the planning and zoning board be so rigidly exercised that individual initiative be stifled and substantial additional expense incurred; rather, it is the intent of this section that the control exercised by the minimum necessary to achieve the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The planning and zoning board shall be authorized to approve or disapprove an application for a PUD. 
    In an approval, the board shall be permitted to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to secure compliance with the purposes set forth in this chapter. The denial of an application for a PUD by the planning and zoning board shall be permitted to be appealed to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-108. - Required contributions. 
    General. The mayor and board of selectmen, as part of the approval of a PUD, shall be permitted to require an applicant to make reasonable contributions to include, but not [be] limited to, any combination of the following: 
(1)  Dedication of land for public park purposes; 
(2)  Dedication of land for public school purposes; 
(3)  Dedication of land for public road right of way purposes; 
(4)  Construction of, or addition to, roads serving the proposed project when such construction or addition is reasonably related to the traffic generated; 
(5)  Installation of required traffic safety devices; 
(6)  Preservation of areas, containing significant natural, environmental, historic, archeological or similar resources. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-109. - Planning and zoning board action. 
(a)  Approval. The planning and zoning board shall have the authority to require that the following conditions for a planned unit development (among others it deems appropriate) be met by the applicant: 
(1)  That the proponents intend to start construction within one year of either the approval or of any necessary zoning district change, and intend to complete said construction, or approved stages thereof, within four years from the date construction begins. 
(2)  That the development is planned as one complex land use rather than as an aggregation of individual and unrelated buildings and uses. 
(b)  Limitations on application. 
(1)  Upon approval of a PUD, construction shall proceed only in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the planning and zoning board and in compliance with any conditions attached by the mayor and board of selectmen as to its approval; 
(2)  Amendment to approval plans an specifications for a PUD shall be obtained only by following the procedures here outlined for first approval; 
(3)  The city inspector shall not issue any permit for any proposed building, structure or use within the projected unless such building, structure or use is in accordance with the approved development plan and with any conditions imposed in conjunction with its approval. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 23-110-23-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 23-116. - Planning and zoning board duties. 
    The planning and zoning commission [board] shall: 
(1)  Hear and decide applications for the various reviews and permits according to the procedures set forth in this chapter and taking into account the recommendations of other agencies and/or the city inspector as provided; 
(2)  Record and file all applications for permits and the various accompanying plans and documents for public record; 
(3)  Revoke any approval or permit issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to law; 
(4)  Enforce provisions of this chapter; and 
(5)  Such other duties as may be prescribed by laws by the city or resolutions of the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-117. - Design review board duties. 
    The planning and zoning board shall also be the design review board. The design review board shall: 
(1)  Conduct a design review of additions, alterations, and improvements to buildings and new buildings in order to improve the general standards of orderly development. 
(2)  Recommend action to the mayor and board of selectmen on design review applications and design review revisions. 
(3)  Prepare, adopt, and recommend to the mayor and board of selectmen reasonable standards and policies for the design of buildings, signs, and other structures in the city, to meet the following goals of design review: 
a.  To protect the community from adverse effects of poor design and to encourage good professional design practices; 
b.  To enhance the beauty, livability, and prosperity of the community; 
c.  To encourage high quality development; 
d.  To discourage poor exterior design, appearance and inferior quality that is likely to have a depreciating effect on local environment and surrounding area; 
e.  To encourage originality, creativity, and diversity in design and to avoid monotony; 
f.  To ensure the compatibility of multiple-dwelling projects with adjoining single family neighborhoods; and 
g.  To ensure single-family design that is compatible with the character inherent within the surrounding area. 
(4)  Review design review standards and recommend additions, alterations and improvements to the mayor and board of selectmen; 
(5)  Such other duties as may be prescribed by the laws of the city and the resolutions of the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-118. - Applying for a permit. 
(a)  Application. Any application required by the planning and zoning board shall be filed in the office of the city inspector and shall contain the following information (where applicable): 
(1)  A description of the property in such form as necessary to identify it precisely, and the existing zoning district designation; 
(2)  A statement of facts upon which the applicant relies; 
(3)  A statement of the reason for filing the application; 
(4)  A specific reference to the section of the zoning ordinance or other law to which the application pertains and a concise statement of why the request meets the legal criteria; 
(5)  Site plans drawn to scale which include (where applicable); 
a.  Lot dimensions; 
b.  Size and use of all buildings on the site; 
c.  Setbacks and space between the buildings; 
d.  Location and number of off-street parking spaces and internal traffic circulation; 
e.  Location and size of pedestrian and vehicular points of ingress and egress; 
f.  Location, size and height of fencing or screen buffer, lighting and signs; 
g.  Street dedications and improvements; 
h.  Proposed landscaping; 
i.  Any significant vegetation or natural features; and 
j.  Other data as may be required to permit the planning and zoning board to make the required findings for determination of the permit. 
(6)  Verification by the owner, his agent, or the lessee of the property involved as to the accuracy and completeness of the information contained in the application. 
(b)  Fees. Fees pertaining to a permit required by this chapter shall be adopted by the mayor and board of selectmen. The fee is nonrefundable. 
(c)  Recommendations of other agencies. A copy of any application shall be sent to the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-119. - Public hearing and notice. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete and valid application, the secretary of the planning and zoning board shall set the matter for public hearing. 
(b)  The secretary of the planning and zoning board shall publish notice of the hearing three times in the city's official journal. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-120. - Decision by the planning and zoning board. 
    At the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning and zoning board shall make a decision based upon written findings of the essential facts as required by law pertinent to the particular matter. The decision and findings of fact shall be mailed to the applicant, secretary for the planning and zoning board; city clerk and to any person requesting a copy and a copy shall be kept on file. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-121. - Decision by the mayor and board of selectmen. 
    Within 60 days after the public hearing, the mayor and board of selectmen shall issue a decision that reverses, affirms, or modifies the decision of the planning and zoning board, or may refer the matter back for further consideration. A decision by the mayor and board of selectmen shall be based on the written findings of the essential facts and on the law to the particular matter. The decision and findings of fact shall be mailed to the applicant, secretary for the planning and zoning board, city clerk and to any person requesting a copy and a copy shall be kept on file. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 23-122. - Variances. 
(a)  Applicability. Any person seeking minor adjustments to the strict application of the zoning ordinances for special or extraordinary circumstances that prevent a parcel of land from being used as the zoning ordinance contemplates shall file an "application for a variance" in accordance with sections 23-118 and 23-119. 
(b)  Criteria for variance. In considering an application for a variance, the sole consideration is whether the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings prevent the applicant from enjoying the same privileges as other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated when the Zoning Ordinance is strictly applied. 
(c)  Conditions. In approving a variance, the planning and zoning board shall have authority to impose such conditions as deemed necessary to protect the interests of the surrounding area and the health, safety, morals and comfort, convenience or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood. 
(d)  [Jurisdiction over variances.] The Planning and Zoning Board shall have continuing jurisdiction over all variances and may revoke, modify or suspend the approval of the variance, after a public hearing and notice given in the same manner as in section 23-119, under the following conditions; 
(1)  The variance was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation 
(2)  The variance has been exercised contrary to the conditions of its approval; or 
(3)  The use permitted by the variance has been exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-123. - Accessory use and special use permits. 
(a)  Accessory uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory uses are permitted in conjunction with allowed principal uses. Accessory uses must be accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use. 
(b)  Permitted principal use required. An accessory use may be established on a lot prior to the establishment of a permitted principal use. 
(c)  Criteria. The following criteria will be used to determine when a structure or use meets the definition of an accessory use. In order to classify a structure or use as accessory, the following must be determined that the use: 
(1)  Is subordinate to the principal use in terms of area, extent and purpose; 
(2)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use served; 
(3)  Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership; 
(4)  Does not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the principal use served; and 
(5)  Is not of a nature likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would normally be expected. 
(d)  Applicability. Any person seeking to use property in accordance with the special use provision for the zoning district in which the property is located or in a substantially similar manner as the uses in the special use provision for the zoning district in which the property is located, shall file an application for special use permit in accordance with section 23-118. 
(1)  A special use permit is restricted and limited to only those applicants that solely own the property and use the property as the applicant's principal residence, except when the applicant is a church. club/lodge, cultural building. 
(e)  Criteria for special use permit. In considering an application for a special use permit, the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  Whether the use is listed in the special use provision for the zoning district in which the property is located; 
(2)  The degree to which a use not specifically listed as a special use in the zoning district is similar in size, intensity, noise, traffic, burden on infrastructure and purpose to those special uses that are specifically listed; 
(3)  In the instance of an application for a special permit to allow for a group home, the extent that the group home are reasonably separated from one another to allow the residents of the home the best opportunity to be mainstreamed and to limit adverse impacts on single family residential use. 
(4)  In the instance of an application for a special permit to allow for a church, club/lodge, cultural building, the extent and degree that the church, club/lodge, cultural building affects the size, intensity, noise, traffic, and burden on infrastructure on the neighborhood, including but not limited to the parking requirements for regular and special events at the church. club/lodge, cultural building. 
(f)  Conditions. In approving a special use permits, the planning and zoning board shall have authority to impose such conditions as deemed necessary to protect the interests of the surrounding area and the health, safety, morals and comfort, convenience or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood. 
(g)  [Jurisdiction.] The planning and zoning commission shall have continuing jurisdiction over all special use permits and may revoke, modify or suspend the approval of the special use, after a public hearing and notice given in the same manner as in section 23-119, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The variance was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation; 
(2)  The variance has been exercised contrary to the conditions of its approval; or 
(3)  The use permitted by the variance has been exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or as to constitute a nuisance. 
(h)  Nontransferable. Special use permits are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 353, 6-9-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 353, adopted June 9, 2015, changed the title of § 23-123 from "Special use permits" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 23-124-23-126. - Reserved. 
Sec. 23-127. - Nonconforming use permits. 
(a)  Applicability. Any person seeking to continue a nonconforming use in a manner consistent with section 23-91 shall file an application for nonconforming use permit in accordance with section 23-118. 
(b)  Criteria. The criteria for the continuation of a nonconforming use are set forth in section 23-191. 
(c)  Conditions. In approving a nonconforming use permits, the planning and zoning board shall have authority to impose such conditions as deemed necessary to protect the interests of the surrounding area and the health, safety, morals and comfort, convenience or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood. 
(d)  [Jurisdiction.] The Planning and zoning board shall have continuing jurisdiction over all nonconforming use permits and may revoke, modify or suspend the approval of the special use, after a public hearing and notice given in the same manner as in section 23-119, under the following conditions; 
(1)  The variance was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation 
(2)  The variance has been exercised contrary to the conditions of its approval; or 
(3)  The use permitted by the variance has been exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 23-128-23-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 23-131. - Three sides residential. 
    Whenever the side of any unimproved lot and/or lots of record abuts on three sides a residential district, including wherever the side of any lot and/or lots of record are located across the street from a residential district, said lot of records or lots of record shall not be used for commercial or industrial use. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-132. - Commercial lot next to residential district. 
(a)  Whenever a C-6 Commercial district is located in the same block with a residential district and abuts on the side of a lot located in a residential district, then any building or structure constructed in the C-6 district on a lot or plot adjacent to such residential district shall leave a front yard of not less than seven feet and a side yard adjacent to such residential district of not less than seven feet. 
(b)  When a lot in a C-6 district rears on a residential district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than seven feet on the C-6 district lot. 
(c)  Whenever a C-6 district is located across the street from a residential district, then any building constructed in such C-6 district on a lot across the street from such residential district shall have a front yard of not less than seven feet. 
(d)  Such front yards shall be planted with materials such as grass and shrubbery and shall be maintained in a manner consonant with the character of the yards in the adjacent residential district. 
(e)  Whenever a C-6 commercial district is located in the same block with a residential district and abuts on the side of a lot located in a residential district, the ingress and egress from the C-6 commercial district lot shall be on a street or road designated for commercial truck traffic. Ingress and egress from the C-6 commercial district lot onto a residential street is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-133. - Lot of record prior to June 12, 1959. 
    The minimum lot size requirements of zoning districts R-10, R-9, R-6, R-4 and R-2 notwithstanding, a single-family dwelling and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of record or parcel of land in and on C-6, C-4 and Industrial districts, provided said lot or parcel became legally established and defined by deed or act of sale before June 12, 1959, and provided that the side yard of dwellings shall not be less than three feet. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-134. - Front, side and rear yards, exceptions. 
(a)  Where dedicated street right-of-way is less than 50 feet the depth of the front yard shall be measured from a point 25 feet from the centerline of the street to the front building lines. 
(b)  Other front yard requirements notwithstanding, the front of no building need be set back more than the average setbacks of the buildings within 100 feet on either side. 
(c)  Steps or stops not exceeding 24 square feet in area, eaves, cornices, belt courses, window sills and unenclosed and uncovered porches may project into any required yard; provided that construction does not project nearer than two feet to the lot lines. Except on the street side of an corner lot, unenclosed carports and car ports may project into a side or rear yard, provided such construction does not project nearer than three feet to the lot lines. 
(d)  Unless there is a party wall, one-story buildings of accessory use in a residential district shall be provided with side and rear-yard of not less than three feet. 
(e)  Where a side or rear yard is provided but not required, such side or rear yard shall not be less than three feet. 
(f)  On lots occupied by dwellings, not more than 40 percent of the rear yard of the main building may be occupied by one-story buildings of accessory use and garage apartment where permitted. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
ARTICLE X. - AMENDMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 23-135. - Amendments. 
(a)  The mayor and board of selectmen may from time to time, on its own motion or on recommendation from the planning and zoning board; after public notice and hearing, amend the districts and the regulations established therefore in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 33:4725. 
(b)  Every proposed amendment shall be referred to the planning and zoning board for report and recommendation to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Zoning amendments, R.S. 33:4725. 
Sec. 23-136. - Enlargement of city limits, grandfather clause. 
(a)  All territory that may hereafter be added to the city shall be classed as lying and being in the R-10 residential district, unless the petitioner for annexation designates another zoning district in his petition for annexation submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to or affect presently used or occupied structures in newly annexed territory as such and presently located within the newly annexed area. However, in the event the structure ceases to exist on the site or lot within the newly annexed territory for a period of one year, then the site or lot within the newly annexed area shall come under the provisions of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Zoning of annexed property, R.S. 33:4725.1. 
Sec. 23-137. - Procedure for reclassification of property. 
(a)  [Application.] Each applicant [application] to amend the official zoning map/designation shall be filed with the secretary of the planning and zoning commission and the city inspector. Each application shall comply with the provisions of section 23-128 and pay a fee of $350.00. 
(b)  Review. The application shall be reviewed by the city inspector who shall be responsible for determining the application's adherence to the applicable development standards for the district for which the application is made. He shall submit his findings to the planning and zoning commission after the public hearing. 
(c)  Schedule. An application shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted by the planning and zoning commission which shall provide that each application shall be submitted to allow sufficient time to legally advertise for public hearing in accordance with these regulations. 
(d)  Withdrawal of application. An application may not be withdrawn or amended by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this section shall have first been published. 
(e)  Advertising. Notice of the proposed change and the time and place of the hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be published once a week for three weeks consecutively in the official journal for the city. At least four days shall elapse between the last date of publication and the date of the hearing. A printed notice in bold type shall have been posted for not less than ten consecutive days prior to the public hearing conducted by the planning and zoning commission on a sign not less than one square foot in area, prepared, furnished, and placed by the city inspector or designee upon the principal and assessable rights-of-way the area proposed for a change in land use classification. 
(f)  A public hearing shall be held in accordance with law and duly advertised before the planning and zoning commission at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. After such public hearing, the city inspector shall submit a report of his analysis of the proposed changes to the planning and zoning commission. 
(g)  The planning and zoning commission shall review and take action upon each application in accordance with the schedule adopted by the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing has been held at which parties in interest and citizens shall have had the opportunity to be fully heard. Each application shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission by the city inspector or his designee, together with his analysis of it. A report of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation and the city inspector's or his designee's analysis shall be submitted to the mayor and board of selectmen. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings and meetings as are consistent with state law and are appropriate to its responsibilities, which shall be published and available to the public, as well as conflict of on a matter in which he has an interest directly or indirectly. 
(2)  A final vote shall have been taken on the proposal by the planning and zoning commission within 20 days after the public hearing. In the event that no final vote is taken, the proposal shall be automatically approved. However, in the event that the 20-day deadline falls on a holiday or a meeting that has been cancelled by the planning and zoning commission, the 20-day deadline is extended automatically to the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting. 
(h)  The mayor and board of selectmen shall not take official action until the report of the planning and zoning commission is received. A final vote shall have been taken on the proposal by the city within 45 days after the report has been received from the planning and zoning commission. If no final vote is taken the proposal shall be automatically approved. However, in the event that the 45-day deadline falls on a holiday or a meeting that has been cancelled by the planning and zoning commission, the 45-day deadline is extended automatically to the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting. 
(i)  Whenever a petition is filed requesting or proposing a change in or amendment to these regulations or to the official zoning map and the petition has been finally acted on and denied by the mayor and board of selectmen in accordance with the above outlined procedure, the mayor and board of selectmen may consider the same request for the same property within 90 days from the date of the city's final decision on the original request. If the request is again denied, or if the 90-day period expires without a repetition on the original request, the mayor and board of selectmen shall not consider any further petition requesting or proposing the same change or amendment for the same property within one calendar year from the date of the city's final action on the original request or most recent petition and/or application. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 297, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 23-138. - Rezoning guidelines and criteria. 
    Before the planning and zoning board recommends or the city rezones property, there should be reasonable factual proof by the proponent of a change that one or more of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Land use pattern or character has changed to the extent that the existing zoning no longer allows reasonable use of the proponent's property and adjacent property. Reasonable is defined as: 
a.  Land use the same as, or similar to that existing on properties next to, or across the street from the site under consideration; 
b.  Consideration of unique or unusual physical environmental limitations due to size, shape, topography or related hazards or deficiencies. 
c.  Consideration of changes inland value, physical environment or economic aspects which tend to limit the usefulness of vacant land or buildings. 
(2)  The proposed zoning change, and the potential of resulting land use change, will comply with the general public interest and welfare and will not create: 
a.  Undue congestion of streets and traffic access. 
b.  Overcrowding of land or overburden public facilities such as transportation, sewerage, drainage, schools, parks, and other public facilities. 
c.  Land or building usage which is, or may become, incompatible with existing character or usage of the neighborhood. 
d.  An oversupply of types of land use or zoning in proportion to population, land use and public facilities in the neighborhood. 
(3)  As far as possible, the city inspector should base rezoning analyses on these criteria. The planning and zoning board, in its recommendation to the mayor and board of selectmen, may state its concurrence with, or rejection of, proponents' offer of proof at public hearings and may state, in its motion of recommendation to the city, its position in relation to proponents statements and the city inspector's analyses shall be forwarded to the city along with the planning and zoning board's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-139. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of the zoning ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variances or special use) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates the zoning ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case, including reasonable attorneys fees. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person, who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Penalties authorized, R.S. 33:4732. 
Secs. 23-140-23-142. - Reserved. 
Sec. 23-143. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the zoning ordinance, zoning or inconsistent with the provisions of the zoning ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 23-144. - Appendices. 
    Appendices are hereby adopted and made a part of the city zoning ordinance, as follows: 
City of Plaquemine Zoning Chart-RESIDENTIAL-Appendix A 
Zone Dist. USES PERMITTED SPECIAL USE WITH PERMIT MINIMUM YARDS MINIMUM LOT SIZE Front 
Depth Rear 
Depth Side 
Depth Area 
Sq. Ft. Lot 
Width Bldg 
Height Zero 
Lot Line R-10 Single-family dwelling only None 25 ft. 10ft. 10ft. 9,000 75 35 no R-10 For all buildings except unattached one-story buildings of accessory use R-9 Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplex 75' min. lot width and one duplex per lot; church, domestic shelter, garden, golf course, public playground/park, public library, school Beauty/barber shop (no signs allowed), day care 1, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal with sign restriction), storage only building 25 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 9,000 75 35 yes R-9 For all buildings except unattached one-story buildings of accessory use R-6 Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplex (limited to 60' width, one per lot; condominium (limited to 60' lot width, one per lot); bed and breakfast inn, church, club/lodge, cultural building, garage apartment, preschool through college preparatory, public library, public safety building, garden, golf course, governmental building, public playground/park, townhouse (limited to 60' lot width, one per lot) Beauty/barber shop (no signs allowed), day care 1, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal with sign restriction), storage only building 25 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 6,000 60 35 yes R-6 For all buildings except unattached one-story buildings of accessory use R-4 Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplex (min. 60' lot width, limit one per lot, see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium (min. 60 ft. lot width, limit one per lot), church, club/lodge, cultural building, domestic shelter, garage apartment, garden, governmental building, public library, public safety building, school Beauty/barber shop (no signs allowed), day care 1, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal with sign restriction), storage only building 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 50 35 yes R-4 For all buildings except unattached one-story buildings of accessory use R-2 Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplex (minimum 60' lot width, limit one per lot, bed and breakfast inn, condominium (see lot width restrictions), church, club/lodge, cultural building, domestic shelter, garage apartment, garden, public library, public safety building, school (preschool through college preparatory, townhouse (see lot width restrictions) Beauty/barber shop (no signs allowed), day care 1, professional office (two or less employees, includes principal with sign restriction), storage only building 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 3,000 30 35 yes R-2 For all buildings except unattached one-story buildings of accessory use HD yes Dwellings For all buildings except unattached one-story buildings of accessory use HD Single-family dwelling, zero lot line dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to bed and breakfast inn, condominium (60 ft., limit one); duplex (60 ft., limit one), garage apartment, townhouse (60 ft., limit one) All structures/properties are subject to current zoning ordinances with additional historic district restrictions HD Cemetery, church, club/lodge, cultural/govt. building, garden, public library, public park/playground, public safety building Beauty/barber shop (no signs allowed), daycare 1, preschool, professional office (two or less employee plus principal includes sign restriction), miniwarehouse NOTE: Special Uses: no special use may be permitted other than a special use specifically permitted in the residential zone or district in which such land or building is located, except the city planning and zoning board may allow land uses not specifically listed as a special use in the district, if it is clearly similar in nature to the listed uses. Board of selectmen reserves the right to add or review zoning issues at any time. Special use with permit is nontransferrable.  
City of Plaquemine Zoning Chart-COMMERCIAL-Appendix B 
Zone Dist. USES PERMITTED SPECIAL USE WITH PERMIT MINIMUM YARDS MINIMUM LOT SIZE Front 
Depth Rear 
Depth Side 
Depth 
Footage Area 
Sq. Ft. Lot 
Width 
Sq. Ft. Bldg 
Height 
(Ft.) Ag Any agricultural use, but not limited to dwellings, maintenance/storage buildings and other such uses necessary for the principal use. Preschool/day care, domestic shelter, planned unit development 30 60 15 10 acres min. 400 35 B8-Business Single-family dwelling, duplex (see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium, garage apartment, townhouse, zero lot line dwelling None 20 10 5 4,500 50 with exception 35 Lot Width Exception: duplex 75'; condo 70'-2 units only; townhouse 70'-2 units only Any small retail business or service which is established for the convenience of the neighboring residents such as: barber/beauty shop, church, club/lodge, day care, dry cleaning, funeral home, garden, limited restaurant (no alcohol), mortuary, neighborhood convenience store, professional office (4 or less employees, including principal), public library, public park/playground, school (Alcohol: no alcohol sale or consumption on site allowed) 20 10 5 4,500 50 with exception 35 C-6 Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling limited to duplexes (see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium (see lot width restrictions), garage apartment, townhouse (see lot width restrictions) 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft. Adult day care, amusement enterprise center, assisted living facility, auto car wash, auto repair shop (major and minor) and other motor vehicle services, auto sales and rentals auto service station, automobile parking lot, bakery, barber/beauty shop, church, club/lodge, commercial office, congregate housing, convenience store, cultural building, daycare, drug store, dry cleaning facility, funeral home, garden, gasoline station, government building, grocery store, small, medium and large group home, health club and/or training facility, household care facility, hospital, hotel/motel, laundry facility, long term care facility medical office, mortuary, movie/video rental, miniwarehouse, neighborhood convenience store, newspaper, nursing home, permanent and portable bank building, planned unit development, printing shop, commercial and professional office, public park/playground, public library, public safety building, restaurant, school, small grocery store, limited restaurant (no alcohol sales and consumption on-site), miniwarehouse, theater, transportation center, truck stop & casino (Alcohol: (a) sales; (b) consumption; (c) sales and consumption on premises with no on-site consumption allowed) 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft. EXCEPTION: For additional restrictions, see section 23-136 relative to C-6 property parcel, adjacent to or across from residential district. C-4 Single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling such as duplexes (see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium (see lot width restrictions), garage apartment, townhouse (see lot width restrictions) 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft. Any retail business or service which is established for the convenience of the neighboring residents: adult day care, amusement enterprise, assisted living facility, auto wash, auto rental and sales, auto repair shop and other motor vehicular service, automobile parking lot, bakery, beauty/barber shop, cemetery, church, club/lodge, congregate housing, convenience store, cultural building, governmental building, day care 1, drug store, dry cleaning facility, funeral home, garden, gasoline station, grocery store (all types), small, medium and large group home, hospital, hotel/motel, laundry facility, light manufacturing, medium manufacturing (8 to 50 employees), mini-warehouse,  
Zone Dist. USES PERMITTED SPECIAL USE WITH PERMIT MINIMUM YARDS MINIMUM LOT SIZE Front 
Depth Rear 
Depth Side 
Depth 
Footage Area 
Sq. Ft. Lot 
Width 
Sq. Ft. Bldg 
Height 
(Ft.) mortuary, newspaper, nursing home, offices: commercial, medical and professional, permanent and portable bank and bank structure, planned unit development (PUD), printing shop, public library, public park/playground, public safety building, recreational facility, restaurant (all types), retail shopping, school, preschool through college preparatory, shopping center/mall, telecommunication tower, transportation terminal, truck stop & casino, video tape rental, warehouse (limited alcohol: no on-site consumption) Telecommunication 
tower, junkyard 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft A-2 (Alcohol) Bed and breakfast, club, lodges, convenience store, restaurant, gasoline station, grocery store, hotel/motel; Applicable only when on-site alcohol consumption is primary sales receipts None 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft See Sec. 23-52(e) for special restrictions; shall comply with any other applicable commercial district provisions. Ind Single-family dwelling, multifamily limited to dwelling such as duplex (see lot width restrictions), bed and breakfast inn, condominium (see lot width restrictions), garage apartment, townhouse (see lot width restrictions) 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft. Industrial Amusement center, auto car wash, auto repair shop and other motor vehicle service, auto sales, automobile parking lot, bakery, barber/beauty shop, church, club/lodge, congregate housing, convenience store, cultural building, daycare, drug store, dry cleaning facility, electrical generation facility, funeral home, garden, gasoline station, government building, grocery store, small, medium and large group homes, hospital, hotel/motel, large automobile parking lot, large warehouse, laundry facility, local transit center, manufacturing facility, medical office, mortuary, neighborhood convenience store, newspaper, nursing home, permanent and portable bank building, planned unit development, printing shop, commercial and professional office, public park/playground, public library, public safety building, restaurant, recreation facility, school (preschool through college preparatory), small grocery store, small restaurant (no alcohol sales and/or alcohol consumption on premises), storage facility, theater, truck stop and casino, telecommunication tower, trucking facility, video/movie rental, warehouse junkyard 20 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 4,500 60 ft. 35 ft. NOTE Special Uses: No special use may be permitted other than a special use specifically permitted in the commercial zone or district in which such land or building is located, except the city planning and zoning board may allow land uses not specifically listed as a special use in the district, if it is clearly similar in nature to the listed uses. Board of selectmen reserves the right to add or review zoning issues at any time. Special use with permit is non-transferrable. Pursuant to City of Plaquemine Code of Ordinances section 23-1 et seq.  

(Ord. No. 287, 9-8-09) 
  
Chapter 24 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 288, §§ 1 through 31, adopted Sept. 8, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as chapter 24, sections 1 through 31. For purposes of classification and to allow room for growth, at the editor's discretion these provisions have been included as §§ 24-1 through 24-57. 
State Law reference- Historic preservation, R.S. 25:731 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PLAQUEMINE HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 24-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Plaquemine." 
(Ord. No. 288, § 1, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-2. - Statement of significance. 
    The historic districts are significant in the following respects: 
(1)  The city is recognized for its collection of historic public, commercial and residential buildings, and these have proved increasingly attractive to residents, business interests and tourists. 
(2)  The city has a tradition of preservation activities which promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity, education and general welfare of the people living in and visiting the city. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 2, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-3. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, preservation of properties and areas of archaeological, cultural, engineering, historical, political, social and spiritual and aesthetic significance use of resources or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of education, economics, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people of the city. It is further intended to recognize past needless losses of historic properties which had substantial value to the cultural and historical heritage of Plaquemine, and to take reasonable measure to prevent similar losses in the future. This chapter is adopted in accordance with the authority granted under the Louisiana Historic Districts Act, R.S., 25:731 et seq. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Enhance, preserve and safeguard cultural and historical resources and improvements and landscape features of districts and archaeological resources which represent or reflect distinctive element of the city's architectural, cultural, economic, engineering, historical, political, social and spiritual history. 
(2)  Safeguard the city's cultural, historical and aesthetic heritage which represents the elements and resources by improving cultural and historical resources by creating districts. 
(3)  Foster wider public awareness of and civic pride in accomplishments of the past. 
(4)  Encourage private efforts of Plaquemine citizens in support of such purposes. 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts as a stimulus to local business and industry which fosters civic beauty and community pride. 
(6)  Enhance the city's image to residents and visitors and make the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work. 
(7)  Stabilize and improve values in such areas. 
(8)  Promote the use of districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city, the state and United States of America. 
(9)  Provide a review process for the preservation and appropriate development of the city's resources. 
(c)  It is further declared that the purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  With respect to an historic property and the properties in historic preservation districts: 
a.  To retain and enhance those properties which contribute to the character of the historic preservation district and to encourage their adaptation for current use. 
b.  To assure that alterations of existing structures are compatible with the character of this historic preservation district. 
c.  To assure new construction and subdivision of lots in an historic preservation district are compatible with the character of this historic preservation district. 
d.  To recognize the value of historic preservation districts and the contributions which they make to the cultural, educational and historical values of the city, and to encourage the maintenance and preservation of historic preservation districts for future generations by appropriate changes to historic properties. 
e.  To retain and enhance historic properties in the city and to encourage their adaptation for current use. 
f.  To encourage the restoration of historic properties. 
(2)  With respect to archaeological resources: 
a.  To encourage identification of the local of both prehistoric and historic archaeological resources. 
b.  To assist with the preservation of these resources, within developments where appropriate, and with recovery of the resources where applicable. 
(d)  The adoption of this chapter is declared to be in the public interest and is for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 3, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 24-4-24-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-15. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure: A detached subordinate building located on the same building site with the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building. 
    Altered: Any architectural, mechanical or structural change to an historic property which requires a certificate of appropriateness and/or city building permit. Includes the words "rebuilt", "reconstructed", "remodeled", "restored", "removed" and "demolished" and the phrases "changed in exterior color" and" any alteration to exterior physical appearance or exterior architectural feature visible from a public way". 
    Archaeological resources: Any material remains of past human life, activities or habitation which is of historic or prehistoric significance. 
    Area: Two or more parcels of land, buildings, houses, sites, or structures which may include streets and alleys. 
    Billboard: See "Off-premises sign" and "outdoor advertising sign." 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for housing or the enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, or anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. The term "building" shall be construed to include the term "structure." 
    Building code: The Building code of the city which regulates construction in the city and requires building permits, electrical and plumbing permits and other permits to do work regulated by the building code. 
    Building official: The person or designee authorized to grant permits for construction, alterations and demolitions pursuant to the city building code and to make interpretations thereof. Also referred to as city inspector or designee. 
    Business agent or lessee: An agent or lessee of an owner of a private building, or other private or immovable property located, in whole or in part, within the historic preservation district, who is operating a business in, or has control of, the building or immovable property, but shall not include a residential lessee who merely resides or is domiciled in the building. 
    Certificate of appropriateness: An official form of the city issued by the Plaquemine Historic Commission indicating its approval or denial of plans for exterior alteration, construction, relocation, removal or demolition of a designated property or a structure within a designated historic district as defined in City Code section 24-39. Such form shall state that the proposed work on historic property is compatible with the historic character of the property and may be completed as specified in the certificate. Such certificate shall not replace or supersede city zoning regulations. 
    Certified local government program: An initiative of the National Park Service, the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, amended 1989, authorized local governmental entity to carry on historic preservation activities under federal legislation. The designation is to encourage communities to establish historic preservation programs at the local level which foster neighborhood pride, to survey and inventory local historic properties, and to assist property owners in preserving their community's heritage. Also referred as "CLG." 
    Constructed: Includes the words "built", "erected", "installed", "enlarged" and "moved". 
    Demolition: Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a building, house, or other structure within a historic preservation district other than solely interior elements or demolition that does not alter exterior features or demolition that is not visible from outside the building, house or other structure. Shall include "demolition by neglect," which shall mean neglect in the maintenance, repair or security of a site, building or structure, resulting in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports; 
(2)  The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members; 
(3)  The deterioration of exterior chimneys; 
(4)  The deterioration of exterior plaster or mortar; 
(5)  The ineffective weatherproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations, including broken windows and doors; and/or the serious deterioration of any documented exterior architectural feature or significant landscape feature which in the judgment of the commission produces a detrimental effect upon the character of the district. 
    Demolition approval: Authorization for removal of all or part of a structure which is located with a historic preservation district or any area under application for historic preservation designation. 
    Design: The combination of elements that create the form, plan, space, structure and style of a property. 
    Design treatment levels: Categories of standards used by the Plaquemine Historic District Commission as general guides in the determination of appropriateness of proposed "work" within an historic district. The design treatment levels are as follows: 
(1)  Restoration. Bringing back into a former or unimpaired state or condition which existed at a date prescribed by the ordinance establishing the district. Authenticity of a restoration would require the removal of incompatible exterior elements and the replacement of all damaged or deteriorated elements with replicas of the same design and materials. A restoration design treatment level shall not be assigned without the written consent of the owner of the affected property at the time of designation. A permit applicant shall be responsible for documenting the authenticity of proposed "work" to the satisfaction of the Plaquemine Historic District Commission. 
(2)  Rehabilitation. Putting back in good condition. This would not require the removal of all nonoriginal materials, but would encourage the removal of nonoriginal materials which are incompatible with the defined elements of design for the particular structure and district. The design of new construction or alteration would not require a duplication of the original design and construction, but would be compatible with the existing structures and the districts defined elements of design. The use of original materials or construction techniques would be encouraged but contemporary methods and materials would also be acceptable when compatible with the defined elements of design for the district. 
(3)  Conservation. Giving new life and making vital by cleaning, repairing or replacing of worn, cracked, or broken parts with compatible materials or protecting from blight or deterioration through normal maintenance. The use of contemporary building methods or materials would be acceptable if they are compatible with the defined elements of design for the district. 
    Development: Any alteration, modification, remodeling, new construction or excavation which requires a city-approved permit or which affects the historical character of an historic property. 
    District: A designated or defined area of the city placed under the authority of a commission for purposes of historic preservation. 
    Elements of design: The characteristic relationships of the various features within an historic district which are significant to the appearance of the district, elements of design to be defined for each historic district are: 
(1)  Height; 
(2)  Proportion of buildings front facades; 
(3)  Proportion of openings within the facades; 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades; 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets; 
(6)  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections; 
(7)  Relationship of materials; 
(8)  Relationship of textures; 
(9)  Relationship of colors; 
(10)  Relationship of architectural details, 
(11)  Relationship of roof shapes; 
(12)  Walls of continuity; 
(13)  Relationship of significant landscape features and surface treatments; 
(14)  Relationship of open space to structures; 
(15)  Scale of facades and facade elements; 
(16)  Directional expression of front elevations; 
(17)  Rhythm of building setbacks; 
(18)  Relationship of lot coverages; 
(19)  Degree of complexity within the facades; 
(20)  Orientation, vistas, overviews; 
(21)  Symmetric or asymmetric appearance; 
(22)  General environmental character. 
    Exterior architectural feature: Such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is open to view from a public street, public way, public park or public body of water, including but not limited to the architectural style, general arrangement, general design and setting of the exterior of a structure, including the kind, color and texture of exterior building materials and surfaces, the type and style of all roofs, windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. 
    Feeling: A property's expression of the aesthetic or historic sense of a particular period of time. 
    HDC: Plaquemine Historic District Commission, which also serves as the certified local government program commission created under this chapter; may also be referred to as "the commission" or "HD commission." 
    Historic: A building, site or structure may be classified as historic when it is at least 50 years of age and is of obvious significant local, regional, or national historic, architectural and/or cultural value. 
    Historic district: A district designated by the city as an area containing significant concentrations linkage or continuity of buildings, structures, sites areas or lands which are united by architectural, historical, archaeological or cultural importance or significance such that the area requires protection and preservation for the purposes of this article. An historic district shall include an area or group of areas, sites, buildings, structures or archeological sites or particular historic or architectural significance to the city, the state or to the United States of America. Such areas, sites, buildings, structures, or archeological sites may be either publicly or privately owned. These districts, including significant landscape features, surface textures and street furniture located thereon, need not have contiguous boundaries. Includes the Plaquemine National Register of Historic Places properties and the city local historic district properties; may also be referred to as "HD". The following criteria shall be used for evaluation of proposed historic districts: 
(1)  Sites, buildings, structures or archeological sites where cultural, economic, engineering, political, social, spiritual, or architectural history of the community, city, state or nation is particularly reflected or exemplified; 
(2)  Buildings, sites, structures or archeological sites which are identified with historic personages or with important events in community, city, state or national history; 
(3)  Buildings or structures which embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural specimen, inherently valuable as a representation of a period, style or method of construction; 
(4)  Notable works of a master designer or architect whose individual genius influenced his or her age. 
    Historic district zoning category: A zoning district in the form of an overlay zone, in which property retains the uses of and is subject to the regulations of the underlying zone, but which is also subject to the provisions of this historic preservation ordinance. 
    Historic preservation: The protection, conservation, improvement, renovation or reconstruction of historic districts through the implementation of the design treatment levels defined herein; may also be referred to as "HP". 
    Historic preservation officer (of the city): The city official who administers this chapter and maintains the Plaquemine Historic District property register, can be referred to as HP officer. The historic district commission recording secretary and Plaquemine Main Street manager shall act as the HP officer. 
    Historic site: Any parcel of land whose historic significance is due to a substantial value in tracing the history or prehistory of Native American people, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which has been designated as a historic site under this section, or an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which is situated a historic structure and any abutting improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic structure is situated. 
    Historic structure: Any improvement which has a special character or special historic or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the region, state or nation and which has been designated as a historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    History: Defined to include all pre-historic periods also. 
    Integrity: The ability of a property to convey its significance. 
    Landmark: A site or structure which contains an outstanding or unique example of an architectural style, which contains or is associated with a major historic event or activity, which contains important, intact archaeological resources, which is a site or structure of unique visual quality and identification, or which is a site of general historic or cultural recognition by the community. A landmark shall also meet all criteria for designation as a historic district. 
    Location: The place where the historic property was constructed or the place where the historic event occurred. 
    Materials: The physical elements that were combined or deposited during a particular period of time and in a particular pattern or configuration to form a historic property. 
    Minor Work: Any change, modifying, restoring, rehabilitating, renovating, surfacing or resurfacing of the features of historic property which does not materially change the historic characteristics of the property. 
    Move: Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site shall also include "remove" or "removal." 
    National Register nomination: A document containing the information necessary to nominate a property to the National Register of Historic Places, including a physical description, a statement of significance, maps, photographs, legal description and geographic data. 
    National Register of Historic Places: The official national list of properties (buildings, districts, sites, structures and objects) that possess special significance in terms of architecture, archaeology, culture or history. The National Register is maintained by the National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. Properties are nominated to the register by the state historic preservation officer (SHPO) in each state. 
    Off-premises sign: See "Outdoor advertising sign." 
    Outdoor advertising sign: A permanent sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed. 
    Owner: The person or entity who has legal title to property, or who has effective custody and control of property. 
    Person aggrieved: The applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an owner of property within the same historic district as property within 100 feet of said property lines and any charitable corporation in which one of its purposes is the preservation of historic structures or districts. 
    Planning and zoning board: The planning and zoning board of the city. 
    Plaquemine Historic Property Register: The list of contributing resources, including buildings, sites, structures, districts and objects within the historic district in the city as compiled and kept by the Plaquemine Main Street manager, who also serves as the recording secretary of the historic district commission. 
    Quaint and distinctive character of a historic preservation district: Includes but is not limited to the historic or traditional ambiance of the district, the antiquity of the district, the historic character of the district, the old-fashioned or traditional neighborhood quality of the district, and the lighting and traditional architectural styles and details of the district. 
    Record owner: Same as owner. 
    Rehabilitation: The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values. 
    Relocation: Same as move or removal. 
    Replacement/reuse plan: A plan for redevelopment of a site within a historic district indicating a proposed development which shall be in according with existing zoning, adopted specific plans, and HP design guidelines. Such plans shall consist of a plot plan illustrating building locations, parking, walls and landscaping. They shall also include general elevation drawing of structures including roofs, doors and windows and other openings. 
    Routine maintenance: Projects which involves repair or replacement where there is no change in the design, materials, or general appearance of elements of the structure or grounds. 
    Setting: The physical environment of a historic property. 
    Signage: See Outdoor advertising sign. 
    Standards for preservation, rehabilitation, and restoration: Pertains to historic buildings of all materials, construction types, sizes, and occupancy and encompasses the exterior and the interior, related landscape features and the building's site and environment as well as attached, adjacent, or related new exterior construction. Such standards for preservation, rehabilitation and restoration are set by the Secretary of Interior, Department of Interior regulations, 36 C.F.R. 67 for use in the Federal Historic Preservation Tax Incentives program. 
    State historic preservation officer (SHPO): The Assistant Secretary, Office of Cultural Development, Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism, State of Louisiana or his designee, who oversees architectural, archeological and historical resources and implements preservation programs of the state. 
    Structure: A combination of materials other than a building, including a sign, fence, wall, hitching post, terrace, walk or driveway. 
    Survey: an inventory and preliminary evaluation of the historic properties in a defined area. Surveys may be conducted of properties which have historic and architectural significance, or of properties which archaeological significance. 
    Work: Any excavation, new construction or erection or demolition or moving of a building, fence, wall or other structure or significant landscape feature, including pavements. The term also includes any removal of an architectural or significant landscape feature, as well as reconstruction, alteration, a change of surface treatment, a change of color by painting or other means, or any demolition or moving of a structure, a portion thereof, or significant landscape feature. 
    Work, major: Projects which involve a change in the appearance of a building, site or structure, and are more substantial in nature than routine maintenance or minor work projects, such as new construction, expansion of a building footprint, or significant changes in landscape features. Guidelines are included in the HDC bylaws. 
    Work, minor: Projects that can be administratively approved that do not involve alterations, additions, or removals that are substantial, and do meet the guidelines, and or are not of a precedent-setting nature. Guidelines are included in the HDC bylaws. 
    Workmanship: The physical evidence of the crafts of a particular culture or people during any given period in history or prehistory. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 4, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-16. - Enumeration of districts. 
    Historic district designations in effect on the date of enactment of this article, including design treatment level assignments and defined elements of design, shall continue in effect and shall be administered according to the appropriate sections of this article. For reference, these districts are: 
(1)  Garden District-Locally recognized; 
(2)  W.W. Harleaux-Captain T. Talbot Harris-Locally recognized; 
(3)  Old Turnerville District-Locally recognized; 
(4)  Plaquemine National Register Historic District; 
(5)  Plaquemine Local Historic District; 
(6)  Individual properties or sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places within the city; 
(Ord. No. 288, § 5, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-17. - Establishment of local recognized district or site area. 
    Upon the receipt of a written request to Plaquemine Mayor and Board of Selectmen from a majority of area property owners residing, doing business, or owning property in the city to designate a locally recognized district or site area as being locally significant or valued or distinctive in its unique architecture, character, culture, history, or heritage or aesthetic landscape, the Plaquemine Board of Selectmen, after making a determination that there are reasonable grounds for such a request, may adopt an Ordinance recognizing the requested district or site area. Such designation shall not be governed nor regulated under the city historic preservation ordinance nor have additional restrictive zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 6, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-18. - Boundary of districts. 
(a)  Designation of the Plaquemine Historic District. There are hereby established under the provisions of R.S. 25:731 et seq. as amended, the following Historic district. Supplemental and illustrative maps serve as a guide, which is on record in the City Clerk's Office and Plaquemine Main Street Program office. 
(b)  [City Historic District.] The City Historic District shall be delineated as follows. The boundaries of the historic preservation district shall be coextensive with the city limits. Within the historic preservation district, there may be separate areas established from time to time in which differing regulations apply. No provisions of these regulations shall apply to structures or appurtenances related thereto until such have been brought within a designated area. 
(c)  [Plaquemine National Register Historic District.] The boundary of the Plaquemine National Register Historic District described above includes only the property south on Foundry Street, includes all the property north and south on Fort Street, includes all the property east and west on Railroad Avenue, includes only the property east on Hamilton Street, and includes all the property north and south on Main Street. 
(d)  {Inclusion.] In the determination of those structures and appurtenances related thereto which are to be found within an area, conflict is to be resolved in favor of inclusion rather than exclusion. 
(e)  [Plaquemine Historic District.] The Plaquemine Historic District is established as: The area designated as "Plaquemine Historic District" beginning at the northwest corner of Foundry Street, being the point of beginning; thence traveling east to a point that intersects with the Mississippi River; thence traveling south along the Mississippi River to its intersection with Seminary Street, continuing south along Seminary Street to its intersection with Fort Street; thence traveling westerly along Fort Street to its intersection with Railroad Avenue; thence traveling northerly along Railroad Avenue to its intersection of Court Street; then traveling west on Court Street to a point in the middle of the block between Constitution Street and Liberty Street; thence traveling north to a point in the middle of the block between Court Street and Plaquemine Street; thence traveling west to a point in the middle of the block between Court Street and Plaquemine Street, west of Railroad Avenue; thence traveling north to a point in the middle of the block of Barker's Alley and Main Street; thence traveling west to Federal Street; thence traveling south three-quarters of the block between Main Street and Plaquemine Street; thence west to the intersection of the extension of Hamilton Street; thence north along Hamilton Street to Main Street; thence traveling east to Railroad Avenue; thence traveling north along the railroad track of Louisiana Highway One to the intersection with Louisiana Highway One and Louisiana Highway 988 (Kurzweg Street); then continuing along Kurzweg Street in a westerly direction to point of beginning with Foundry Street. 
    This district is also known as the Plaquemine Main Street District, which comprises the Historic Residential, Historic Business and/or Office and Historic Commercial districts. This area includes the Plaquemine National Register Historic District and the City Historic District. A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program office. 
(f)  [Locally recognized districts.] The city's locally recognized districts include: 
    Area one. The area designated as the "Garden District of Plaquemine" from the intersection of Railroad Avenue South and Fort Street to the intersection of Fort Street and Marshall Street; traveling south along Marshall Street to the intersection of Marshall Street and LaBauve Street; traveling easterly along LaBauve Street to the intersection of LaBauve Street and Railroad Avenue South; thence traveling along Railroad Avenue South to the intersection of Fort Street and Railroad Avenue South which is the point of beginning. It is further designated as the area of the Garden District of Plaquemine that area bounded east by Eden Street, south by Desobry Street, west by the railroad tracts, and north by Fort Street. A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program Office. 
    Area two. The area designated as the "Old Turnerville District" from Laville Street to the Mississippi River levee, bounded by Laville Street, the Mississippi River levee, Bayou Plaquemine and Louisiana Highway One. A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program office. 
    Area three. The area designated as the "W.W. Harleaux-Captain T. Talbot Harris District" encompasses a portion of the entire streets. W.W. Harleaux Street boundary begins at the intersection of Haase Street and Railroad Avenue, traveling in a westward direction to the intersection of Haase Street and Bayou Road (Louisiana Highway 3066). The entirety of Osage Street is renamed to Captain Talbot Harris Street, which begins at the intersection of Captain Talbot Harris Street (formerly Osage Street) and First Street and ends at the intersection of Captain Talbot Harris Street and W.W. Harleaux (formerly Haase Street). A district map is supplemental and illustrative guide which is on record in the city clerk's office and Main Street Program Office. 
(g)  The city's locally recognized areas along the boundaries include properties on both sides of the streets so designated, unless otherwise stated. 
(h)  The city's locally recognized areas shall not be governed nor regulated under the Plaquemine Historic District rules and regulations. Such areas may adopt special zoning regulations or restrictions, as deemed appropriate. 
(i)  The Plaquemine Historic District shall be governed and regulated under the Plaquemine Historic District rules and regulations set forth herein and the bylaws of the historic district commission. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 7, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-19. - Zoning categories of historic district. 
(a)  The following zoning districts shall be established in the Plaquemine Historic District: 
HR Historic Residential HB Historic Business and/or Office HC Historic Commercial  
(b)  The allowable uses are set for the [historic districts] in sections 23-53 through 23-55 of the City Zoning Code, within these districts. 
(c)  Where street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the zoning map, the Plaquemine Historic Commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(d)  Any property with a nonconforming use within the historic district as of the effective date of this chapter shall be accepted. If a nonconforming use ceases to function for six months, the property shall revert to the zoning district of the adjoining properties within the block of the nonconforming property. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 8, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 24-20-24-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLAQUEMINE HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Historic district commissions, R.S. 32:732, 32:742 et seq. 

Sec. 24-35. - Historic district commission: establishment, membership terms and administrative matters. 
    There is hereby created the Plaquemine Historic District Commission which shall serve as the certified local government program (CLG) commission, with the following composition, terms, and administrative matters: 
(1)  Composition. 
a.  The historic district commission shall consist of minimum of five and no more than seven members, appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by the board of selectmen. All members shall be of the full age of majority and electorate of the city. Mayor reserves the right to appoint an additional member with nonvoting privileges, as needed. 
b.  Such membership shall be chosen, as far as possible, from historic preservation disciplines and citizens members who, through education or experience, have demonstrated a commitment to historic preservation. If there are no nominees to any preservation disciplines, the board of selectmen may proceed to appoint the commission without nominations. Commission membership may include historic preservation-related organization members in an advisory capacity. The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel for the commission in an advisory capacity. 
(2)  Terms. 
a.  [Terms to be staggered.] The first commission appointed shall serve staggered terms, as follows: two members to serve a term of one year; two members to serve a term of two years and one member to serve a term of three years. Any remaining members shall serve a one-year term. 
Thereafter, Plaquemine Historic District Commission members shall serve from three- to five-year terms in staggered terms. All commissioners shall draw lots to determine the individual's terms. Commission members may serve unlimited consecutive terms with majority vote from the board of selectmen. 
b.  Officers election. The commission shall elect annually from its own members a chairman, vice-chairman and any other officers it deems appropriate. All officers, except the secretary shall be elected from its own members. The Plaquemine Main Street manager shall serve as the recording secretary to the HD commission. The commission shall elect a secretary pro-tempore who shall take the minutes of the meeting in the absence of the recording secretary's attendance. 
c.  Vacancy. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term. Such vacancy shall be filled within 60 days, including expired terms. 
(3)  Administrative matters. 
a.  Compensation. No member shall receive compensation for his or her service on the commission, but shall be reimbursed, subject to availability of appropriated funds, for his or her actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in performance of his or her official duties. 
b.  Member attendance. If a member of the HD commission fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the HD commission, or fails to attend 50 percent of more of the regular meetings of the HD commission during a calendar year, unless excused by the chairman, the board of selectmen may declare such member's seat vacant and appoint a new member to serve the balance of the unexpired term. 
c.  Member recall. Any member may be recalled at any time by the mayor and/or board of selectmen for gross inefficiency, fraud or studied neglect. 
d.  Expenses. The commission may enter into contracts and may, if necessary, subject to appropriation, employ clerical and technical assistance of consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to the carrying on of its work. 
e.  Gifts . The commission may accept contributions, donations, trust and gifts and expend the same for the carrying on of its work. The commission may administer on behalf of the city any properties or easements, restrictions or other interests in real property which the city may have or may accept as gifts or otherwise and which the city may designate the commission as the administrator thereof. 
f.  Recordkeeping and rules . The HD commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions and determinations and of the vote of each member participating therein, and the absence or failure to vote of every member. The HD commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business and may adopt and amend such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and prescribe such forms as it shall deem desirable and necessary for the regulations of its affairs and the conduct of its business. The commission's activities shall be filed with the Louisiana Division of Historic Preservation under provisions of R.S. 25:731 et. seq. 
g.  Bylaws . The Commission shall make bylaws as it deems necessary for the conduct of its affairs not inconsistent with the laws of the city and state, subject to the approval of the board of selectmen. Commission bylaws shall be set forth in this chapter as approved by the board of selectmen. Any change of bylaws shall be approved by the board of selectmen. 
h.  Other powers. The commission shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and duties granted to it by this chapter, such other powers, authority and duties as may be delegated or assigned to it from time to time by vote of the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 9, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-36. - Commission meetings. 
(a)  Notice requirements. Public hearing notice shall be posted in the city's official journal as a legal advertisement with time and place at least seven days before such hearing, and on or near the main entrance of any hall or room where the commission usually meets. 
(b)  Meeting. A public hearing shall be held for each application for certificate of appropriateness affecting property, except in those instances where the commission has determined that the application for certificate of appropriateness is not a substantive change and further that the commission has determined the certificate compiles with standards adopted. The commission may also conduct a public hearing on other historic preservation matters for informational purposes. 
(c)  Voting. The commission shall hold regular meetings and special meetings, as needed, open to the public. The commission shall meet at regular intervals at least four times a year or in such other manner as the commission shall determine in its rules. A majority of the members of a commission shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a majority of the commission members shall be necessary to issue a certificate of appropriateness. 
(d)  Review of application. The commission shall determine promptly, and in all events within 45 [days] after the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, as the case may be, whether the application involves any exterior architectural features which are subject to approval by the commission. If the commission determines that such application involves any such features which are subject to approval by the commission, the commission shall hold a public hearing on such application unless such hearing is dispensed with as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Hearing an application. The commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on any application and shall give public notice of the time, place and purposes thereof at least seven business days before said hearing in such manner as it may determine. 
(f)  Period of determination. As soon as convenient after such public hearing, but in any event within 45 days after the filing of the application, or within such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the commission shall make determination on the application, giving consideration to the factors set forth in R.S. 25:737(A) and (B) and any other guidelines deemed appropriate. Applicant shall be given written notice of its decision setting for the reasons therefore by virtue of the certificate of appropriateness. The applicant and the commission may agree upon an extension of the determination period, or the application may be withdrawn within 45 days after application filing. 
(g)  Waiver of public hearing. A public hearing on an application need not be held if such hearing is waived in writing by the applicant and commission as follows: if the commission determines that the exterior architectural feature involved or its category or color, as the case may be, is so insubstantial in its effect on the historic district that it may be reviewed by the commission without public hearing on an application. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 10, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-37. - Commission powers and duties. 
    The Plaquemine Historic District Commission shall: 
(1)  Work with the board of selectmen on matters of historic preservation; 
(2)  Take the initiative in bringing people together on historic preservation issues; 
(3)  Develop and maintain and, from time to time, amend a plan for historic preservation in the city; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a city historic property register, survey historic properties including archaeological resources, and formulate design guidelines; 
(5)  Provide public information and education on preservation, coordinate resources and provide technical assistance and make recommendations to the board of selectmen and citizens of the city regarding historic preservation; 
(6)  Confer, as needed, with other city, parish, regional, state and national historic preservation boards and commissions. The commission shall work with and assist city departments in matters affecting historic preservation; 
(7)  Initiate plans for the restoration or rehabilitation of city-owned buildings, and shall advocate and recommend plans for the restoration or rehabilitation of privately-owned buildings and the preservation of archaeological resources; and 
(8)  Discourage and work with city departments to prevent unwanted demolition or removal of historic buildings and structures, and the destruction of archaeological resources. 
(9)  Review all proposed applications for certificates of appropriateness, certificate of nonapplicability or certificate of hardship variance for private and publicly-owned properties, including plans for new construction, reconstruction of existing structures, partial renovations, demolitions, relocation of properties, and construction of new and/or refurbishment of existing signs, including bill posters and the style, scale, material, size and location of outdoor advertising signs; 
(10)  Not consider interior arrangement or use but shall consider the relationship of the building's exterior concerned with all others in the historic preservation district as to avoid incongruity and promote harmony therewith; 
(11)  Adhere to and seek compatibility of structures in the historic district in terms of size, texture, scale and site plan and define design guidelines; 
(12)  Have the power to approve or deny applications as it may deem appropriate and has met all criteria in order to maintain the character of the historic district and forward certificates to the city inspector's office; 
(13)  Have jurisdiction in which the powers and duties of the Plaquemine Historic Commission shall be imposed shall be those areas of the city as outlined in this chapter; and 
(14)  Follow the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating and Reconstructing Historic Buildings in considering all proposals for new construction and/or rehabilitation, as copies of the guidelines may be available at the city inspector's office and Plaquemine Main Street office. 
(15)  In order to carry out its powers and duties, the Plaquemine Historic District Commission may employ and/or appoint technical advisors and/or consultants as provided by law. The cost of which shall be approved by the city prior to employing or appointing said professional. The cost shall be paid by the city upon satisfactory completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 11, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-38. - Historic preservation officer. 
(a)  The recording secretary of the historic district commission shall serve as the historic preservation officer. Such officer shall also be the designated Plaquemine Main Street manager. Such officer shall: 
(1)  Perform administrative acts required by the historic preservation ordinance, including giving notice, researching background material, preparing reports and recommendations, attending meetings of the HD commission, and rending such assistance to the HD commission as is required. 
(2)  Work with and assist departments of the city in matters affecting historic preservation. 
(3)  In conjunction with policy as established by the HD commission, shall establish and maintain a program of incentives. The incentives shall be used to encourage owners of historic properties to obtain HP designation and to assist owners of designated property in recognition, restoration and maintenance of their historic, architectural or archaeological resources. 
(4)  Perform such other acts as are required by this chapter or by the HD commission. 
(b)  Duties of the historic preservation officer may be delegated as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 12, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-39. - Historic district certificate of appropriateness application. 
(a)  Considerations of commission. In passing upon matters before it, the commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or structures, the commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the building or structure both in relation to the land area upon which the building or structure is situated and to buildings and structures in the vicinity, and the commission may in appropriate cases may request dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required by applicable ordinance or by-law. Such request must be approved by planning and zoning department. The commission shall not consider interior arrangements or the categories of exclusions specified in subsection (c). 
    The commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the historic district. 
(b)  Submission requirements. Except for the exclusions noted in subsection (c), no building or structure within an historic district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features unless the commission shall first have issued certificate of appropriateness with respect to such alteration, construction or demolition or relocation of property. 
    An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall file with the commission, in such form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal, a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed necessary by the commission to enable it to make a determination on the application. 
    A certificate of appropriateness can be filed administratively with the concurrence of the recording secretary and building official. Such certificates shall be presented at the next available HDC meeting. 
    No building permit for building or structure construction or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature and no demolition permit for full or partial building demolition or removal within an historic district shall be issued by city building official thereof until the certificate required by this section has been issued by the commission. 
(c)  Exclusions . The authority of the commission shall not extend to the review of the following categories of buildings, structures or exterior architectural features of the historic district and, in this event, the buildings, structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed or altered within the historic district without review by the commission: 
(1)  Temporary structures, subject, however, to such conditions as to duration of use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the commission may reasonably specify; 
(2)  Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennas, lawn statuary and similar appurtenances, or any one or more of them; 
(3)  The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, type of use and size of a building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence; 
(4)  Interior features, unless they are to be considered an integral part of the exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 13, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Certificates of appropriateness, R.S. 32:738. 
Sec. 24-40. - Historic district certificate of appropriateness procedure. 
    Commission powers and duties. The commission shall have the following powers, functions and duties related to issuance of certificates: 
(1)  If the commission determines that the construction, alteration, relocation of property, or demolition (full or partial) for which an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed will be appropriate for or compatible with the preservation or protection of the historic district, the commission shall cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the applicant. 
In the case of a disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness application, the commission shall place upon its records the reasons for such determination and shall forthwith cause a notice of its determination, accompanied by a copy of the reasons therefore as set forth in the records of the commission, to be issued to the applicant. Prior to the issuance of any disapproval, the commission may notify the applicant of its proposed action accompanied by recommendations of changes in the applicant's proposal which, if made, would make the application acceptable to the commission. The commission may make an appropriate alternative proposal recommendation to the applicant with respect to appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material, and similar features. The commission shall, as feasible, identify sources of additional information, technical assistance and financial incentives, which may eliminate the area of concern. If, within 14 days of the receipt of such notice, the applicant files a written modification of his application in conformity with the recommended changes of the commission, the commission shall cause certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the applicant. 
(2)  In the case of determination by the commission that an application for a certificate of appropriateness does not involve any exterior architectural feature, or involves an exterior architectural feature which is not then subject to review by the commission, the commission shall issue to the application such certificate denoting no cause of effect. 
(3)  Each certificate issued by the commission shall be dated and signed by its chairman or vice-chairman or secretary or such other person designated by the commission to sign such certificates on its behalf. Each certificate issued by the commission shall also be accompanied by a document substantiating insufficient detail, the basis of the determination. Certificates are valid for one full year from the date of issuance and must be revalidated by the commission if substantial work has not been completed by the end of this period. A certificate of appropriateness may be amended, modified or extended only in accordance with the procedures and criteria established for its original approval. 
(4)  The commission shall file with the city building official a copy or notice of all certificates, determinations of disapproval and substantiating documents issued by it. 
(5)  The commission shall have the right to make such recommendations for changes and modifications as it may deem necessary in order to enable the applicant to meet with its requirements. 
(6)  If the application is approved, the commission shall issue the certificate and send its decision, in writing, to the applicant and the city inspector within three business days. The applicant shall submit the certificate of appropriateness to the city building official, who may within three business days issue building permits for the proposed work. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 14, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Certificates of appropriateness, R.S. 32:738. 
Sec. 24-41. - Standards for certificate of appropriateness. 
    In reviewing applications, the commission shall consider, in relation to the design treatment levels and the defined elements of design for the historic district: 
(1)  Whether the proposed work will be appropriate according to the design treatment levels and defined elements of design for the historic district, in which case the commission will issue a certificate of appropriateness; or 
(2)  Whether the proposed work will be inappropriate according to the design treatment levels and defined elements of design for the historic district, but is without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the intents and purposes of this chapter, and where denial of the application will result in undue financial hardship to the applicant, in which case the commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness; or 
(3)  Whether the proposed work will be inappropriate according to the design treatment levels and defined elements of design for the historic district, in which case the commission will issue a denial. 
    The commission shall give consideration to: 
(1)  The historic, cultural, archaeological, or architectural significance of the historic site or structure and its relationship to the historic, cultural, archaeological, or architectural significance of the surrounding area; 
(2)  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of a historic site, or structure to the remainder of the historic site or structure and to the surrounding area; 
(3)  The general compatibility of proposed exterior design, scale, proportion, arrangement, texture, and materials to the historic site or structure and to the surrounding area; 
(4)  Compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties; and consistent with the intent and principles of the Plaquemine District Design Manual (most recent addition) which is more commonly known as the "HDC design guidelines." 
(5)  Any other factors including aesthetic factors which the Commission deems to be pertinent. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 15, 9-8-09) 
State Law reference- Certificates of appropriateness, R.S. 32:738. 
Sec. 24-42. - Appeals. 
(a)  [Appeal in writing.] Any owner, agent, lessee or other person acting for or in conjunction with the applicant aggrieved by any decision, act or failure to act, or proceeding inconsistent with historic district commission's decision shall have a right to apply in writing to the board of selectmen for reversal or modification thereof; and the mayor shall have the right to stay or stop all further action until the board of selectmen shall have had an opportunity to rule thereon. Any such appeal shall be taken within 30 days from date of the written decision of the Plaquemine Historic District Commission, and the board of selectmen may consider said appeal at its next regular meeting or special meeting, but, in any event, not more than 45 days thereafter. The board of selectmen may affirm, deny, change, reverse, or modify any decision of the Plaquemine Historic District Commission by majority vote of its members present. 
(b)  [Civil suit.] Any owner, agent, lessee or other person acting for or in conjunction with the applicant aggrieved by any decision of the board of selectmen affecting the historic district shall have the right to file a civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days from the date of decision by the board of selectmen. 
(c)  Procedure for appeals. 
(1)  Enforcement. The 18th Judicial District Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of R.S. 25:731 et seq. and this chapter enacted thereunder and the determinations, rulings and regulations issued pursuant thereto and may, upon the petition of the mayor or the board of selectmen or of the commission, restrain by injunction violations thereof; and, without limitation, such court may order the removal of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature constructed in violation thereof, or the substantial restoration of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature altered or demolished in violation thereof, and may issue such other orders for relief as may be equitable. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of $500.00. Each day during any portion of which a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Other options. The remedy provided by this section shall be exclusive but the parties shall have all rights of appeal and exception as in other equity cases. 
(3)  Costs. Costs shall not be allowed against the commission unless it shall appear to the court that the commission acted with gross negligence, in bad faith or with malice in the matter from which appeal was taken. Costs shall not be allowed against the party appealing from such determination of the commission unless it shall appear to the court that such party acted in bad faith or with malice in making the appeal to the court. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 16, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-43. - Injunctions. 
    Whenever any person has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this chapter, the commission or city may make application to the appropriate court for an order enjoining such act or practice, or requiring such person to refrain from such prospective violation or to remedy such violation by restoring the affected property to its previous condition. Upon showing by the commission or the city that such person has engaged or is about to engage in such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other appropriate order shall be granted without bond. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 17, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-44. - Penalties. 
    Any owner, agent, lessee, or other person acting for or in conjunction with the owner, who has not received a certificate of appropriateness from the Plaquemine Historic District Commission and has begun construction, reconstruction or refurbishment of a property or signage within the historic district shall be considered in violation of this chapter shall be fined up to $500.00 for each infraction until the appropriate application and plans have been received, approved and a certificate of appropriateness issued. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 18, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-45. - Emergency stopping work without certificate. 
    The city inspector or his designee is empowered to promptly stop any work started without or contrary to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this chapter. In addition to other remedies and penalties, where there is a violation of this article, the city building official, through the city attorney, shall institute appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 19, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-46. - Building permit. 
    Before work commences within the Plaquemine Historic District, an application for a building permit may be required. Such permit shall be submitted to the city building official by the applicant and no work shall begin before the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 20, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-47. - Demolition of historic buildings. 
    Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to preserve the historic and architectural resource within the historic district. However it is recognized that there can be circumstances beyond the control of the owner, or situations involved public health, safety, and welfare which may result in the necessary demolition of a structure. These situations include a building which constitutes danger to the public, safety and welfare, or which involves a resource whose loss dos not diminish or adversely affect the integrity of the district, or which imposes a hardship on its owners. 
    Process. The process for the review of proposed demolition or removal of buildings, sites, or structures located in Plaquemine Historic District shall be as provided in the application for certificate of appropriateness in sections 24-39 through 24-42, with the additional requirements set forth herein and in section 24-48. 
(1)  [Standards of review.] In addition to any other requirements and/or standards, the historic district commission standards of review shall include: 
a.  The architectural or historical value or significance of the structure or feature and its relationship or contribution to other historic value of the property in the surrounding area. 
b.  The relationship of the exterior architectural features or landscape features to the remainder of the structure, site or property and to the surrounding area. 
c.  The relation of historic or architectural features found on the site to other such features within the surrounding area. 
d.  Any other factors, including aesthetic, which may be relevant to the historical or architectural aspects of the property or deem pertinent by the commission. 
(2)  Denial of demolition. In the event a demolition is denied, no certificate of appropriateness for demolition shall be issued for one year from the date of the HD commission initial hearing on the subject property. 
(3)  [Granting of demolition.] In addition to the standards of review in subsection (1) herein, the standards for granting a demolition certificate of appropriateness shall only be granted if the applicant demonstrates: 
a.  That the building is of no or minimal historic significance because of its location, condition, modifications or other factors, and its demolition shall be inconsequential to historic preservation needs of the area; or 
b.  Loss of the structure would not adversely affect the integrity of the historic district or the historic, architectural or aesthetic relationship to adjacent properties and its demolition shall be inconsequential to historic preservation needs of the area.; or 
c.  If the building is determined to have historic or architectural significance, that the denial of the demolition permit will resulting an hardship to the property owner. Such hardship shall be determined in accordance with City Code section 24-48. 
(4)  [Exceptions.] An application for a demolition certificate of appropriateness shall be exempt from these demolition review requirements if the building official or his designee notifies the HDC recording secretary in writing that the building has been ordered to be demolished in whole or part by the mayor or board of selectmen to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(5)  [Areas in which provisions apply.] The provisions of this section apply to all areas of the city under the HP designation on the effective date of this chapter and to all areas of the city for which applications for HP designation are initiated after the effective date of this chapter. 
(6)  [Access to property.] A demolition certificate of appropriateness may be conditioned on stipulations which provide for rights of access to the property for the purposes of documentation or for agreed upon removal of artifacts. 
(7)  [Possibility of assistance.] Upon denial of a demolition certificate of appropriateness, the recording secretary/Main Street manager may contact the property owner to determine what available assistance might be feasible to place the property into productive use. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 21, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-48. - Information to submit for the demolition or moving of historic buildings. 
    In consideration of an application for a certificate of appropriateness to demolish, the applicant shall provide the following information to the Plaquemine Historic District Commission, which must be submitted before the application is considered: 
(1)  Form of ownership of the property. 
(2)  A report from an engineer licensed in the state as to the structural soundness of the structure and its adaptability for rehabilitation. Any dangerous conditions should be identified. Include the engineer's resume highlighting professional experience in historic property assessment/rehabilitation. 
(3)  Cost of the proposed demolition or removal and an estimate of any additional costs that would be incurred to comply with standard conditions of approval such as documentation. 
(4)  Fair market value of the property to be presented through an appraisal by a qualified professional expert. All appraisals obtained within the previous two by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the property. 
(5)  An itemized breakdown from a professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure of the property. 
(6)  Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, identification of the seller, a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or the applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased, and any items of financing between the seller and buyer. The settlement statement must be submitted. The remaining balance of any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years must be submitted. 
(7)  If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years; the itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the past two years, and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period. 
(8)  Price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years. The most recent tax assessment must be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 22, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-49. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Any resource which is designated as historic and all resources within the historic district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons as may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such resource if it is found to have one or more of the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration to the extent that creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the city inspector. 
(2)  Deterioration, as determined by the city inspector, of a building characterized by one or more of the following: 
a.  Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports, or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads safely. 
d.  Parts of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, lost or buckle due to defective material, workmanship or deterioration. 
e.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that is insufficient to carry imposed loads safely 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members which say, split, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration. 
g.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration. 
h.  Any fault, defect or condition in the building which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(b)  If the preliminary determination that a resource is being demolished by neglect, the city building official shall notify the owners of the resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefore and shall give the owner of record 30 days from the date of mailing of such notice or the posting thereof on the property, whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notices shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail, restricted delivery, mailed to the last known address of the record owner as listed on the city tax rolls. 
(2)  If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posed in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource. 
(c)  If the owner fails to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by lack of a certificate of appropriateness and/or a building permit, the commission shall notify the city building official, who shall notify the owner in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the commission. For the purpose of ensuring lawful notice or mitigating circumstances, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The commission shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If, after such hearing, the commission and the city inspector shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, the city inspector may take appropriate action against the owner if the necessary repairs are not completed within 90 days of the determination that the subject building or structure is being demolished by neglect. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 23, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-50. - Exterior changes to buildings. 
(a)  Due to the unique nature of the historic district, all new construction or reconstruction of existing structures shall be made to conform to architectural periods or styles prevalent in the historic district, specifically the neighboring structures. Conformance with this intent shall be at the discretion of the Plaquemine Historic District Commission. 
(b)  Any existing building in the historic district shall not be altered or changed to resemble or mimic a style that is earlier than its construction and/or ground breaking date. 
(c)  The owner of any property within the historic district shall apply at least 21 days prior to construction start date for a certificate of appropriateness from the commission before commencement of any work in: 
(1)  The erection of any new building or construction in the historic district; 
(2)  The alteration or addition to any existing structure in the historic district; or 
(3)  The painting and major repairing of any existing building situated within the historic district; or 
(4)  The relocation of any building in or into the historic district; or 
(5)  The construction or refurbishment of any signage. 
    Ordinary and necessary maintenance and repairs which do not involve a change of design, material, or of the outward appearance, thereof, nor prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such feature which is required for by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition shall not require an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(d)  The application therefore must be received in the Plaquemine Main Street office at least 14 calendar days before the next HD commission meeting. Such applications may be submitted at the city inspector's office or Main Street Program office. Applications may also be accepted at the Plaquemine Main Street Program office that do not require a prior zoning change or variance approval. 
    Applications shall be accompanied by the full plans and specifications thereof so far as they relate to the proposed appearance, color, texture or materials and architectural design of the exterior, including the front, sides, rear and roof of such buildings. Also included are alterations of additions of any building or outbuilding, party wall, courtyard, sidewalk, driveway, parking area, fence or other dependency thereof, and any construction or refurbishment of signs. 
(e)  Where, by reason of topographic conditions, irregularly shaped lots, or an unusual circumstance applicable solely to the particular applicant, the strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in serious undue hardship, then the commission shall have the power to vary or modify adherence to this chapter provided always that its requirements insure harmony with the general purposes hereof, and will not adversely affect the Historic District as a whole. 
(f)  Building erection, modification or relocation that requires zoning change or variance must be approved by the Plaquemine Planning and Zoning Commission before such application can be submitted to the Plaquemine Historic District Commission. 
(g)  Demolition of any building, site or structure in the historic district is prohibited, except as provided in sections 24-47 and 24-48 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 24, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-51. - New construction in historic district. 
(a)  Proposals for new construction in the historic district should seek compatibility with existing structures through the appropriate use of site planning, materials, decorative details, architectural elements and scale. A proposal should not draw unnecessary attention to itself in any one of these characteristics. The architectural context is of primary concern. The following should be considered: 
(1)  Scale. The relationship of the building and its elements, including the doors and windows, to other structures in the district. It is important in considering scale that a careful study is made of the height, width, and mass of buildings in the immediate neighborhood and historic district as a whole. This study should serve to confirm or deny the appropriateness of the height, width, and mass of the proposed building. Maximum height of any new structure/building shall conform to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating and Reconstructing Historic Buildings. In no case shall a new structure exceed a height of 35 feet above the street. 
(2)  Siting. The positioning of a building on a lot. This process includes determining the setback of a building, the spacing of the building from adjacent buildings, and the location of the walls, fences, walks, drives, and landscaping, if any of these are used in the overall design. The setback of any new construction shall correspond to those of the adjacent properties, but shall not be in conflict with zoning ordinance setback requirements. 
(3)  Materials. The surface building fabric which contributes to the exterior character and appearance of a building. The materials used in the new construction should conform to the style of the structure, the neighborhood, and the historic district. 
(4)  Decorative details. The ornamentation or embellishment of the structure. These include cornices, lintels, arches, balustrades, chimneys, shutters, columns, and other common details. When used, details should create a unifying effect on a building and should be compatible with the context of the neighborhood. 
(5)  Architectural elements. Parts of a building/structure that are integral to its composition. These include balconies, roofs, porches, chimneys, dormers, parapets, and other parts of a building that contribute to its overall shape and silhouette. The choice and arrangement of elements of a proposed building should reflect those of other buildings in the neighborhood. The building should not draw unnecessary attention to itself by failing to relate to neighboring styles. The object is to complement the context of the historic district. 
(b)  A certificate of appropriateness for new construction in the historic district shall satisfy following criteria: 
(1)  The new construction must be compatible with the setbacks along the block face and facing block face(s); 
(2)  The exterior features of new construction must be compatible with the exterior features of structures along the block face or facing block face(s); and 
(3)  The proportions of the new construction, including height, width, length and roofline, must be compatible with structures and objects along the block face or facing block face(s). 
    Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed to require or impose a single architectural style in the historic district. 
(c)  The erection and construction of any type of billboard, outdoor advertising or off-premises sign on a parcel classified as Historic Residential (HR) is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 25, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-52. - Signage. 
    Any signage in the Historic, Historic Commercial and Historic Business [districts] shall conform, as follows: 
(1)  All signs to be displayed on parcels classified and zoned as Historic Business (HB) and Historic Commercial (HC) must obtain a certificate of appropriateness prior to being constructed or displayed. 
(2)  Any person seeking to erect, construct or display a sign in the Historic Business (HB) or Historic Commercial (HC) shall follow the procedures set forth in City Code section 24-39, Application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 26, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-53. - General historic district characteristics. 
(a)  Suitable colors and color combinations. The Plaquemine Historic District Commission shall prepare and maintain a book of historic colors suitable for use. This book shall be available at the Plaquemine Main Street Manager's office. All new construction, reconstruction, partial renovations, or refurbishing of existing structures or construction of new or refurbishment of existing signs shall conform with this book of historic colors and shall be compatible with the neighboring properties. 
(b)  Fences. All fence designs must be in harmony with the nature of the district. The list of fencing materials that are generally acceptable shall be maintained at the Plaquemine Main Street manager's office. The following fencing materials are not acceptable: barbed wire, chain link, concrete block, stockade, plywood, hardboard, or asbestos board. 
(c)  Floodlights. The historic district shall not be illuminated by privately controlled floodlights or other illumination except as approved by the Plaquemine Historic Commission or as permitted specifically by ordinance. City-maintained security lights on poles shall be allowed in the historic district. It is recommended that these floodlights be placed in back yards. 
(d)  Porches and overhanging balconies. No porches, galleries, or overhanging balconies may be removed, but new or additional balconies may be constructed if they confirm to the distinctive architecture of the building and of the historic district. The application for a certificate of appropriateness for all such new construction or any renovation shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Aerials, antennas, etc. The placement or construction of aerials, antennas, satellite dishes of any type or other forms of objects not in keeping with the presentation of the historic district shall not be located where they can be seen by casual observance by the general public. Applications and plans for the discreet placement or construction of any of these items shall be submitted to the Plaquemine Historic Commission for their approval. 
(f)  Commercial vehicles> No heavy-duty/highway-duty vehicles (such as semis or large travel trailers), except in the case of deliveries or repairs, shall be parked in plain view of the general public in the residential areas of the historic district. Any existing authorized use as of the effective date of this chapter shall be allowed as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 27, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-54. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
    In order to insure the protective maintenance or resources, the exterior features of properties in the historic district shall be maintained in compliance with the International Building Code as previously adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 28, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-55. - Ordinary repairs permitted. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure within the historic district. Ordinary maintenance or repair shall mean any maintenance or repair not defined as "work" herein. Ordinary and necessary maintenance and repairs which do not involve a change of design, material, or of the outward appearance, thereof, nor prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such feature which is required for by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition shall not require an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 29, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-56. - Landscaping and yard maintenance. 
(a)  Landscaping of all properties in the historic district shall be of a scale and style that is compatible with the structures/buildings on the property and appropriate to the neighborhood. 
(b)  All trees, shrubs, bushes, planting beds, etc. shall be maintained to their normal maintenance requirements. 
(c)  Lawns and grass shall be maintained and mowed on a regular basis. 
(d)  All tree limbs overhanging sidewalks shall be maintained at a height not less than eight feet from the sidewalk. 
(e)  All yard ornamental salutary, fixtures, amenities, gazebo, etc., shall be compatible with the scale and proportion of the structure and lot size. The context of these items shall be appropriate to the historic district. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 30, 9-8-09) 
Sec. 24-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If it is determined by the Plaquemine Historic District Commission that a structure in an historic district is being demolished by neglect, the commission, on its own initiative, and to insure that the structure shall be preserved and protected in consonance with the purposes of this article may notify in writing to the city inspector office requesting that the city building inspector or his designee require the correction of defects or necessary repairs of the structures. 
(b)  In addition to other enforcement rights created by this article, the requirements of a historic district may be enforced upon the complaint of any property owner or association of property owners within the district. 
(c)  Any person or organization performing work within a designated historic district prior to the issuance of the required building permit or contrary to conditions specified in any permit issued for work within a district shall, upon conviction, be subject to a $500.00 fine. The Plaquemine Historic District Commission may require that conditions created by violations of this article be remedied in conformance with the requirements for the district. 
(d)  In cases where there is imminent danger of the loss of a designated historic building, site or structure, the Plaquemine Historic District Commission shall notify the mayor and board of selectmen to request to seek such injunctive relief as it deems necessary and appropriate to preserve the historic building, site or structure. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 31, 9-8-09) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-6 1-5 1-12 1-6 1-8 1-7 1-10 1-8 1-13 1-9 1-11 1-10 1-7 2-1 2-1 2-1.1 2-1 2-2 2-17 2-3 15-16 15-17 2-4 15-18 15-19 15-20 2-5 15-21 2-6 15-22 15-23 2-7 15-24 2-8 15-25 2-9 15-61 15-62 15-63 15-64 15-65 15-66 2-9.1 15-37 15-38 15-46 15-47 2-11 14-19 14-20 2-12 14-21 2-13 14-22 2-14 14-23 2-15 7-1 2-16 7-2 2-17 7-3 2-18 7-4 2-19 7-5 2-20 2-87 2-22 2-18 2-24 2-2 2-25 2-41 2-26 2-42 2-27 2-43 2-28 2-44 2-29 2-45 2-41 2-64 2-42 2-65 2-43 2-66 2-44 2-67 2-45 2-68 2-46 2-69 2-47 2-70 3-1 3-29 3-2 3-30 3-3 3-31 3-4 3-32 3-5 3-34 3-6 3-30 3-7 3-30 3-10 3-35 3-11 3-36 3-20 3-29 3-21 3-30 3-22 3-32 3-23 3-34 3-24 3-30 3-25 3-30 3-27 3-35 3-35 3-64 3-36 3-66 3-37 3-65 3-38 3-67 3-39 3-68 3-40 3-69 3-41 3-70 3-42 3-70 4-1 5-55 4-2 5-64 4-3 5-65 5-66 4-6 5-52 4-7 5-1 4-8 5-2 4-10 5-16 4-11 5-26 4-12 5-27 4-13 5-28 4-14 5-29 4-15 5-28 4-16 5-36 5-37 5-38 4-17 5-39 4-18 5-3 5-1 6-16 5-2 6-17 5-3 6-18 5-4 6-1 5-5 6-2 5-6 6-3 5-7 6-19 6-1 10-31 6-2 10-32 6-3 10-33 6-4 10-34 6-5 10-35 6-6 10-37 6-7 10-36 6-8 10-2 6-21 10-16 6-25 10-17 6-26 10-18 6-27 10-19 7-1 11-16 7-2 11-17 7-3 11-18 7-4 11-19 7-5 11-21 7-6 11-1 7-7 11-1 7-8 11-2 7-9 13-21 7-10 13-21 7-11 13-22 7-12 13-23 7-13 13-24 7-14 13-25 7-15 11-3 8-1 6-116 8-2 6-117 8-3 6-146 8-4 6-147 8-5 6-148 8-6 6-150 8-7 6-149 8-8 6-136 8-9 6-118 8-10 6-137 8-11 6-119 8-12 6-120 8-13 6-121 8-14 6-122 8-15 6-123 8-16 6-124 8-17 6-125 8-18 6-126 8-19 6-127 8 1/2-1 12-1 9-1 19-16 19-23 9-2 19-16 19-20 19-22 9-3 19-19 9-4 19-17 9-5 19-18 9-6 19-21 10-1 20-36 10-3 20-39 10-4 20-37 10-5 20-38 10-6 20-21 10-8 20-16 10-9 20-17 10-19 20-18 10-20 20-19 10-21 20-20 10-40 20-51 10-41 20-52 10-42 20-54 10-43 20-55 10-44 20-56 10-45 20-57 10-46 20-58 10-47 20-59 10-48 20-60 10-49 20-61 10-50 20-62 10-51 20-63 10-52 20-64 10-53 20-65 10-55 20-66 11-1 9-1 11-2 9-2 11-3 9-3 11-4 9-4 11-5 9-5 11-6 9-6 11-7 9-7 11-8 9-8 11-9 9-9 11-10 9-10 11-11 9-11 11-12 9-12 11-13 9-13 11-14 9-14 11-15 9-15 11-16 9-16 11-17 9-17 11-18 9-18 11-19 9-19 11-20 9-20 11-21 9-21 11-31 9-56 11-32 9-57 11-33 9-58 11-34 9-59 11-35 9-61 11-36 9-60 11-37 9-62 11-38 9-65 11-39 9-77 11-40 9-79 11-41 9-80 11-43 9-81 11-44 9-82 11-45 9-83 11-46 9-84 11-48 9-85 11-49 9-86 11-50 9-87 11-51 9-88 11-52 9-89 11-53 9-101 11-54 9-102 11-55 9-103 11-56 9-104 11-58 9-122 11-59 9-124 11-60 9-125 11-61 9-126 11-62 9-42 11-63 9-127 11-64 9-38 11-65 9-39 11-66 9-178 11-67 9-78 11-68 9-105 11-69 9-164 11-70 9-123 11-71 9-177 11-72 9-143 11-73 9-144 11-74 9-145 11-75 9-106 11-76 9-108 11-77 9-36 11-78 9-37 11-80 9-107 11-81 9-109 11-82 9-128 11-83 9-146 11-84 9-179 11-85 9-180 11-86 9-40 11-87 9-41 11-89 9-142 11-90 9-181 11-91 20-79 20-86 20-87 20-88 20-89 20-90 20-91 20-92 20-93 11-92 9-129 11-103 4-1 11-104 9-147 11-105 9-165 11-108 9-148 11-109 9-130 11-110 9-149 11-111 9-110 11-113 13-2 13-3 13-4 11-114 9-150 11-117 9-182 12-1 6-86 12-2 6-87 12-3 6-88 12-4-12-7 6-32 12-8 17-16 17-17 17-18 12-9 6-98 12-10 6-97 12-11 6-96 12-12 6-99 12-13 6-100 12-14 6-101 12-15 6-102 12-16 6-103 12-17 6-33 12-18 6-34 12-19 6-35 12-20 6-36 12-21 6-37 12-22 6-38 12-23 6-39 12-24 6-40 12-25 6-41 12-26 6-42 12-27 6-43 12-28 6-44 12-29 6-45 12-30 6-46 12-31 6-47 12-32 6-48 12-33 6-49 12-34 6-50 12-35 6-51 12-36 6-52 12-37 6-53 12-38 6-54 12-39 6-55 12-40 6-56 12-41 6-57 12-42 6-58 12-43 6-59 12-44 6-60 12-45 6-61 12-46 6-62 12-47 6-63 12-48 6-64 12-49 6-65 12-50 6-66 12-51 6-67 12-52 6-68 12-53 6-69 12-54 6-70 12-55 6-71 12-56 6-72 12-57 6-73 12-58 6-74 12-59 6-75 12-60 6-76 12-61 6-77 12-62 6-78 13-1 21-69 21-70 13-2 21-72 14-1 21-26 14-2 21-26 14-3 21-27 14-4 21-28 14-5-14-8 21-29 14-9 21-30 14-10 21-31 14-11 21-32 14-12 21-33 15-2 17-1 15-3 17-2 16-1 18-4 16-2 18-1 16-3 18-2 16-4 18-3 16-10 18-16 16-11 18-17 16-12 18-18 16-13 18-19 16-14 18-20 16-15 18-21 16-16 18-22 16-20 18-36 16-21 18-37 16-22 18-39 16-30 18-5 17-1 22-21 17-2 22-24 17-3 22-36 22-37 17-4 22-38 22-39 22-40 17-5 22-1 22-2 22-23 17-6 22-3 17-7 22-22 17-8 22-4 17-9 22-5 17-12 22-6 18-1 23-16 18-2 23-17 18-10 23-1 18-15 23-46 18-16 23-47 18-17 23-48 18-18 23-49 18-25 23-31 18-26 23-32 18-30 23-61 18-31 23-62 18-33 23-63 18-34 23-64 18-35 23-65 18-40 23-76 18-41 23-78 18-45 23-77 18-50 23-91 18-51 23-92 18-52 23-93  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 6-29-67 6 1-5 805 8-12-69 2-1 806 8-12-69 2-1 807 10-14-69 5-37 810-A 5-12-70 2-1 816 6-23-70 2-1 816A 7-14-70 10-56 13-37 10-57 13-38 10-58 13-39 10-59 13-39 816-B 7-14-77 3-16 819 9-8-70 5-53 821 11-10-70 11-4 824 5-25-71 23-32 824-A 6-22-71 21-1 839 12-14-71 2-1 840 2-8-72 1 20-41 841 3-14-72 2-1 846 7-25-72 23-32 855 12-12-72 9-85 857 4-18-73 1 6-163 2 6-164 3 6-165 4 18-38 858 4-24-73 1 5-54 3 5-55 859 5-8-73 1 11-20 866 7-10-73 4-16 4-17 4-18 4-19 4-20 4-21 4-31 4-32 4-33 875 6-25-74 9-163 876 6-25-74 10-1 889 3-8-73 2-1 902 1-11-77 2-1 904 2-8-77 21-67 917 11-22-77 21-71 3-28-78 131/2-1 16-1 16-2 131/2-2 16-3 131/2-3 16-4 131/2-4 16-5 131/2-5 16-6 918 5-23-78 2-86 919 6-13-78 20-53 20-63 925 2-13-79 20-40 926 2-13-79 14-16 14-17 14-18 927 2-13-79 2-16 928 2-21-79 21-69, 21-70 930 3-13-79 6-9 10-49 6-10 10-50 6-11 10-51 6-12 10-52 6-13 10-53 937 9-11-79 3-1 3-17 938 9-25-79 20-21 939 10-9-79 2-31 940 11-13-79 10-2 943 1-22-80 1 8-16 2 8-17 3 8-18 5 8-20 4 8-19 7 8-21 8-22 8 8-23 948 7-22-80 20-21(a)(11) 948-A 8-26-80 19-1-19-9 21-55.1-21-55.9 949 9-23-80 14-16-14-18 950 1-27-81 19-1 6-181 19-2 6-187(c) 19-3 6-186 19-4 6-187(d) 19-5 6-183 19-6 6-182 19-7 6-184 19-8 6-185 19-9 6-187(a), (b) 19-10 6-187(e) 952 2-10-81 18-52 23-93 953 2-24-81 11-5 9-180 955 5-12-81 5-16-5-20, 5-26-5-29, 5-36-5-38 957 5-26-81 21-67 964 8-25-81 1-5 20-104-20-108 967 11-24-81 1, 2 19-16 3 19-17 4 19-20 5 19-23(a), (b) 6 19-23(c) 968 11-24-81 13-21-13-23 970 1-26-82 21-69, 21-70, 21-73, 21-74 971 2-9-82 3-16(b)-(e) 972 3-9-82 14.5-1-14.5-8 980 7-13-82 23-16 987 9-28-82 23-50 989 11-7-82 17-3 1000 9-13-83 1-9 Adoption Ordinance p. ix 1003 3-13-84 22-7 1012-A 9-11-84 3-30 1013 9-25-84 1-7 6-200-6-206 1014 9-25-84 4-2 1015 10-9-84 14-17, 14-24 1016 10-23-84 15-1-15-4 1017-A 12-11-84 9:1-9:3 9-1-9-3 9:5-9:19 9-4-9-18 9:21-9:24 9-19-9-22 9:26 9-23 9:27 9-24 9:33 9-55 9:35 9-56 9:36 9-57 9:37 9-59 9:38 9-58 9:39 9-60 9:39.1 9-61 9:40 9-62 9:40.1 9-63 9:46 9-64 9:56 9-75 9:56.1 9-76 9:59 9-77 9:63 9-170 9:63.1 9-84 9:63.2 9-78 9:63.3 9-79 9:68.1 9-172 9:67-9:69 9-80-9-82 9:70 9-173 9:71 9-83 9:83-9:85 9-95-9-97 9:90 9-98 9:90.2 9-99 9:90.3 9-100 9:91 9-149 9:91.1-9:91.4 9-150-9-153 9:92 9-155 9:93 9-116 9:95 9-115 9:95.3 9-117 9:101 9-174 9:102 9-136 9:103-9:105 9-133-9-135 9:106 9-103 9:106.1 9-137 9:106.2 9-175 9:107 9-102 9:108 9-36 9:108.2 9-38 9:110 9-42 9:110.1 9-43 9:112 9-37 9:284 9-101 9:965 9-122 9:966 9-104 9:1000 9-119 9:1001 9-176 9:1002-9:1004 9-39-9-41 9:1005 9-120 9:1007 9-178 9:1008 9-177 9:1009 9-118 9:1011 9-121 9:1012 9-171 9:1014 9-148 9:1015 9-156 9:1017 9-179 9:1019 9-180 9:1020 9-25 13:1-13:9 13-1-13-9 13:21-13:24 13-21-13-24 13:37-13:39 13-37-13-39 13:40 13-50 13:41 13-51 13:50-13:53 13-65-13-68 13:54-13:56 13-80-13-82 13:57 13-113 13:60-13:64 13-95-13-99 13:65-13:67 13-110-13-112 13:81 13-10 20:1 20-1 20:2 20-12 20:12 20-13 20:20-20:27 20-25-20-32 20:30 20-45 20:33 20-46 20:34 20-47 20:40 20-150 20:42-20:45 20-151-20-154 20:47-20:53 20-155-20-161 20:60-20:73 20-172-20-185 20:80-20:87 20-196-20-203 20:90-20:99 20-475-20-484 20:100-20:108 20-214-20-222 20:110-20:115 20-232-20-237 20:120-20:123 20-248-20-251 20:130-20:134 20-262-20-266 20:140-20:145 20-277-20-282 20:150-20:153 20-346-20-349 20:160-20:162 20-360-20-362 20:164-20:172 20-363-20-371 20:174 20-372 20:180-20:183 20-383-20-386 20:190-20:196 20-397-20-403 20:200 20-293 20:201 20-294 20:204 20-295 20:205 20-296 20:209-20:224 20-414-20-429 20:225.1-20:225.6 20-307-20-312 20:226-20:232 20-313-20-319 20:240-20:245 20-330-20-335 20:250-20:252 20-60-20-62 20:260-20:272 20-75-20-87 20:274-20:285 20-88-20-99 20:290-20:294 20-111-20-117 20:300-20:302 20-128-20-130 20:306-20:312 20-131-20-137 20:337-20:341 20-440-20-444 20:350-20:359 20-455-20-464 Res. 12-11-84 6-203(d)(3) 1020 2-12-85 1-14 Res. 3-26-85 23-1(9) Res. 5-14-85 14-17 Res. 5-14-85 15-2 Res. 5-14-85 15-17 Amend. 6-11-85 4-19 Amend. 7-9-85 20:134 20-266(6) Amend. 7-23-85 9:95.1 9-123 Amend. 8-13-85 3-40(a)(5) Amend. 8-27-85 20:196.2 20-373 Amend. 9-10-85 13:64.1 13-100 Amend. 9-24-85 13:20-13:23 13-21-13-23 Amend. 10-22-85 2-19 Amend. 1-13-86 2-16 Res. 2-25-86 2-116-2-118 Amend. 2-25-86 20-251 Amend. 7-8-86 13:64.1 13-100 Res. 6-10-86 1-14(c) Amend. 7-8-86 13:64.1 13-100 Res. 9-9-86 3-31 Amend. 9-23-86 23-1(a) 1033 10-14-86 4:2-4:10 4-45-4-53 4:12-4:15.6 4-54-4-63 Amend. 11-25-86 2-57 1039 11-25-86 3-42 1040 11-25-86 3-43 Amend. 1-27-87 20:134 20-266 Res. 1-27-87 23-31 Amend. 2-10-87 6-300-6-308 Amend. 3-10-87 6-309 Res. 4-14-87 2-20 1046 5-26-87 2-46-2-50 1049 6-23-87 19-16 19-17 19-24 Amend. 9-8-87 6-205(9) 1054 9-22-87 19-16 19-19 19-25 1055 1-12-88 5-4-5-12 Amend. 2-23-88 9:35.1 9-65 Amend. 2-23-88 9:35.2 9-66 Amend. 2-23-88 9:45 9-157 Amend. 2-23-88 11-22 Res. 5-10-88 2-76-2-79 Amend. 5-10-88 9-115(a)(5), (c) Amend. 7-12-88 3-64(b)-(e) Amend. 7-12-88 20-266(7) Amend. 9-13-88 3-64(f) Amend. 1-10-89 23-1 23-16, 23-17 23-31-23-34 23-46-23-50 23-61-23-65 23-76-23-78 23-91-23-93 1070 2-14-89 6-89 Res. 2-14-89 6-136 Amend. 2-14-89 6-137(d) Amend. 2-14-89 20-399(17) Res. 3-14-89 2-3 1072 3-14-89 2-16 Res. 4-25-89 19-26 Res. 5-23-89 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3(note) Amend. 5-23-89 6-86(a) 1076 8-8-89 20-374 1077 8-22-89 12-2 1078 9-12-89 23-94-23-97 23-104-23-107 Amend. 9-26-89 20-399(a)(18) 1083 11-28-89 16-4 Amend. 1-9-90 2-48 Amend. 1-9-90 21-26(d)-(f) Amend. 1-9-90 21-69(a) Amend. 1-9-90 21-75 Amend. 2-13-90 20-295(a) Amend. 5-22-90 20-251(13) 001 6-26-90 23-1(14) 002 6-26-90 6-20 Amend. 6-26-90 23-31 003 8-14-90 5-21, 5-22 Amend. 8-28-90 5-54 004 9-11-90 23-18-23-30.1 008  1- 8-91 1-14(c) 009  1- 8-91 6-202(d)(1) 010  3-26-91 1 19-17 014  8-27-91       Rpld 2-46-2-50 Res. 11-12-91 2-58 Res. 11-12-91 2-100 015 11-12-91 20-404 020  4-14-92 17-19-17-21 022  6- 9-92 17-21 024  7-14-92 9-44 025  7-14-92 9-85 026  7-28-92 2-46-2-50 027  8-11-92 13-111(b)(9) 031  9- 8-92 9-148(a) 032  9- 8-92 9-67 033  9- 8-92 2-88 035 12- 8-92 6-201(a), 
6-202(a),(d) 040  5-11-93 15-2 041  5-25-93 2-46-2-51 042  5-25-93 2-58 043  6- 8-93 9-176 044  7-13-93 3-40(c) 045  8-10-93 19-27 051 10-12-93 3-35(b), (c) 052 10-26-93 20-251(14) 053 11- 9-93 23-34(c), (e), (h), (i) 054 12-14-93 3-30 055 12-14-93 3-31(b) 3-32(a)(11) 056 12-14-93 8-24 058 12-14-93 15-3 059 12-22-93 3-30 060 12-22-93 3-40 061 12-22-93 3-41 062 12-22-93 3-64-3-71 063  1-25-94 6-78(g) 064  8- 9-94 - 9-86 065  8-23-94 - 6-21-6-26 069  9-27-94 - 20-250(c) 072 11- 8-94 - 2-1 073 12-13-94 - 2-1 075  3-29-94 - 20-277 076  5-23-95 - 9-85(c) 077  7-11-95 - 13-22 081 11-14-95 3-32 082 11-14-95 3-40, 3-41 083 12-12-95 6-23(a)(6)b.i., ii. 084  1- 9-96 18-6 085  3-12-96 11:23-11:29 19-50-19-56 088  5-14-96 1-15 089  5-14-96 20-14 094 11-12-96 2-52-2-56 095 12-17-96 6-310 096  1-28-97 2-16 098  2-25-97 20-373.1 099  4- 8-97 9-148.1 100  4-22-97 2-64       Deleted 2-65-2-70 101  7-22-97 13-101 102  8-26-97 2-1(note) 105 12-16-97 23-52-23-58 106  3- 3-98 9-138 107  5-12-98 13-95-13-98.3 108  6-23-98 2-1(note) 111 8-11-98 21-70.1 112 9-8-98 9-3.1 9-36.1 9-45 9-70, 9-71 9-77 9-79.1 9-87, 9-88 9-105 9-158-9-163 113 10-13-98 19-1 114 10-13-98 19-2 115 11-10-98 3-35(d) 116 2-9-99 6-16 117 2-9-99 6-16.1, 10-31 118 2-9-99 6-307 119 3-23-99 20-251(15) 120 4-13-99 13-114 121 7-9-99 13-25 122 7-13-99 20-251 123 7-13-99 13-115 124  8-24-99 6-78(g) 130  9-29-99 6-27-6-30 131  9-29-99 6-20 132 10-12-99 20-251(17) 133 10-26-99 2-59 134 11- 9-99 6-22 Res. 11- 9-99 10-81-10-88 136  4-18-20 13-111-13-111.4 137  4-18-20       Added 21-70.2 138  6-13-20 4-64-4-66 139  6-13-20 11-27-11-30 Res.  6-13-20 2-60 140  7-11-20 1, 2 19-18 141  9-12-20 20-251 142  9-12-20 20-251 147 11-14-20       Rpld 20-414-20-429 148  3-20-20 13-95-13-102 149  3-20-20 13-114.1, 13-114.2 150  5- 8-20 13-111.2(c) 152  7-10-20 13-22(d), (e) 154  9-11-20 1-16 155 10- 9-20 13-22(b) 156 19- 9-20 13-103 157 10- 9-20 15-18 159 10-23-20 17-22-17-44 160 11-13-20 5-166-6-169 162 12-11-20 19-18 163  2-19-20 1-17 164  2-19-20 21-2 165  2-19-20 2-101 166  5-14-20 3-31(c) 167  5-14-20 3-38 168  5-14-20 19-23 169  5-14-20 21-2, 21-3 170  8-13-20 23-23-23-25 23-27 171  9-10-20 9-72 9-124 9-89-9-94.6 9-139 9-164, 9-165 176 12-10-20 1-18 179  3-19-03 6-311 181  4- 8-03 21-67 182  4- 8-03 21-4 183  4- 8-03 6-79 184  4- 8-03 17-22 17-24 17-28-17-30 17-32 17-35 17-37 17-39 185  6-10-03 2-58(2)a, b 187  8-12-03 23-61 188  8-12-03 20-365 189 10-14-03 20-277 192 11-12-03 2-1 (note) 193 11-12-03 2-1 (note) 194 11-12-03 13-95, 13-98, 13-99       Added 13-97.1, 13-99.1-13-99.3 195 11-12-03 21-68 196 12-16-03 9-71(a) 197 12-16-03       Added 9-73 203  4-13-04 20-251 204  4-13-04 20-251 207  5-25-04 20-251 208 9-28-04       Added 13-104 212 11-23-04       Added 3-30(d) 213 11-23-04 3-31(c) 215 4-12-05       Added 5-81 216 4-12-05 21-67(b)       Added 21-70(c), 21-76 217 6-14-05 6-166-6-169       Added 6-170 218 6-14-05 5-81       Added 5-82-5-92 219 7-19-05 4-64-4-66       Added 4-67 222 11-8-05 21-72 223 11-8-05       Added 21-67(f) 224 11-8-05       Added 21-34-21-41 226 12-14-05       Added 18-7 227 1-12-06 21-68 228 3-14-06 6-16       Rpld 6-31 229 3-14-06 6-115       Rpld 6-31 230 3-14-06 10-31       Rpld 6-16.1 231 3-14-06 21-68 232 4-11-06       Added 14-25-14-49 238 2-13-07 13-103 239 2-13-07 21-38 240 4-10-07 15-18 241 4-10-07       Added 6-20.1 242 4-10-07 6-201 243 4-10-07 18-18 244 4-10-07       Added 18-18.1 245 4-10-07 23-92 246 4-10-07       Added 23-1(1.1), (8.1) 248 7-10-07 23-93 249 7-10-07       Added 6-20.2 252 9-11-07 2-55 253 9-11-07       Rpld 23-22, 23-27-23-30       Added 23-19.1-23-19.6, 
23-20.1, 23-22, 
23-27-23-30       Amded 23-20-23-23 255 10-9-07       Added 2-21 256 10-9-07       Added 13-4(b)(14) 258 10-30-07 11-2       Rpld 11-4, 13-113, 
17-20 259 10-30-07 3-66(1) 260 11-7-07 19-27 262 12-11-07 2-78 263 2-12-08       Added 20-251(a)(17), (18) 264 4-8-08 22-7       Added 22-8, 22-9 265 5-13-08       Added 20-399(a)(19) 266 7-15-08 11-16-11-18 270  9- 9-08       Added 2-89 271  9- 9-08       Added 2-4 272  9- 9-08 19-25 273 10-14-08 23-1-123-144 274  9- 9-08 1-10       Added 2-5 275  9- 9-08       Added 14-50-14-79 Res. of 12-16-08       Added 2-130-2-135 279  2-10-09       Added 21-16, 21-17 281  4-14-09 23-1-23-144       Added 23-145 280  3-10-09 23-1-23-144 282  5-12-09 23-22 23-23 23-28 23-33 23-141 286  9- 8-09 6-310 287  9- 8-09       Dltd 23-1-23-145       Added 23-1-23-144 288  9- 8-09 1-31       Added 24-1-24-57 289  9-22-09       Added 19-65-19-68 292 11-18-09 20-251 293 12-15-09 14.5-1-14.5-8       Added 14.5-9 294 12-15-09 23-8       Added 23-38(g) 295  3- 9-10 23-16 296  4-13-10       Added 2-6 297  6-22-10 23-137 298  7-27-10       Added 18-6.1, 18-6.2 302 10-12-10       Added 20-375 305  1-25-11 13-22(b) 306  4-20-11 1-10 Adopting ord, 
p. ix 308  6-14-11       Added 21-77 310  9-27-11 14-28 14-30 311  9-27-11       Added 21-18-21-25.5 314  3-13-12 2-16 316  4-24-12 23-3 23-41-23-43 23-46, 23-47 319  8-21-12       Added 13-22(f) 320  9-11-12       Added 13-26-13-32 322 10- 9-12       Added 13-33-13-35 325 10-23-12       Added 13-36 327 11-13-12       Rpld 6-310 329  1-15-13       Added 20-376 330  3-20-13 21-68 336  8-27-13 14-30 339 10- 8-13 Arts. 1-5       Added 6-351-6-354, 6-361, 6-371-6-377, 6-381-6-384, 6-391-6-396 343  3-11-14       Added 13-116-13-120 344  3-25-14 2-16 345  4- 8-14 21-68(a) 349  1-13-15 10-31 350  3-24-15 23-16 351  3-24-15       Added 2-7 352  4-14-15 21-68(a) 352A  8-11-15 21-68 353  6- 9-15 23-40-23-43 23-123 355  8-11-15 1-18 356 10-13-15 2-3 364  6-13-17 Added 10-89-10-97 368 10-10-17 17-28(b) 369 10-10-17       Rpld 5-3, 5-16-5-22, 5-26-5-29, 5-36-5-38, 5-64-5-66 5-4-5-12       Added 5-16-5-41 372 10-24-17 2-55 373 10-24-17 2-16 377 12-12-17 1-15  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
State Const. 
Article Section 
this Code 10 Pt. I, § 13 6, & 17 23-104  
Children's Code 
Article Section 
this Code 116 9-148.1  
Civil Code 
Article Section 
this Code 664-674 13-3  
R.S. 
Section Section 
this Code 1:1 et seq. 1-2 3:1 et seq. Ch. 5 3:2531 et seq. Ch. 5 4:361 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II 4:701 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. III 9:306 9-71 9:361 et seq. 9-71 9:372 9-71 9:2795 14-73 9:4821(1) 13-22 11:1341 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 13:1899 1-14 13:1910 1-17 13:4711 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. VII Ch. 13 14:1 9-1 14:1 et seq. Ch. 9 14:2 9-2 14:2(4) 22-8 14:2(13) 9-73 14:3 9-3 14:4 9-3.1 14:5-14:19 9-4-9-18 14:21 9-19 9-20 14:22 9-19 9-20 14:24-14:27 9-21-9-24 14:29 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. III 14:32.1 20-277 14:33 9-55 14:34.2 9-65 9-66 14:34.3 9-65 9-66 14:34.3 9-72 14:34.5 9-73 14:35 9-56 14:35.1 9-68 14:36 9-57 14:37 9-59 14:37.3 9-124 14:38 9-58 14:38.2 9-69 14:39 9-60 14:39.1 9-61 20-77 14:39.2 20-277 14:40 9-62 14:40.1 9-63 14:40.2 9-67 14:45.1 9-70 9-157 14:46 9-64 14:51 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. IV 14:56 9-75 14:56.1 9-87 14:59 9-40 9-41 9-77 14:62.4 9-89 14:63 9-90 14:63 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. III 14:63.3 9-79 14:63.4 9-79.1 14:67 9-80 9-94 14:67.6 9-88 14:67.14 9-92 14:67.16 9-93 9-94 14:67.17 9-93 9-94 14:67.21 9-94.1 14:68 9-81 14:68.1 9-94.2 14:68.6 9-94.3 14:69 9-82 14:70 9-173 14:71 9-83 14:74.1 9-105 14:79 9-71 14:80 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. V Ch. 9, Art. VIII 14:82 9-95 9-96 14:83 9-95 9-96 14:85 9-97 14:90 4-59 9-98 14:90.2 9-99 14:90.4 9-94.4 14:91 9-158 14:91 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. VIII 14:91.1 9-94.5 14:91.8 9-154 14:91.13 9-159 14:92 9-155 14:92.2 9-160 14:92.3 9-94.6 14:93.1 9-122 14:93.2 9-164 14:93.11 9-149 9-150 14:93.12 9-149 9-150 14:93.12 9-151 9-161 14:93.13 9-152 9-162 14:94 9-115 14:95 Ch. 9, Art. VI 9-115 14:95.4 9-165 14:95.5 9-117 14:96 9-40 14:98 20-277 20-278 14:99 20-279 14:100 20-47 14:100.1 9-139 20-296 14:101 9-174 14:102 9-170 14:102-14:102.7 5-27 14:102.14 5-35 14:103 9-133 14:103 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. VII 14:104 9-134 9-135 14:105 9-134 9-135 14:107 9-102 14:108 9-36 14:108 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II 14:108.1 9-36.1 20-282 14:110 9-42 14:112 9-37 14:113 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II 14:133.2 9-44 9-45 14:133.3 9-44 9-45 14:206 9-39 14:220.1 9-85 14:222.1 9-172 14:225 9-86 14:284 9-101 14:285 9-103 14:324 9-118 14:327 20-83 14:401 9-136 14:403.2 9-94.1 15:306 20-277 15:436.2 5-39 15:541(16) 9-94.5 15:1404(A) 9-160 tit. 22, ch. 1, pt. XXIII       19-18 22:1068(C) 19-18 22:1076 19-18 ch. 25, tit. 731 et seq. 23-20 25:731 24-35 25:731 et seq. Ch. 24 24-3 24-18 24-42 25:737(A), (B) 24-36 tit. 26 3-66 tit. 26, ch. 3 9-163 26:1 et seq. Ch. 3 26:71 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. II, 
Div. 2 26:74 3-29, 3-30 26:76 3-37-3-39 26:79 3-66 26:80 3-32 26:81 3-35 26:83 3-41 26:84 3-33 26:88 3-36 26:89 3-31 26:90 3-40 3-14 26:91 3-40 3-41 26:271 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. II, 
Div. 2 26:274 3-29, 3-30 26:276 3-37-3-39 26:279 3-66 26:280 3-32 26:281 3-35 26:282 3-33 26:285 3-36 26:286 3-40 3-41 26:287 3-40 3-41 26:493 Ch. 3 26:494 3-66 tit. 27, ch. 6 9-94.4 27:301(B)(15) 9-94.4 29:608 7-1 29:721 et seq. Ch. 7 30:2521 et seq. 9-176 Ch. 11 11-1 11-21 20-94 31:79 20-161 tit. 32 20-96 20-100 32:1 20-1 32:1 et seq. Ch. 20 32:1--32:399 20-442 32:22 20-28 32:24 20-31 32:41 Ch. 20 32:51 20-62 32:52 20-95 32:56 20-27 32:57 20-14 32:61 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III, 
Div. 6 32:64 20-262 32:65 20-185 32:71-32:78 20-172-20-179 32:78 20-249 32:79 20-180 32:80 20-236 32:81 20-181 20-182 32:82 20-181 20-182 32:100.1 20-484 32:101 20-214 32:101 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III, 
Div. 3 32:102-32:106 20-215-20-219 32:121 20-196 32:121 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III, 
Div. 2 32:122-32:124 20-197-20-199 32:124 20-235 32:125 20-200 32:141 20-349 32:141 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. IV 32:143 20-360 32:144 20-346 32:145 20-75 32:171-32:173 20-232-20-234 32:190 20-335 32:190 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III, 
Div. 9, 
Ch. 20, Art. III, 
Div. 10 32:190.1 20-335 32:191 20-331 32:191.1 20-332 32:191.3 20-334 32:194 20-308 32:195 20-310 32:196 20-89 20-314 20-333 32:197 20-311 32:211 20-475 32:211 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. VII 32:212-32:216 20-476-20-480 32:218 20-481 32:219 20-483 32:231(A) 20-151 20-152 32:231(B) 20-151 20-152 32:232 20-154 32:234 20-155 32:236 20-156 32:237 20-32 32:262 20-183 32:281 20-76 32:282-32:284 20-79-20-81 32:286 20-82 32:287 20-84 32:288 20-482 32:300.3 20-86 20-87 32:302 et seq. 20-60 32:322 20-97 32:327 20-91 32:329 20-318 32:351(B) 20-90 32:380 20-98 32:380-32:388 20-98 32:387 20-98 32:388 20-98 32:398 20-45 32:401 et seq. 22-7 32:429 1-18 32:661 20-278 32:732 Ch. 24, Art. III 32:738 24-39-24-41 32:742 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. III 32:1301 et seq. 20-61 32:1301-32:1310 20-61 32:1502(5) 20-375 tit. 33 Ch. 2 33:101 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 33:101-33:119 15-24 33:102 15-16 15-17 33:103 15-16 15-17 33:103 15-18-15-20 33:104 15-21 15-22 33:105 15-21 15-22 33:105 15-23 15-24 33:106 15-23 15-24 33:110 15-24 33:112 Ch. 18 33:114 18-5 33:131 15-37 33:131 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III, 
Div. 2 15-46 33:132 15-47 33:361 19-18 21-70.2 33:1341 et seq. 2-31 33:1361 et seq. 1-1 33:1368 10-31 12-1 33:1368 et seq. 6-16 6-115 33:1420.1 2-52 33:1720.21 et seq. Ch. 6 Ch. 6, Art. III, 
Ch. 6, Art. IV Ch. 6, Art. VIII 6-16 6-115 33:1891 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 33:1893 2-49 33:2021 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 33:2334 1-16 33:3301 et seq. Ch. 17 33:3876 Ch. 13, Art. IV 33:3881 et seq. Ch. 21, Art. III 33:4161 et seq. Ch. 21 33:4712 2-87 33:4712.1 2-87 33:4721 et seq. Ch. 15 Ch. 23 23-1 33:4721-33:4729       15-25 33:4722 Ch. 23, Art. II 33:4725 23-135 33:4725.1 23-136 33:4726 15-25 33:4727 Ch. 15, Art. IV 15-62 15-66 33:4732 23-139 33:4741 6-19 33:4851.1 et seq. 4-53 33:4861 et seq. 4-62 33:4861.4 4-46 33:4862 et seq. 19-27 33:4876(B), (c) 13-114.1 33:5051 Ch. 18 33:5062 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. II 33:7151 et seq. 2-41 2-43 37:682 9-90 37:846 20-99 37:863.1 20-100 37:1361 et seq. 21-19 37:1367(G) 21-20 37:1781 et seq. Ch. 14.5 38:84 6-351 tit. 40, ch. 4 9-138 40:381 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. I 15-1 15-4 40:962 et seq. 9-104 40:964 9-180 20-277 40:1021 et seq. 9-179 9-180 40:1321 3-40 40:1491 et seq. Ch. 10 40:1728 6-16 40:1742 20-372 40:1749.11-1749.22 12-2 40:1749.14 12-2 40:1749.19 12-2 tit. 42, Ch. 12, pts. I, II       19-18 44:32 2-3 45:200.3 Ch. 22 45:321 et seq. Ch. 16 45:1361 et seq. 2-4 2-89 Ch. 8, Art. III 45:1366 2-89 46:1401 et seq. 19-17 46:2131 et seq. 9-71 47:341 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. II 47:341-47:363 19-16 19-17 47:354 19-25 47:359D 19-27 47:359(J) 19-25 47:363 19-17 47:369(C) 19-24 47:1601 19-18 47:1601 19-27 47:1602 19-27 47:2195 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. III 47:2206 19-67 48:385 11-3 51:650 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. IV 51:2601 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. II 110.1 9-43  
