Part I, General Bylaws
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Amended in is entirety 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15A1]
§ 1-1. Enforcement through indictment or on complaint to District
Court.
Any Bylaw of the Town of Abington may be enforced through any lawful
means in law or in equity including but not limited to enforcement by
criminal indictment or on complaint before the district court pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 21. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. A fine of up to $300 may be imposed for each violation.
§ 1-2. Enforcement through non-criminal disposition.
Any Bylaw of the Town of Abington, or rule or regulation of its officers,
boards or departments adopted at a public meeting for which notice is
posted on the Town website and bulletin board for a two-week period
prior to the meeting, and which is on file with the Town Clerk, may
in the discretion of the Town official who is the appropriate enforcing
person, be enforced through non-criminal disposition as provided in
MGL c. 40, § 21D. The specific penalty for purposes of non-criminal
disposition for each such violation, if not otherwise specified, shall be
as follows; [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
First violation Warning
Second violation $50
Third violation $100
Fourth violation $200
Fifth and subsequent violations $300
A.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for
purposes of this Bylaw.
B.
The term "enforcing person" as used in this Bylaw shall mean: any Town
of Abington police officer with respect to any offense; as well as the
Building Inspector and his designee, the members of the Conservation
Commission and its designee, the members of the Board of Health, its
Health Agent or other designee, the Sealer of Weights and Measures
and the Sealer's designee and such other officials as the Board of
Selectmen may from time to time designate, each with respect to
violation of Bylaws, rules and regulations within their respective
jurisdictions. If more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case,
any such official may be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
C.
The fines set forth in the notice of violation issued in accordance with
this Bylaw shall be payable to the Town within 21 days of the date
D.
1. Editor’s Note: Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
set forth on the notice or, if the person so notified seeks to contest
the violation, such person may request a hearing before the District
Court. The person so notified may also seek to resolve the matter
locally by appealing the issuance of the notice, in writing, to the Town
Manager no later than 14 days following the date of the notice of
violation. The Town Manager or the Manager's designee shall, no later
than 20 days following the date of the notice of violation, decide the
appeal, or hold a hearing to determine such additional facts as may
be necessary. If the person so notified is dissatisfied with the Town
Manager's determination and resolution, they may contest the violation
as set forth in the notice by seeking a hearing before the District Court
in accordance with MGL c.40, § 21D. The Manager's failure to make a
determination within the time set forth herein shall be construed for
purposes of this paragraph as a determination to void the notice of
violation.
§ 1-2 ABINGTON CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Terms and References
§ 1-3. Reference to statute.
Any reference within these Bylaws to a regulation or statute enacted by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall incorporate by reference the
provisions of said regulation or statute, as they may be amended in the
future. In the event the provisions of a Bylaw conflict with the provisions
of state regulation or statute, the more restrictive and/or more definitive
provisions shall prevail, unless otherwise mandated by law.
§ 1-4. Town website.
All references in these Bylaws to the "Town website" or "Town's website"
shall mean the official Town website registered and operated by the Town
of Abington.
§ 1-5. Authority of Town Clerk to assign appropriate number.
[Added 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
The Town Clerk shall hereby be authorized to assign appropriate numbers
to Bylaw sections, subsections, paragraphs and subparagraphs, where none
are approved by Town Meeting, and, if such are approved by Town Meeting,
after consultation with the Town Manager, to make non-substantive,
editorial revisions to ensure consistent and appropriate sequencing and
numbering, provided that such editorial revisions shall be identified by a
footnote or other convention.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
Chapter 7
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
§ 1-5 ABINGTON CODE § 1-5
7:6
ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 82]
§ 7-1. Drinking on public or private property restricted.
No person shall drink alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138,
Section 1 of the General Laws while on, in or upon any public way or upon
any way to which the public has a right of access, or any public park, public
playground or public recreational area, or any place to which members of
the public have access as invitees or licensees, nor while on, in or upon any
private land or place without the consent of the owner or person in control
thereof. The Board of Selectmen may, however, grant temporary or limited
permits to allow the consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on
public property.
§ 7-2. Seizures of alcoholic beverages.
All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this Bylaw shall be seized
and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons arrested or summoned before the court.
§ 7-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw shall be liable to pay a fine of
not more than $100 for each violation.
2. Editor's Note: This Article also superseded former Art. I, Consumption in Public, derived
from Ch. 8, Sec. 8, of the 1992 Town of Abington Bylaws.
§ 7-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 7-3
7:7
Chapter 11
ANIMALS
§ 7-3 ABINGTON CODE § 7-3
7:8
ARTICLE I
Pasturing of Certain Animals
§ 11-1. Pasturing within streets or ways prohibited.
No person shall pasture or cause to be pastured any cattle or other animals
upon or within the limits of any street or way of the Town, either with or
without a keeper.
§ 11-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 11-1
7:9

ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 11-2. Running at large prohibited; exception for hunting
purposes.
§ 11-3. Impoundment; maintenance and administrative charges.
Dogs running at large will be impounded. If the owner is known, notice
shall be given within three days to such owner. If the owner is unknown,
or the dog remains unclaimed for more than seven days, disposition of the
dog shall be as provided under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 140,
Section 151A. The owner or keeper of any dog so impounded may reclaim
such dog upon payment of the dog license fee if it is then unpaid, and upon
payment of any outstanding fines, maintenance and administrative charges
as may be established by the Animal Control Officer.
An owner or keeper of a dog shall not cause or permit such a dog to run
at large in any street or public place or upon the premises of anyone
other than the owner or keeper, unless the owner or occupant of such
premises grants permission. While in any public place or street, dogs
shall be under restraint by owner or keeper. A dog is under restraint
within the meaning of this Bylaw if it is controlled by a leash or confined
within a vehicle driven or parked on a street. Notwithstanding the
preceding, an owner or keeper shall be prohibited from bringing a dog,
even under restraint, to/into the following events/venues:
Any concert or other public event organized and/or administered
by the Abington Summer Concerts Committee;
(1)
The Island Grove swimming and recreation area, which shall be
designated from time to time by the Board of Selectmen. Until
or unless otherwise designated, the Island Grove swimming and
recreation area shall be bounded by Memorial Bridge at the west,
Park Avenue at the east, and the main walking path at the north,
and shall include the swimming pool and recreation area.
(2)
(3) On the grounds of the Millennium Memorial Complex.
A.
Subsection A shall not be construed to limit or prohibit the use of
hunting dogs during the hunting season, or the training of hunting
dogs, or during field trials for hunting dogs.
B.
Subsection A shall not be applicable to dogs when utilized by law
enforcement and public safety officials or in search and rescue efforts,
or as a service animal, as that term is defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, 42 U.S. Code § 12101 et seq., and
any regulations promulgated thereunder.
C.
§ 11-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 11-4
7:11
§ 11-4. Licensing required; license period.
Every owner or keeper of a dog who is six months old or over shall license
it with the Town Clerk on or before January 1 of each year. Every owner or
keeper of a dog which becomes six months old subsequent to January 1 of
any year shall license it with the Town Clerk when it becomes six months
old. The owner or keeper of every dog which is so licensed shall cause it to
wear at all times a license tag issued for the purpose by the Town Clerk. An
annual dog license shall be valid from January 1 to December 31.
§ 11-5. Confinement of dogs during heat.
If the Animal Control Officer determines that a dog in its oestrus cycle (in
heat) is attracting other dogs and such attraction is causing damage or
disturbance to any neighborhood, the Dog Officer shall order in writing that
the owner or keeper of such dog restrain the dog for the duration of its
oestrus cycle. If the Dog Officer determines that such owner or keeper is not
complying with such order, the Dog Officer shall impound said dog for the
duration of its oestrus cycle and the owner shall pay the current boarding
fee for each day the dog is held in the pound as may be established by the
Animal Control Officer.
§ 11-6. Kennels.
No person may maintain a kennel, as defined in M.G.L. c. 140, § 136A,
without a kennel license.
A.
A kennel license may be obtained upon submission of a written
application to the Town Clerk with the prior approval from the Animal
Control Officer and the Zoning Board of Appeals, if required under the
Town's Zoning Bylaws, and upon payment of the applicable fee.
B.
The kennel license application shall be on a prescribed form and shall
specify the name of the owner, the name of the kennel, the name of the
keeper, and the location of such kennel. Such license shall specify the
maximum number of dogs to be kept on the premises at any one time.
Prior to approving any application, the Animal Control Officer shall
conduct an inspection of the premises and shall deliver notice of said
kennel application by first class mail to all owners of property situated
within 300 feet of the boundaries of the proposed kennel property, in
accordance with a certified abutters list issued for said purpose by
the Board of Assessors. All costs of said notice shall be paid by the
applicant, and said notice shall inform the abutters of their right to
submit written comments about the proposed kennel within 10 days of
its mailing. No kennel license shall be approved unless the operation
of a kennel in the particular location complies with all applicable laws,
including but not limited to the Town's Zoning Bylaws. The approval
of the license may include sufficient conditions, at the discretion of
the Animal Control Officer, to prevent any nuisance to neighboring
properties. Any party thereafter objecting to the decision of the Animal
C.
§ 11-4 ABINGTON CODE § 11-6
7:12
§ 11-7. Animal waste.
Control Officer may appeal said decision to the Board of Selectmen for
independent review.
An annual kennel license shall be valid from January 1 through
December 31.
D.
The owner or keeper of such kennel shall renew the license prior to the
commencement of each succeeding license period.
E.
While at large, each dog in a kennel shall wear a collar or harness to
which shall be securely attached a tag upon which shall appear the
number of the kennel license and the year of issuance and the name of
the Town.
F.
The Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer may at any time inspect or
cause to be inspected any kennel, and if in their judgment the kennel
is not being maintained in a sanitary and humane manner, or if records
are not properly kept as required by law, shall by order revoke or
suspend said kennel license.
G.
In the case of revocation of said licenses, the Board of Selectmen may
reinstate such license and impose conditions and regulations upon the
operation of said kennel only after holding a public hearing, with notice
of said hearing going to abutters at least 10 days prior to the date of
said hearing, such notice to be provided as set forth in § 11-6C of this
Bylaw.
H.
All kennels shall be limited to the number of dogs that the kennel
license states are to be maintained on said premises.
I.
In accordance with Chapter 102 of the Town's General Bylaws, the
Town Clerk may deny any application for kennel license if the applicant
has outstanding unpaid taxes or fees owed to the Town.
J.
The owner or custodian of every dog or animal shall be responsible for
any fecal matter deposited by the animal(s) on public walks, streets,
recreation areas or private property of another.
A.
The owner or custodian of an animal when appearing with the animal
on any public walk, street, recreation area, or private property shall
possess the means of removal of any fecal matter left by such animal.
B.
For purposes of this regulation, the means of removal shall include
any tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking
up and containing such fecal matter. Disposal shall be accomplished
by transporting such fecal matter to a place suitable and regularly
reserved for the disposal of human fecal matter, specifically reserved
for disposal of animal fecal matter or otherwise designated as
appropriate by the Board of Health.
C.
§ 11-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 11-8
7:13
§ 11-8. Fees.
Fees for individual dog licenses and kennel licenses shall be established
annually by the Town Clerk in accordance with Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 40, section 22F.
§ 11-9. Violations and penalties.
This Bylaw may be enforced by the Animal Control Officer or any Town
of Abington police officer. In addition to the remedies set forth herein
and in GL c. 140, §§ 136A to 174E, inclusive, or any other applicable
provision of law, whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw may be
penalized by a noncriminal disposition process as provided in G.L. c.
40, § 21D and the Town's non-criminal disposition Bylaw. If non-criminal
disposition is elected, then any person who violates any provision of this
Bylaw shall be subject to the following penalties:
Failure to license dog $50
Operation of kennel without a
license
$50
Operation of kennel above
maximum allotment of dogs
$25 per dog
Allowing dog to run at large $100
Removal of animal waste $50
Any other violation not specifically
enumerated
$50
A.
Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. If more
than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 11-8 ABINGTON CODE § 11-9
7:14
Chapter 17
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council on Aging — See Ch. 40.
Finance Committee — See Ch.. 67.
Historical Commission — See Ch. 89.
Town Meetings — See Ch. 152.
§ 11-9 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 11-9
7:15

ARTICLE I
Terms of Office
§ 17-1. Term to be specified at creation; default term.
The term of office for a member of any committee appointed by the Town
Meeting, the Town Manager, the Board of Selectmen, or the Moderator shall
be specified at the time of the creation of the committee, and if no such term
is specified the term of office shall be three years.
§ 17-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 17-1
7:17

ARTICLE II
Organization
§ 17-2. Reorganization by elected officials.
Elected officials shall reorganize their respective board, committee,
commission, council or authority on or before May 15 of each year, or
at the next regularly scheduled meeting after the Annual Town Election.
The present chairperson of the board, committee, commission, council or
authority shall step down and the secretary or senior member shall take
nominations from the floor for chairperson. All members of the board,
committee, commission, council or authority may nominate candidates for
chairperson. All members may vote on all nominations for officers of their
respective board, committee, commission, council or authority. The Town
Manager and the Town Clerk shall be notified in writing of the newly
reorganized board, committee, commission, council or authority no later
than June 15 of the same year.
§ 17-3. Reorganization by appointed officials.
With the exception of the Finance Committee, appointed officials shall
reorganize their respective board, committee, commission, council or
authority on or before May 15 of each year, or at the next regularly
scheduled meeting after the Annual Town Election. The present chairperson
of the board, committee, commission, council or authority shall step down
and the secretary or senior member shall take nominations from the floor
for chairperson. All members of the board, committee, commission, council,
or authority may nominate candidates for chairperson. All members may
vote on all nominations for officers of their respective board, committee,
commission, council or authority. The Town Manager and the Town Clerk
shall be notified in writing of the newly organized board, committee,
commission, council or authority no later than June 15 of the same year.
§ 17-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 17-3
7:19

ARTICLE III
Public Hearings
§ 17-4. Minimum notice requirements. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by
Art. 9]
All appointed and elected boards, committees, and commissions required
by either state statute or internal rules to hold a public hearing on any
matter within their jurisdiction shall post notice thereof in compliance with
the Open Meeting Law, M.G.L. chapter 30A, §§ 18 to 25, as it may be
amended from time to time, and shall provide such additional notice as may
be required by federal, state or local law, rule or regulation. Public hearing
notices shall also be posted on the Town website whenever feasible as an
additional means of notification to the general public, but the failure to post
any notice on the Town website as required by these General Bylaws shall
not be deemed to violate the minimum notice requirements of any section
of these General Bylaws.
§ 17-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 17-4
7:21

ARTICLE IV
Recording of Meetings
[Added 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15K]
§ 17-5. Recording of meetings of multiple-member bodies for
broadcast on local cable station.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to adopt a policy concerning
televising of meetings of multiple member bodies, which policy may, to the
extent that the same is technologically and practically feasible, require such
meetings to be televised live or recorded for the purpose of later broadcast
on a local cable television station. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Bylaw or policy adopted by the Board of Selectmen, however, whether a
meeting is televised or for later broadcast shall have no effect on the validity
of such meeting.
§ 17-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 17-5
7:23
Chapter 25
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 25-1. Display of numbers.
At the time of the sale, rental, new occupancy or transfer of any building in
the Town, numbers representing the address of such building and assigned
to such building by the Assessors shall be affixed to such building in such a
manner that they are clearly visible from the nearest street and/or driveway
entrance which provides access to such building. Said numbers shall be no
less than four inches in height and shall be of a color in direct contrast
to the surface to which it is attached. In addition to affixing numbers on
the building, a building which is not clearly visible from the street or
the driveway entrance, whether due to distance, topography, vegetation or
other obstruction, may also be required by the Fire Department to affix its
assigned numbers on a sign or other marker of a size and design acceptable
by the Fire Department, which shall be erected in a more visible area
along the public way as determined by the Fire Department. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit a property owner from voluntarily erecting or
affixing building numbers on a sign or marker in a location more visible to
the public, so long as said sign or marker conforms to the Sign Bylaws and
Zoning Bylaws of the Town. [See MGL Ch. 148 § 59.]
§ 25-2. Verification by Fire Department.
No sale, rental, new occupancy, or transfer of a building shall take place
until the Fire Department verifies that such numbers are affixed in
accordance with this Bylaw.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investigation of land use complaints — See
Ch. 98, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 17-5 ABINGTON CODE § 25-2
25:24
§ 35-1. Declaration of emergency. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
The Town of Abington, acting by and through its Town Meeting, finds
and declares that a serious public emergency exists within the Town with
respect to the availability and affordability of rental housing to citizens
of said Town, particularly to elderly and persons with a disability and to
families of low and moderate income; that this emergency results from
the aggravated local impact of factors set forth in Chapter 527 of the
Acts of 1983, most particularly from limited rental housing development,
prolonged increases in sales and rental housing costs exceeding increases
in personal income, the increased pressures on the Town's housing stock
from the metropolitan housing market and the conversion of existing rental
housing to more expensive condominiums or cooperative sales housing; that
this rental housing shortage generates serious threats to the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town; that increased
protection of the present tenants of rental housing and of future occupants
of converted units requires local action including establishment of
provisions protecting a greater portion of the rental housing stock,
extending the effective conversion notice period, lessening tenant
uncertainty regarding conversion plans, encouraging appropriate safety
improvements to converted housing, and establishing a local permit system
to regulate and oversee the conversion process; and that this Bylaw is
accordingly adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 527 of the Acts
of 1983.
§ 35-2. Purpose.
§ 35-3. Definitions.
APPLICANT — A person who records, or proposes to record, the
condominium instruments or on whose behalf the condominium instruments
To provide the community with the ability to oversee and regulate the
conversion of property for use as condominium or cooperative housing.
A.
To assure compliance with state and local regulations for the
construction and physical features of buildings which are to be used for
condominiums.
B.
To require landlords who seek to convert their rental property into
condominium, cooperative, or other form of non-rental property to
give their tenants a reasonable period of notice before evicting them
in furtherance of the conversion. Such prior notice will provide the
potentially displaced tenants with sufficient time to examine the
housing market, evaluate available housing alternatives, formulate
future housing plans, secure any necessary financing and decided
whether to acquire the housing accommodations being converted or to
relocate.
C.
§ 25-2 (RESERVED) § 35-3
29:25
are recorded, thereby subjecting the property to condominium ownership,
and includes successors or persons who come to stand in the same relation
to the condominium development as all applicants.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Abington.
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION — Creation of units for condominium or
cooperative ownership in a building, which was at any time before the
recording of the declaration wholly or partially occupied by persons other
than purchasers and persons who occupied with the consent of the
purchasers.
CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE CONVERSION EVICTION — An
eviction of a tenant by a landlord or any agent thereof for the purpose of
removing such tenant from a housing accommodation in connection with
the initial sale and transfer of legal title to that housing accommodation
to a prospective purchaser as a condominium unit, cooperative or similar
form of ownership, or, an eviction of a tenant by any other person who
has purchased a housing accommodation when the tenant whose eviction
is sought was a resident of that housing accommodation as a condominium
unit, cooperative or unit held in a similar form of ownership. A conversion
eviction shall not include an eviction by reason of the tenants; substantial
violations of the terms of the tenancy.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A unit of a condominium as that is defined in
Chapter 183A of the Massachusetts General Laws or any successor statute
with respect to condominiums (the "condominium statute").
COOPERATIVE UNIT — A unit in a housing cooperative as set forth in
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 157.
ELDERLY TENANT — A tenant who is a person or group of persons residing
in the same housing accommodation any of who has reached the age of 60
years or over as of the date of receipt of the notice provided for hereunder.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — A person as defined in Sections 3(2) of the
U.S. Housing Act of 1937 as amended by the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any building, structure, or part thereof
or land appurtenant thereto, or any other real or personal property rented
or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes containing three or
more dwelling units, together with all services connected with the use or
occupancy of such property.
LANDLORD — The individual who holds legal title to any housing
accommodations in any manner including, but not limited to, a partnership,
corporation or trust. For the purposes of this Bylaw, the rights and duties
of a landlord hereunder shall be the obligated of anyone who manages,
controls, or customarily accepts rent on behalf of the landlord.
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Households whose total
income for the previous year was equal to or less than the qualification
income for the Section 8 Housing Assistance Program as designated from
time to time by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
§ 35-3 ABINGTON CODE § 35-3
29:26
Development pursuant to Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937 as amended
by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as further
amended by the Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998,
codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1437 et seq., and/or as otherwise defined by law, and
calculated pursuant to such provisions.[Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — A person as defined in Section 3(2) of
the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 as amended by the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974, as further amended by the Quality Housing and
Work Responsibility Act of 1998, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1437 et seq., and/
or otherwise as may be defined by law. For purposes of this Bylaw, the term
"person(s) with a disability" may be used interchangeably with and/or in
place of the term "handicapped person" without changing the definition of
either.[Added 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
RENTAL HOUSING AGREEMENT — An agreement, verbal, written or
implied between a landlord and a tenant for use or occupancy of a housing
accommodation or for housing services.
TENANT — Any person entitled under the terms of a rental housing
agreement to the use and occupancy of any housing accommodation or for
housing services.
UNJUSTIFIABLE RENT INCREASE — Any rent increase exceeding that
allowed by consumer price index, 10% maximum, and Tax Escalation Clause
provisions of the Section 4(3) of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983.
§ 35-4. Applicability.
§ 35-5. Condominium or cooperative conversion permit.
This Bylaw shall be applicable to all multi-family dwellings located
within the Town of Abington which contain three or more dwelling units
which are proposed to be converted to condominium or cooperative
ownership subsequent to the effective date of this Bylaw.
A.
As required by Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983 provisions which go
beyond the protection in that Act do not apply to certain federally
insured, Mass. Housing Finance Agency-financed, or adoptive-reusecreated
units listed in Section 2 of that Act.
B.
A condominium or cooperative conversion issued by the Planning Board
is required for conversion of existing structures to condominium or
cooperative ownership, and such permits shall be required prior to the
filing of a master deed pursuant to the Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 183A.
A.
Anyone wishing to apply for a condominium or cooperative conversion
permit shall give notice to the tenants according to this Bylaw and
Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983, and then shall file an application with
the Town Clerk for transmittal to the Planning Board.
B.
§ 35-3 (RESERVED) § 35-5
29:27
§ 35-6. Tenant rights. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
Any application for a condominium or cooperative conversion
permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee under the fee schedule
established by the Planning Board and approved by the Board
of Selectmen, and by copies of notices of intent and other items
required by the Planning Board.
(1)
Within 60 days of the receipt of a properly executed application at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place
of such public hearing, of the subject matter, sufficient for
identification, and of the place where texts and maps thereof may
be inspected shall published in the newspaper of general
circulation in the Town once in each of two successive weeks, the
first publication to be not less than 14 days before the day of the
hearing and by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in the
Town Hall for a period of not less than 14 days before the day
of said hearing. Notice of said hearing shall also be sent by mail,
postage prepaid, to the applicant, owners, and tenants.
(2)
Within 30 days following the public hearing, the Planning Board
shall take final action on the application. Failure to take final action
shall be deemed to be a grant of the permit applied for.
(3)
Condominium or cooperative conversion permits can only be
granted by at least four members of the Planning Board voting in
the affirmative.
(4)
A copy of the attested condominium or cooperative conversion
permit shall be a part of and attached to the master deed recorded
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 183A. The
applicant shall notify the Town Clerk within 10 days of recording a
master deed.
(5)
Permits shall expire if a master deed is not filed within 12 months of
permit issuance, and an eighteen-month period shall elapse before
a subsequent permit application may be filed.
(6)
The Planning Board must approve any such application if it finds that
the applicant has fully complied with all the conditions and
requirements of the Bylaw.
C.
Permits may be revoked upon finding (at a hearing advertised as per
Chapter 41, Section 81T) that the applicant has violated tenants' rights
during the twelve- to twenty-four-month periods described in § 35-6
below.
D.
An applicant who intends to convert a rental building to a condominium
or cooperative ownership is required to give each tenant in such
building notice of this intention. Such notice must precede application
for a condominium or cooperative conversion permit as per § 35-5B.
A.
§ 35-5 ABINGTON CODE § 35-6
29:28
No applicant will be allowed to bring an action to recover possession of
the premises (i.e., to evict a tenant) within the 12 months following the
recording of a master deed, or within 24 months of such recording in
the case of low and moderate income, person with a disability or elderly
tenants as defined in § 35-3.
B.
The notice of intention to convert must set forth generally the rights of
a tenant under this Bylaw and must include a copy of this Bylaw as an
attachment. The notice shall be mailed postage prepaid by registered
mail, return receipt requested, to the tenant at the unit or any other
mailing address provided by the tenant.
C.
The Board shall have the right to deny an applicant a condominium
or cooperative conversion permit if sufficient testimony is presented
indicating that the tenants' right under § 35-6A to G of this Bylaw were
violated prior to the application's filing date. The Board shall also have
the right to revoke a permit if sufficient testimony at a subsequent
hearing called upon petition of five tenants, or if the conversion unit
has less than five tenants, upon petition of a majority of the tenants of
the unit, is presented to indicate that tenants' rights have been violated
during the applicable twelve- or twenty-four-month periods. The Board
shall exercise these rights when it determines that the intent of this
Bylaw has been so compromised.
D.
No tenant may be given notice by the applicant to vacate the premises
within the applicable twelve- or twenty-four-month period provided in
§ 35-6A above, except by reason of substantial violations of the terms of
the tenancy.
E.
Any tenant under a lease entered into a subsequent to the effective date
of this Bylaw shall have the right at any time after receipt of a notice
to convert pursuant to this Bylaw, to terminate the lease upon notice.
Such termination shall be without penalty or other termination charge
to the tenant.
F.
Within 60 days after recording a master deed pursuant to
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 183A, the applicant shall offer to
sell each unit or proposed unit to the tenant who rents or leases that
unit. Such an offer shall be in the form of a properly executed purchase
and sale agreement. The terms and conditions shall be substantially the
same as, or more favorable than, those offered to the general public
for the 90 days following expiration of said tenants' right to purchase
pursuant to 5.4(e) of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983. The tenants' right
to first purchase expires 90 days after receipt of the applicant's offer to
sell.
G.
The tenant in a conversion condominium or cooperative shall not
unreasonably withhold consent to the applicant to enter the unit in
order to inspect the premises, obtain data or show the unit to
prospective or actual workers or purchasers. The applicant shall give
H.
§ 35-6 (RESERVED) § 35-6
29:29
§ 35-7. Enforcement.
Any person violating any provision of this Bylaw, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $25 for each offense. Each one-day period that
willful violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 35-8. Effect on other regulations.
This Bylaw shall not interfere with or annul any Bylaw, rule, regulation or
permit, provided that, unless specifically exempted, where this Bylaw is
more stringent, it shall control.
§ 35-9. Severability.
The provisions of this section are severable. If a court declares invalid
any such provision or its application to any person or circumstance, the
invalidity shall not affect the validity of any other provision or application.
§ 35-10. Safety.
Chapter 40
COUNCIL ON AGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 17.
§ 40-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
There is hereby established a Council on Aging consisting of from seven
to 11 citizens of this Town, appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms
the tenant at least two days' notice of his intent and may enter only at
reasonable times.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of harassment
against a tenant which is designed to, or is likely to result in the
termination of the tenancy by the tenant. Conduct which shall be
considered harassment shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: failure of the landowner to make repairs in a timely and
professional manner; imposition by the landowner of unjustifiable
increases in the rental price of a unit; failure of the landowner to
provide the tenant with essential services; verbal harassment and/or
threats by the landowner against the tenant.
I.
Certification of final approval by the Planning Board shall be deemed
to be the signing of the permit only after all involved inspectors have
signed same.
A.
§ 35-6 ABINGTON CODE § 40-1
40:30
not to exceed four years for any member. Said terms shall be staggered so
that not more than three appointments shall be made in any calendar year.
Members can be re-appointed for concurrent terms.
§ 40-2. Duties.
The duties of said Council on Aging shall be to:
§ 40-3. State and federal agencies and laws.
Said Council on Aging shall cooperate with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Commission on Aging and shall be cognizant of all state and
federal legislation concerning funding, information exchange, and program
planning which exists for better community programming for the elderly.
§ 40-4. Reports.
Said Council on Aging shall give an annual report to the Board Selectmen
with a copy of that report directed to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Commission on Aging.
Chapter 44
DEEDS OF RELEASE AND REDEEMED REAL ESTATE
§ 44-1. Duties of Treasurer.
Deeds of release and redeemed real estate, if the estate has been taken or
purchased by the Town for non-payment of taxes thereon, on the payment
or tender of the amount of the tax, all intervening taxes, charges and fees,
and interest in the whole in accordance with the provisions of the law of the
Commonwealth, shall be made and executed by the Town Treasurer.
§ 44-2. Sale of real estate; advertisement.
Any real estate which has been acquired by the Town for non-payment of
taxes may be sold by the Treasurer, with the prior assent of the Board of
Selectmen, and the Treasurer shall be empowered to execute, acknowledge,
and deliver sufficient deeds therefor. Notice of such sale shall be given by
posting a notice at the Town Offices, posting a notice on the Town website,
A. Identify the total needs of the community's elderly population;
Educate the community and enlist support and participation of all
citizens concerning these needs;
B.
Design, promote, or implement services to fill these needs, or
coordinate present existing services in the community;
C.
Promote and support any other programs which are designed to assist
elderly programs in the community.
D.
§ 40-1 DEEDS OF RELEASE AND REDEEMED REAL § 44-2
44:31
and by publication in two newspapers of general circulation in the Town
once in each of two successive weeks, the posting of said notice and the
first publication to be not less than 14 days prior to the day of the scheduled
sale. [See MGL Ch. 60 § 40 et seq.]
Chapter 49
DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
Solid waste — See Ch. 138.
§ 44-2 ABINGTON CODE § 44-2
44:32
ARTICLE I
Landfill
§ 49-1. Permit to dump required. [Amended 4-2-2012 ATM by Art.
15F; 6-9-2014 ATM by Art. 20; 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person shall dump or allow to be dumped any fill material on any
property in the Town of Abington in excess of 100 yards without first
receiving a permit therefor from the Planning Board. For the purposes
of this Bylaw, the term "fill material" shall include debris, refuse, sand,
gravel, or other types of earth or other materials of any kind.
A.
No action shall be taken on application for a permit unless it includes:
An abutter list, based upon the most recent data available to, and
certified by, the Town Assessor, identifying all direct abutters to the
property at which the fill is to be placed (the "subject property"),
and all abutters and abutters to abutters within 300 feet of the
subject property;
(1)
A plot plan describing the subject property and indicating where on
the property the fill is to be placed, as well as existing and proposed
topography of the affected area;
(2)
A description of the fill (i.e., what material consists of) and its
origin;
(3)
A description of the amount of fill proposed to be placed at the
subject property;
(4)
A list of how many loads will be required to bring the fill on the
subject property;
(5)
A list of what size trucks will be used, including a description of the
weight of the largest fully loaded truck;
(6)
A description of the truck routes to be taken to access and leave
the subject property;
(7)
(8) A description of the proposed hours of trucking; and
A description of the measures to be used to control spilled material
and dust (i.e., sweeping and water spraying.
(9)
B.
Upon receipt of such an application that contains all of the necessary
documentation set forth above, the Planning Board shall schedule a
public hearing and provide written notice, at the expense of the
applicant, to the abutters and abutters to abutters within 300 feet, of
the public hearing by certified mail and by regular mail, which written
notice shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the scheduled
public hearing.
C.
§ 49-1 DEEDS OF RELEASE AND REDEEMED REAL § 49-1
44:33
§ 49-2. Planning Board rules.
This article may be superseded by the rules and regulations of the Planning
Board.
If the Planning Board determines it is appropriate to grant a permit
allowing the fill material to be placed, the Planning Board may impose
reasonable conditions on such permit including but not limited to: size,
number, and maximum weight of trucks that may access the property
within any twenty-four-hour period; implementation of spill control and
dust control measures; requirements applicable to loaming and seeding
of material; and implementation of erosion and sedimentation control
measures to prevent the material from moving off site or into nearby
wetland or water resources during a storm event. If such conditions
are thereafter violated, the Planning Board may immediately revoke the
permit if the public health and safety so require, or otherwise upon 24
hours' notice to the holder of the permit.
D.
Any such permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance. A
current permit may be extended for an additional three months by vote
of the Planning Board at any meeting, provided that the request for
the extension is received before the permit expires and that such vote
otherwise complies with the Open Meeting Law, as it may be amended
from time to time.
E.
The Planning Board shall hereby be authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations as may be necessary or desirable to implement this section.
F.
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the Town
of Abington or any individual or business organization performing
services pursuant to a contract or subcontract with the Town of
Abington ("Town Contractor"). However, prior to commencing any
undertaking which would otherwise be subject to this section, the
Town of Abington or any Town Contractor shall file a plan for such
undertaking with the Planning Board and may consult with the Planning
Board on the implementation of said plan.
G.
§ 49-1 ABINGTON CODE § 49-2
44:34
ARTICLE II
Control of Dump and Compost Site
§ 49-3. Control by Board of Health; other landfills prohibited.
[Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
The Town Landfill and compost site shall be under the control of the Board
of Health and no person shall maintain a landfill on any other premises in
the Town.
§ 49-3 DEEDS OF RELEASE AND REDEEMED REAL § 49-3
44:35
Chapter 53
ELECTIONS
§ 49-3 ABINGTON CODE § 49-3
53:36
ARTICLE I
Police Presence
[Adopted 4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 8.3]
§ 53-1. Posting at polling places.
The Selectmen shall have such police officers as necessary posted at all
polling places for any election to enforce the laws relative to the election
process.
3. Editor's Note: This article also superseded former Art. I, Police Presence, derived from Ch.
2, Sec. 5, of the 1992 Town of Abington Bylaws.
§ 53-1 ELECTIONS § 53-1
53:37
Chapter 59
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Failure to pay taxes — See Ch. 102, Art I.
§ 53-1 ABINGTON CODE § 53-1
59:38
ARTICLE I
Payment into Treasury
§ 59-1. Fees and revenues.
All fees or other revenues collected by any Town department or office shall
be paid into the Treasury of the Town and accrue to the benefit of the Town.
Any fee or fine schedule established pursuant to MGL Chapter 40 § 22F
shall be kept on file with the Town Clerk.
§ 59-1 FEES § 59-1
59:39

ARTICLE II
Town Clerk and Sealer of Weights and Measures Fees
§ 59-2. Town Clerk fees.
The schedule of fees to be charged by the Town Clerk under the provisions
of Section 34 of Chapter 262 of the Massachusetts General Laws shall be
those established by the Town Clerk under the provisions of Section 22F
of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws. A copy of the fees so
adopted shall be posted and shall be available in the office of the Town
Clerk.
§ 59-3. Sealer of Weights and Measures fees.
The schedule of fees to be charged by the Sealer of Weights and Measures
under the provisions of Section 56 of Chapter 98 of the Massachusetts
General Laws shall be those established by the Sealer of the Weights
and Measures, subject to approval by the Board of Selectmen, under the
provisions of Section 22F of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
A copy of the fees so adopted shall be posted and shall be available in the
office of the Town Clerk.
§ 59-2 FEES § 59-3
59:41
Chapter 63
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 59-3 ABINGTON CODE § 59-3
59:42
ARTICLE I
Dangerous Fences
§ 63-1. Responsibility of property owners for dangerous fence;
deadline for completion of work.
Should the presence of an otherwise lawful fence create a clear and present
danger to the general public, it shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to remedy the situation. The Fence Viewer may set a deadline for the
completion of such work. If a fence is not repaired or removed pursuant to a
determination of the Fence Viewer, the delinquent property owner shall be
subject to all remedies and costs authorized by MGL Chapter 49.
§ 63-2. Responsibility of property owner for erecting fence;
deadline for completion of work.
Should the lack of a lawful fence create a clear and present danger to the
general public, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to erect a
lawful fence or otherwise remedy the situation. The Fence Viewer may set a
deadline for the completion of such work. The presence of, or lack of, clear
and present danger to the general public shall be determined by a majority
decision of the Fence Viewer, Fire Chief and Police Chief.
§ 63-3. Powers of Fence Viewer.
The Fence Viewer shall be allowed to take any necessary actions in order to
accomplish the duties of the Fence Viewer in a safe and timely manner.
§ 63-1 FEES § 63-3
59:43

ARTICLE II
Electrical Fences
§ 63-4. Conditions and specifications. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by
Art. 9]
Low-voltage electrical "security" fencing with a maximum of 12 volts,
primary voltage, may be permitted within areas of Abington zoned for nonresidential
use; and in the event a person, firm, corporation, or other entity
erects electrical fencing in a permitted zone, the following conditions and
specifications shall apply:
§ 63-5. Livestock fencing.
The above regulation (§ 63-4) shall not apply to electrical livestock fencing,
which may be permitted within all areas of Abington, under the following
conditions:
§ 63-6. Fee.
The Fence Viewer shall be entitled to assess a fee for his/her services in
accordance with MGL Ch. 49.
An electrical fence shall be no higher than 10 feet tall from its lowest
electrical point;
A.
An electrical fence shall be completely surrounded by a non-electrical
fence or wall, that fence/wall must conform with all existing
regulations;
B.
The surrounding non-electrical fence/wall shall be separated from the
electrical fence by at least six inches at the closest point between the
electrical fence and the non-electrical surrounding fence/wall;
C.
And electrical fence shall be equipped with an emergency "shut off" in
a location readily accessible to emergency personnel;
D.
E. An electrical fence shall be identified as such at least every 30 feet.
An electrical livestock fence shall be identified as such at least every 60
feet;
A.
An electrical livestock fence must comply with all other fence
regulations.
B.
§ 63-4 FEES § 63-6
59:45
Chapter 67
FINANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 17.
Town Meetings — See Ch. 152.
§ 67-1. Appointment; terms; eligibility.
A Finance Committee of nine voters of the Town shall be appointed by
the Moderator to fill staggered three-year terms. No elective or appointive
Town officer or Town employee shall be eligible to serve on said Committee.
If any member announces his candidacy for an elective office, his position
shall be deemed to be vacant and shall be filled as herein provided.
§ 67-2. Organization; vacancies.
The Finance Committee shall meet for purposes of organization each year
within 75 days after the start of each fiscal year. It shall choose its own
officers, and it shall cause to be kept a true record of its proceedings. It
may appoint sub-committees and liaisons from its own membership. It shall
notify the Town Manager, Selectmen, Town Clerk, and Moderator in writing
of its organization. Vacancies shall be filled promptly by the Moderator for
the unexpired term of the member whose appointment is vacated.
§ 67-3. Access to books, contracts and accounts.
The Finance Committee shall have the authority to inspect and have access
to all books, accounts, contracts and documents of any department or
office of the Town. Copies of all newly-negotiated employment contracts and
contract amendments shall be submitted to the Town Accountant by the
appropriate Town agency within 10 days after the contract's execution by
all parties, and the Town Accountant shall be custodian of all original Town
contracts.
§ 67-4. Consideration of articles; recommendations. [Amended
4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15M4]
The Finance Committee shall report its recommendations in writing on
every article contained in a Town Meeting warrant at least 10 days prior to
a scheduled Town Meeting. Said recommendations shall include a summary
of reasons for each recommendation and shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
Said report shall also be made available to voters of the Town, forthwith
4. Editor’s Note: This Article provided that such Bylaw amendment shall not take effect until
the special legislation authorized by this vote shall have been enacted and all the
provisions of MGL c.40, § 32 have been met.
§ 63-6 ABINGTON CODE § 67-4
59:46
after the filing with the Town Clerk, in the manner provided in § 152-2B, and
at Town Meeting.
§ 67-5. Preparations of budget estimates.
The Town Manager shall annually prepare a detailed budget for the ensuing
year in accordance with the requirements of the Charter. A draft budget
shall be submitted to the Finance Committee on or before January 15th
of each year in preparation for the Annual Town Meeting. The Finance
Committee and the Town Manager shall coordinate the presentation and
format of final budget information for each Town Meeting.
§ 67-6. Requests for funds after Town Meeting.
When requesting a Reserve Fund Transfer from the Finance Committee
subsequent to the Annual Town Meeting, Town officers, department heads,
boards, and committees shall submit such requests on forms furnished by
the Finance Committee together with explanatory statements in sufficient
detail to justify the request.
§ 67-7. Inventory of Town property; inventory forms; disposal of
property. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
Each Town officer, department head, board, or committee shall be
responsible for the proper use, handling, storage, condition and security
of all tangible Town-owned property in its possession or under its control.
Each responsible individual, board, or committee shall, not later than July
15 of each year, prepare and furnish to the Town Manager an inventory
as of June 30 of all such property on forms provided for the purpose.
Accompanying such inventory list there shall be shown separately a list of
property declared to be of no further use and surplus to its needs. Before
disposal of surplus property in a manner consistent with law, whether by
sale, transfer to another department, destruction, or otherwise, such action
shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen. Report of the action taken by
such Board shall be furnished to the Town Manager. Inventory sheets and
surplus property lists shall be prepared in such form and detail as the Town
Manager may prescribe.
§ 67-8. Annual internal audit. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
The Board of Selectmen shall within each calendar year, without notice,
cause to be made an internal audit of the Town's inventory by the Town's
Internal Auditor of all property (excluding office furniture and general office
supplies with a total value of less than $5,000) in the possession or control
of each Town officer, department heard, board or committee and such audits
shall be filed with the Town Manager.
§ 67-4 FEES § 67-8
59:47
Chapter 69
FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 75.
§ 69-1. Preamble.
Whereas, there has been an increase in recent years in the use of fire alarm
systems which operate by way of a master box;
Whereas, improper installation, defective equipment, lack of maintenance
or other reasons cause fire alarm systems to malfunction;
Whereas, in addition to the financial cost, each malfunction requires that
Abington Fire Department personnel respond, thus decreasing the number
of Abington Fire Department personnel available to respond to an actual
fire;
Whereas, the Abington Fire Departments' responding to fire alarm
malfunctions jeopardizes the safety of firefighters as well as the general
public;
Now, therefore, be it ordered to be in the public interest as follows.
§ 69-2. Title.
The Town of Abington Bylaws are hereby amended by adding the following
Bylaw to be entitled "Fire Alarm Systems."
§ 69-3. Definitions.
When used in this Bylaw, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any heat-activated, smoke-activated, flameenergy-
activated or other such automatic device capable of transmitting a
fire signal directly to the Abington Fire Department by way of a master box
or central station.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM MALFUNCTION — The transmittal of a fire alarm
directly to the Abington Fire Department by way of a master box or central
station, which alarm is caused by improper installation of a fire alarm
system, a mechanically defective fire alarm system, lack of maintenance
or other reasons that cause a fire alarm to sound even though there is no
actual fire or situation that reasonably could evolve into a fire.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM OWNER — An individual or entity who owns the
title to and/or has on his/her business or residential premise or premises a
§ 67-8 ABINGTON CODE § 69-3
59:48
fire alarm system equipped to send a fire alarm signal to a central station
operating company or directly to the Abington Fire Department.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Abington Fire Department.
MASTER BOX — A fire alarm control device equipped to send a fire alarm
signal directly to the Abington Fire Department or its designee by way of
radio frequency connection for the purpose of manually or automatically
reporting a fire alarm or other emergency request for assistance.[Added
4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15B; amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
MASTER BOX OWNER — An individual or entity who has on his/her
business or residential premises a fire alarm system equipped to send a fire
alarm signal directly to the Abington Fire Department by way of a master
box.
PROTECTED PREMISES — Any property that has a fire alarm system that
is connected to a master box or central station that reports to the Fire
Department any alarms or signals from that premises.
§ 69-4. Connection of fire alarm system to Abington Fire
Department by way of master box. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
Every master box owner whose protected premises on the effective date
of this Bylaw is connected to the Abington Fire Department by way of a
master box shall pay the following fees for each master box:
Annual fee $100
A.
Every master box owner whose protected premises is connected after
the effective date of this Bylaw to the Abington Fire Department by way
of a master box shall pay the following fees for each master box:
Permit fee (single charge) $25
Connection fee (single charge) $200
Annual fee $100
B.
Before any fire alarm system is connected to the Abington Fire
Department, the master box owner shall provide the Fire Chief the
following information:
The name, address and home and work telephone numbers of the
master box owners.
(1)
(2) The street address where the master box is located.
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two other
persons other than the master box owner who can be contacted
24 hours a day, who are authorized by the master box owner to
respond to an alarm signal and who have access to the premises in
which the master box is located; and
(3)
C.
§ 69-3 FEES § 69-4
59:49
§ 69-5. Updating information.
§ 69-6. Fire alarm system malfunctions; fines.
If there is a fire alarm malfunction as defined herein, the Fire Chief may
assess a fine against the fire alarm system owner for each protected
premises and for each such malfunction per fiscal year according to the
following schedule:
Any other information pertaining to the fire alarm system as the
Fire Chief may require.
(4)
If a master box owner fails to comply with this section, the Fire Chief
may assess a fine of $50 for each day of noncompliance.
D.
Every master box owner shall be responsible for updating the
information herein required to be provided to the Fire Chief. If the
information changes, the master box owner shall provide the Fire Chief
with the updated information and shall pay the fees, if any, required by
this Bylaw.
A.
If a master box owner fails to comply with this section, the Fire Chief
may assess a fine of $50.
B.
First through third malfunction: no charge.
Upon recording of the third alarm by the Fire Department, the Fire
Chief shall notify the owner of the building, in writing, and by certified
mail, of such fact and at this time inform the owner of the Department
policy with regards to charging for false alarms.
Fourth through the sixth malfunction: $100.
Seventh through the 11th malfunction: $250.
Each malfunction after the 11th: $500.
A.
Private fire alarm systems connected to the Abington Fire Department
by other automatic means or through a central station system shall be
subject to the above conditions.
B.
Any fire alarm system malfunction which is the result of the failure of
the property owner, occupant or their agents to notify the Abington
Fire Department of repair, maintenance or testing of the internal fire
alarm system within the protected premises shall cause a penalty to be
assessed in accordance with Subsection A above.
C.
For the purpose of this regulation, a fire alarm system malfunction may
consist of but not be limited to:
(1) The operation of a faulty smoke or heat detection device.
(2) Faulty control panel or associated equipment.
D.
§ 69-4 ABINGTON CODE § 69-6
59:50
§ 69-7. Appeal procedure.
§ 69-8. Deposit in fire alarm system account.
All fines and fees assessed herein shall be payable to the Town of Abington
for deposit in the Fire Alarm Revolving Account, with said fees being
appropriated to maintain and upgrade the fire alarm system.
§ 69-9. Severability.
The provisions of this Bylaw shall be deemed to be severable, and if any
of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions.
§ 69-10. Regulations and enforcement.
The Fire Chief may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to
implement this Bylaw. The Fire Chief is authorized to pursue legal action as
may be necessary to enforce this Bylaw.
An action, malicious or intentional, by an employee of the owner, or
occupant of the protected premises, or a contractor employed by
the owner or the occupant, causing a non-fire-related activation of
the internal fire alarm system.
(3)
Property owners shall be billed once a month for the previous month's
malfunction activity. All fines assessed shall be paid to the Town
Treasurer for deposit into the Fire Alarm Revolving Account.
E.
If a bill is not paid within 30 days, a second notice will be sent. If the bill
is not paid after 60 days, a final notice will be sent and/or occupant that
the master box will be disconnected and the building owner notified.
F.
Any fire alarm system owner who is aggrieved by an action taken by the
Fire Chief under this Bylaw may, within 10 days of such action, file an
appeal, in writing, to the Town Manager of the Town of Abington. After
notice, the Town Manager shall hold a hearing, after which it shall issue
a decision in which it affirms, annuls or modifies the action taken by the
Fire Chief, giving its reason therefor.
A.
The Town Manager shall send its decision to the owner by first-class
mail within 10 days after the hearing. The decision of the Town
Manager shall be a final administrative decision. The owner shall have
30 days from the date of the written decision to seek judicial review in
the District Court of Plymouth County.
B.
§ 69-6 FEES § 69-10
59:51
Chapter 71
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch 1, Art I.
Explosives and flammable materials — See Ch
75, Art I.
Underground storage of flammable
fluids — See Ch 75, Art II.
§ 71-1. Permission to discharge required; exceptions. [Amended
6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person shall fire or discharge any firearm or explosive of any kind within
the limits of the Town except with a permit issued by the Board of Selectmen
related to a Town sponsored or private event which commemorates or
celebrates a federal, state, or local holiday or a historical, cultural, or
community event; provided, however, that this Bylaw shall not apply to the
lawful defense of life or property nor to any law enforcement officer acting
in the discharge of his duties. Any person violating this Bylaw shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $300 for each offense.
§ 71-2. Hunting or trapping. [Added 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
Notwithstanding § 71-1, this Bylaw shall not apply to hunting or trapping on
private property, subject to any applicable state law or regulation. Hunting
or trapping on all Town-owned land shall be prohibited except with a permit
issued by the Board of Selectmen in connection with public health, safety,
or welfare.
Chapter 75
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 71.
Commercial garages — See Ch. 81.
Gas installations — See Ch. 84.
§ 69-10 ABINGTON CODE § 71-2
59:52
ARTICLE I
Explosives and Flammable Materials
§ 75-1. Fees.
The fee for a license for keeping, storage, or manufacture or sale of
explosives and inflammable material issued by the local licensing authority
under the provisions of MGL Ch. 148 § 13 shall be established from time to
time by the Fire Chief, pursuant to MGL Ch. 40 § 22F. A schedule of said
fees shall be kept on file at the Fire Department and with the Town Clerk.
§ 75-1 FEES § 75-1
59:53

ARTICLE II
Underground Storage of Flammable Fluids
§ 75-2. Testing schedule.
Any flammable liquid or gasoline storage tank installed below the ground
under license duly granted by the Board of Selectmen shall be tested for
leakage at the expense of the owner upon installation, and according to the
following schedule, the date of which shall be determined by the license
date or the date of installation, whichever is later:
§ 75-3. Supervision of testing; removal of leaking tanks.
Such testing shall be done under the supervision of the Fire Chief using
the Kent/Moore Test Method or equal. The tank or tanks shall be removed
by the owner, at their expense, if it fails the test, or at any time when it
becomes a hazard because of leakage or otherwise in the opinion of the Fire
Chief.
§ 75-4. Town held harmless; obligations of owners upon
discontinuance.
The fact of installation, maintenance and/or usage of such storage tanks
under a license granted by the Board of Selectmen shall constitute an
agreement on the part of the owner or owners of such tanks to save
and hold harmless the Town of Abington from any and all reasonable and
necessary expenses of removing said tanks upon expiration of the license,
or at any time when the same shall be required in the opinion of the Fire
Chief. The fact of installation, maintenance and/or usage of such storage
tanks under a license granted by the Board of Selectmen shall constitute
on the part of the owners an obligation to remove such tanks at the cost of
the owners upon the discontinuance and/or abandonment of that business
necessitating or using such tanks, whether or not such discontinuance and/
or abandonment be less than the five-year limitation above mentioned.
Removal of such tanks under the provisions herein shall be within 180 days
of the date of discontinuance or abandonment.
§ 75-5. Jurisdiction over leakages; notification information.
Jurisdiction over any and all leakage of flammable liquid or other harmful
and injurious matter into any main, line or other conduit below the surface
of the ground, constituting a detriment to the public health or safety, shall
be vested with the Fire Chief.
A. Day of installation.
B. Every five years up to 20 years.
C. Every two years up to 30 years.
After 30 years, annually unless the Fire Chief determines that
conditions indicate more frequent testing be done.
D.
§ 75-2 FEES § 75-5
59:55
§ 75-6. Installation and usage constitutes agreement.
The fact of the installation, maintenance and/or usage of such storage tanks
under the license of the Board of Selectmen, with the actual or implied
consent of the owner of such land, shall constitute an agreement on the
part of the owner of such licensed land to take such action as constitute
an agreement on the part of the owner of such licensed land to take such
action as requested above to discover the presence or absence of any such
leakage; and shall further constitute an agreement on the part of the owner
to hold and save harmless the Town from any reasonable and necessary
expenditures incurred by the Town in testing the licensed land upon failure
of the owner to comply with the notification of the Fire Chief.
§ 75-7. Tanks in floodplain areas; fee.
Any tanks installed in a floodplain area will be in a concrete vault. The fee
for an original license and renewal license shall be in such sums set forth in
Article I of this chapter.
Upon determination of such leakage into such main, conduit or line,
the Fire Chief shall seek to provide an immediate verbal notification
of such leakage to all owners of land duly licensed for such storage of
gasoline or other flammable or injurious material in the area defined
as the source of such leakage and the particular main, line or conduit
affected. The Fire Chief shall further notify all owners by first class and
registered mail. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
A.
The defined area within which the source of leakage is located, if
ascertainable;
B.
A demand upon the owners of such licensed land within the defined
area to take necessary action to test and confirm the absence of any
such leakage from storage tanks upon the owners' particular land;
C.
A reasonable time limit within which to effect such tests, not to exceed
72 hours;
D.
Notification of the intention of the Town to make such reasonable tests
as are requested upon the failure of the owner to take action;
E.
The amount of charge for such tests in the event the owner fails to
comply with the demand.
F.
§ 75-5 ABINGTON CODE § 75-7
59:56
Chapter 81
GARAGES, COMMERCIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch 1, Art. 1.
Storage of explosives — See Ch. 75.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 81-1. License required.
Any person who maintains a commercial garage with the facilities for the
repair, alteration or towing of motor vehicles including an autobody shop,
so-called, shall first obtain a license therefor from the Board of Selectmen.
§ 81-2. License fee.
Fee for the license shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 81-3. Expiration; revocation; hearing.
Licenses issued hereunder shall expire June 30 following the date of issue
and may be revoked at any time, after a hearing, by the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 84
GAS INSTALLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty - See Ch. 1, Art. I. Storage of flammable liquids — See Ch. 75.
§ 84-1. Appointment of Inspector.
The Town Manager shall annually appoint an Inspector of Plumbing, Gas
Piping and Gas Appliances in Buildings, which person shall be a licensed
plumber or licensed gas fitter, who shall insure that installations comply
with the requirements of the regulations of the Massachusetts Gas
Regulatory Board.
§ 84-2. Permit to install gas equipment required.
No person, firm or corporation shall install any gas pipes, equipment,
appliances or systems in the Town without first obtaining a permit.
§ 75-7 GARAGES, COMMERCIAL § 84-3
81:57
§ 84-3. Permit fees.
The Board of Health shall determine such fees as may be payable to the
Town for such gas installation permits.
Chapter 89
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 89-1. Membership; terms.
The Historical Commission shall be comprised of five members, who must
be residents of the Town. The members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to fill staggered three-year terms. They shall survey, research,
and record the important historic places in the Town and shall, as mandated
by the state law, see to preserve, protect, and develop these historic assets.
§ 89-2. Authority of Commission.
§ 89-3. Urging property owners to include deed designation.
The Historical Commission shall have the right to urge the owner(s) of
private property which has been declared an important historic place in the
Town to so indicate the designation on the instrument of transfer (or deed)
if and when the property changes hands.
The Historical Commission shall be the authority for interpreting the
historic aspects of the Town.
A.
The Historical Commission may, from time to time, classify a certain
place in the Inventory to be of especial historic value to the Town as
a whole. In order to make the owner of the property, as well as the
appropriate Town departments and the public in general, aware of its
importance, a copy of its record in the Inventory shall be forwarded to
the Selectmen, together with a covering statement by the Commission.
If the Selectmen concur with the Commission's decision, they shall
declare the place to be of especial value to the Town, and shall have
a copy filed with the Town Clerk, and shall also forward copies to the
Abington Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and any other
Town departments or officers who may be interested and/or make a
request. Copies shall also be forwarded to the Old Colony Planning
Council and to the owner(s) of private property involved.
B.
§ 84-3 ABINGTON CODE § 89-4
89:58
§ 89-4. Declassifying properties; procedure.
A declaration that a place has historic importance shall cease to be effective
if and when the Historical Commission re-evaluates the place and so advises
the Selectmen who shall then withdraw the item from the files of the
Town Clerk and others, and a public announcement of the action shall be
published in the local newspapers.
§ 89-5. Severability.
Rejection of any section or part of a section of this Bylaw shall not invalidate
any other part thereof.
Chapter 94
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 163.
§ 94-1. Authority of Selectmen to license dealers and collectors.
The Selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers in and keepers
of shops for the purpose, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand
articles, and may also license suitable persons as junk collectors to collect
by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals and secondhand articles from
place to place in the Town.
Chapter 98
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 89-4 JUNK DEALERS § 94-1
94:59

ARTICLE I
Investigation of Complaints
[Adopted 4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 85]
§ 98-1. Investigation by Selectmen.
Upon the complaint of an abutter, the Selectmen shall investigate the use
of adjoining land, which although within the allowed use under the Zoning
Bylaws (Ch. 175) or Health Regulations is alleged to be conducted in such
a manner that it unnecessarily or unreasonably interferes with the use or
quiet enjoyment of the complainant's land.
§ 98-2. Hearing; order to correct.
If the Selectmen, after such investigation, deem it necessary, they may
order a hearing, if as a result of such hearing they find the complaint
justified they shall order such corrections in the use of such land as they
deem necessary.
§ 98-3. Failure to comply with order.
Failure of compliance with an order of the Selectmen under this section
shall constitute an offense under these Bylaws.
5. Editor's Note: This Article also superseded former Art. I, Investigation of Complaints,
derived from Ch. 2, Sec. 7, of the 1992 Town of Abington Bylaws; amended by Art. 31 of
1996 ATM.
§ 98-1 LAND USE § 98-3
98:61
Chapter 102
LICENSING
§ 98-3 ABINGTON CODE § 98-3
98:62
ARTICLE I
Failure to Pay Taxes
[Adopted 6-9-2014 ATM by Art. 246]
§ 102-1. Furnishing of list. [Amended 5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 17]
The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges,
hereinafter referred to as the Tax Collector, shall annually, and may
periodically, furnish to each department, board, commission or division,
hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or
permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation,
or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or other municipal charges and that such party has not filed in good faith
a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition
before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 102-2. Denial by licensing authority; hearing; issuance of
certificate indicating good standing.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector or
with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject
of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried
out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real
estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished
to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held
not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie
evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to
any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing
conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other
proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial,
revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or
revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license
authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is
in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the
date of issuance of said certificate.
6. Editor's Note: This article also superseded former Art. I, Failure to Pay Taxes, adopted
4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 8.
§ 102-1 LAND USE § 102-3
98:63
§ 102-3. Issuance of certificate upon compliance with payment
agreement.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitation to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall
be conditioned upon satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure
to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or
revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be
given notice and hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 102-4. Waiver.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in Section 1 of Chapter 268A in the business or activity conducted
in or on said property.
§ 102-5. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
A. Open burning; Section 13 of Chapter 48;
B. Bicycle permits; Section 11A of Chapter 85;
C. Sale of articles for charitable purposes; Section 33 of Chapter 101;
D. Children work permits; Section 69 of Chapter 149;
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses; Section 21E
of Chapter 140;
E.
F. Dog licenses; Section 137 of Chapter 140;
G. Fishing, hunting, trapping license; Section 12 of Chapter 131;
H. Marriage licenses; Section 28 of Chapter 207; and
Theatrical events, public exhibition permits; Section 181 of Chapter
140.
I.
§ 102-3 ABINGTON CODE § 102-5
98:64
Chapter 106
MARIJUANA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 7.
§ 106-1. Public use or consumption; enforcement; violations and
penalties.
No person shall smoke, ingest or otherwise consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c. 94C, as amended) while in or
upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge,
park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public building,
schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area owned by
or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any bus or other passenger
conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any place accessible to the
public. This Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 21 or by noncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D
by sworn members of the Abington Police Department. The fine for violation
of this Bylaw shall be $300 for each offense. Any penalty imposed under this
Bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under MGL c. 94C,
§ 32L.
Chapter 111
PAWNBROKERS
§ 111-1. License required.
No pawnbroker shall operate in the Town of Abington unless licensed to do
so by the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized
to adopt policies governing the licensing process for pawnbrokers.
§ 111-2. Access to premises, articles and records.
Any pawnbroker license issued by the Board of Selectmen shall require
that police officers of the Town of Abington be provided with reasonable
access to the licensed premises to examine all articles taken in pawn
or kept or stored upon the premises. All books and inventories shall be
exhibited without delay upon demand.
A.
If a licensed pawnbroker, clerk, agent or other person in charge of
the premises refuses to admit an authorized agent to enter or fails to
exhibit to them upon demand all such articles, books and inventories
or hinders, obstructs or prevents an investigation, the license shall
be immediately and without delay revoked and the licensee shall be
B.
§ 102-5 LAND USE § 111-2
98:65
§ 111-3. Numbering, describing and photographing of items
required; identification of sellers.
§ 111-4. Holding period; audit sheets.
Any person licensed as a pawnbroker shall hold all items taken in for
a minimum of 60 days before the resale, trade, melting, changing the
appearance of or any other means of disposing an item. Audit sheets shall
be submitted to the Chief of Police or his designee on a weekly basis with
record of all transactions including the date of sale, amount, seller's name
and address, date of birth, driver's license or other number provided on
picture identification issued by an authorized governmental agency and an
itemized list and description of each article.
§ 111-5. Return of stolen property.
Any person licensed as a pawnbroker shall, if it is determined that any
goods, article or other item taken into possession are stolen property, or
if the rightful owner of property identifies the same and the property is
confirmed by a member of the Abington Police Department to be stolen, the
property shall be immediately returned to the rightful owner at no cost to
such owner.
subject to the penalties set forth in MGL c. 140, § 74, including a fine of
not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or
both.
Any person licensed as a pawnbroker in the Town of Abington shall,
at the time of making any loan, attach a number of the article taken
in pawn and/purchased by the agent, clerk, agent or other person in
charge. Each and every numbered item shall be kept in a record book
of a style and size to be approved by the Chief of Police, in which shall
be legibly written in the English language. An account and description
to include any distinguishing marks or numbers of the goods, articles or
items shall be recorded. The amount of money paid and/or loaned, day
and hour when it was purchased and/or pawned, and rate of interest to
be paid shall also be recorded. A colored photograph shall also be taken
of the item and kept for a period for at least one year from the time of
acquisition. The photograph shall be taken at a close enough proximity
to make recognition of the item easy for any authorized agent to view.
A.
Every licensed pawnbroker shall photograph any person pawning or
selling any item and keep such photographs with the record books as
part of the pawnbroker's records. The photograph shall also include
the name, age and residence of the person. Positive identification shall
be required, clearly photocopied and kept with the records. Positive
identification shall mean any picture identification issued by an
authorized governmental agency of the United States of America or its
political subdivisions. The pawnbroker shall also require that the seller
sign his or her name.
B.
§ 111-2 ABINGTON CODE § 111-6
98:66
§ 111-6. Complaints; notice of violation; suspension or revocation of
license.
Complaints concerning a licensed or unlicensed pawnbroker shall be made
to and may be investigated by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee.
Upon determination of a violation, the Board of Selectmen shall serve notice
by certified mail or in hand as to the date, time and place of hearing
along with a statement of the reasons. The Board of Selectmen, Police
Chief or their respective designee may suspend or revoke a pawnbroker's
license without hearing if public health and/or safety so require. In such
circumstances, the Board of Selectmen shall forthwith give notice of the
suspension or revocation and serve the pawnbroker by certified mail or in
hand with notice of the opportunity for a hearing.
§ 111-7. Enforcement.
This Bylaw shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of §§ 1-1 and
1-2 of the Town Bylaws. In addition, offenses that may result in suspension
or revocation of a license include but are not limited to the following:
Chapter 113
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art I. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 7, Art. I.
A. Violation of any provision of the license agreement;
B. Violation of any provision of the statutes regulating pawnbrokers;
Violation of any provision of any other statute or of this Bylaw, including
providing incorrect information on a license application.
C.
§ 111-6 LAND USE § 111-7
98:67

ARTICLE I
Ball Playing in Street
§ 113-1. Restrictions.
No person shall play ball, or throw balls, stones, snowballs, or any other
missiles within or upon any of the streets or public places of the Town,
except places set apart for such purposes.
§ 113-1 LAND USE § 113-1
98:69

ARTICLE II
Posting of Advertisements
§ 113-2. Permission required. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person shall post, draw, affix or in any way attach any poster, handbill,
notice, advertisement or placard, or paint, draw, affix or stamp any letter,
notice, advertisement or placard, or paint, draw, affix, or stamp any letter,
notice, figure, advertisement or mark upon or into any way, fence, post,
tree, building or structure not his own, without the permission of the owner
if private property, or of the Town Manager if public property.
§ 113-2 LAND USE § 113-2
98:71

ARTICLE III
Injury to Memorials and Gravesites
§ 113-3. Desecration prohibited.
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any building, monument or
memorial, or desecrate any grave or gravesite or burial place within the
Town.
§ 113-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons so injuring, defacing or destroying any building,
monument or memorial, or desecrating any grave or gravesite or burial
place will be subject to a fine of $300, plus full restitution for the amount of
damages.
§ 113-3 LAND USE § 113-4
98:73

ARTICLE IV
Sound Trucks
§ 113-5. Permit required. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person shall operate any sound truck or other similar open air sound
making device in the Town, without a permit from the Town Manager.
§ 113-5 LAND USE § 113-5
98:75

ARTICLE V
Public Decency
§ 113-6. Peeping into windows.
No person, except an officer of the law in the performance of his/her duties,
shall enter upon the premises of another or upon any public property for
the purpose of peeping into the windows of a house or other building or of
spying in any manner upon any person or persons therein.
§ 113-6 LAND USE § 113-6
98:77
Chapter 117
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art I. Junk dealers — See Ch. 94.
§ 113-6 ABINGTON CODE § 113-6
98:78
ARTICLE I
Peddling and Soliciting
§ 117-1. Registration required. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person unless authorized shall go from place to place with the Town
selling or bartering or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor
or taking orders therefor any magazines, periodicals, goods, wares and
merchandise, without first having recorded his/her name and address with
the Chief of Police and furnished such other information as may be
requested of him/her.
§ 117-2. Issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police shall thereupon issue a permit for a period not exceeding
12 months, which must be shown on request, and shall state that said
person has duly registered and is entitled to go from place to place within
the Town for the purpose specified.
§ 117-1 LAND USE § 117-2
98:79

ARTICLE II
Hawkers and Peddlers
§ 117-3. Issuance of licenses by Selectmen; fee. [Amended 4-2-2012
ATM by Art. 15G]
The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the authority to grant
licenses to all hawkers and all peddlers who are engaged in the sale or
barter of any and all types of merchandise including the sale of prepared
or unprepared food; said license fee to be established by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 117-3 LAND USE § 117-3
98:81
Chapter 119
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 17.
Finance Committee — See Ch. 67.
Town Meetings — See Ch. 152.
Town offices — See Ch. 155.
§ 119-1. Purposes and authorization.
The purpose of the Personnel Bylaw is to establish fair and equitable
personnel policies and to establish a system of personnel administration
based on merit principles that ensures a uniform, fair and efficient
application of personnel policies. This Bylaw is adopted pursuant to the
authority granted by Article LXXXIX of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth and General Laws, Chapter 41, Sections 108A and 108C.
§ 119-2. Application.
All Town departments and positions shall be subject to the provisions of this
Bylaw except elected officers, employees with personal contracts, positions
within collective bargaining units, and employees of the School Department.
§ 119-3. Town Manager.
Pursuant to the Abington Home Rule Charter the Town Manager is
entrusted with the administration of the Town personnel system. The Town
Manager shall also be responsible for establishing a central record-keeping
system compliant with applicable federal and state laws. The Town Manager
shall be responsible for promulgating policies and procedures regarding
the establishment and maintenance of a personnel system based on merit
principles, the classification and reclassification of positions and an annual
compensation plan. Proposed policies, and amendments to policies, subject
to this Bylaw shall become effective on the 15th day following the day
that such notice is provided to the Board of Selectmen unless the Board of
Selectmen otherwise votes to veto the proposed change(s).
§ 119-4. Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to veto any personnel policies
or amendments thereto as stated in § 119-3.
§ 119-5. Personnel system.
A personnel system shall be established utilizing current concepts of
personnel management and shall include but not be limited to the following
elements:
§ 117-3 ABINGTON CODE § 119-6
98:82
§ 119-6. Method of administration.
A system of administration which assigns specific responsibility for all
elements of the personnel system, including: maintaining personnel
records, implementing effective recruitment and selection processes,
maintaining the classification and compensation plans, monitoring the
application of personnel policies and periodic reviews, and evaluating the
personnel system.
§ 119-7. Classification plan.
A position classification plan for all employees subject to this Bylaw shall be
established, based on similarity of duties performed and the responsibilities
assumed so that the same qualifications may be reasonably required for, and
the same schedule of pay may be equitably applied to, all positions in the
same class.
§ 119-8. Compensation plan.
A compensation plan for all positions subject to this Bylaw shall consist of:
§ 119-9. Recruitment and selection policy.
A recruitment, employment, promotion and transfer policy which ensures
that reasonable effort is made to attract qualified persons and that selection
criteria are job related.
§ 119-10. Personnel records.
A centralized record keeping system, which maintains essential personnel
records.
§ 119-11. Personnel policies.
A series of personnel policies which establishes the rights, the benefits to
which personnel employed by the Town are entitled and the obligation of
said employees to the Town.
§ 119-12. Other elements.
Other elements of a personnel system as deemed appropriate or required
by law.
A schedule of pay grades including minimum, maximum and
intermediate rates for each grade; and,
A.
An official list indicating the assignment of each position to specific pay
grades.
B.
§ 119-6 LAND USE § 119-13
98:83
§ 119-13. Severability.
The provisions of this Bylaw and any regulations adopted pursuant to this
Bylaw are severable. If any Bylaw provision or regulation is held invalid,
the remaining provisions of the Bylaw or regulations shall not be affected
thereby.
§ 119-14. Effective date.
This Bylaw shall take effect on July 1, 2015. Personnel policies existing
prior to said date will remain in effect until promulgation of new policies or
amendments.
Chapter 122
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use complaints — See Ch. 98, Art I. Junked vehicles — See Ch. 163.
§ 119-13 ABINGTON CODE § 119-14
98:84
ARTICLE I
Discharge of Offensive Matter Into Streets
§ 122-1. Contents of sinks, cesspools and privies. [Amended
6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, or discharge or suffer to be
discharged, in any public or private way of the Town, the contents of any
sink, cesspool or privy.
§ 122-2. Dead animals, rubbish and garbage.
No person shall place any dead animal or substance, rubbish or garbage, in
any public or private way of the Town, except for the purpose of immediate
removal therefrom.
§ 122-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw shall be liable to a penalty for
each violation.
§ 122-1 LAND USE § 122-3
98:85

ARTICLE II
Public Safety Hazard Abatement
§ 122-4. Enforcement officials.
In order to ensure the public safety and public convenience of the
inhabitants of the Town, it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, Police Chief,
Building Inspector and Zoning Enforcement Officer, and Health Agent to
require the abatement of any public health or safety hazard on public or
private property. The Fire Chief, Police Chief, Building Inspector and Zoning
Enforcement Officer, and Health Agent shall investigate and issue orders
consistent with the General Laws, to order the abatement of the hazard.
§ 122-5. Failure to abate; filing of complaint.
Upon failure of the property owner to abate a hazard within a reasonable
time after issuance of a written order to do so, as established by the General
Laws or by local order, the Board of Selectmen and/or the Board of Health
may assess daily fines and shall direct the various Town officials under its
charge to file a complaint in the District Court seeking a criminal complaint
to force the abatement of the hazard.
§ 122-6. Term defined.
The definitions of a public health or safety hazard will be as defined by the
General Laws, Code of Massachusetts Regulations, these Bylaws, and the
rules and regulation of the Board of Health.
§ 122-4 LAND USE § 122-6
98:87
Chapter 124
REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 124-1. Establishment.
There are hereby established in the Town of Abington, pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, the following revolving funds:
Revolving
Fund
Authorized
to Spend Revenue Source
Use of
Funds
A Fire
Department
Fund 039
Fire Chief Fees collected
relative to the fire
alarm system
Maintaining
the fire
alarm
system in
the Town
$16,000
B Library Fund
021
Board of
Library
Trustees
Fees from private
groups using the
meeting facilities
after regular
hours of
operation
Maintaining
the library
public
meeting
rooms
$1,000
C Library Fund
038
Board of
Library
Trustees
Fines from lost,
damaged or
stolen library
materials
Replace
lost,
damaged or
stolen
library
materials
$2,000
D Police
Department
Fund 017
Police
Chief
Fines received by
the Town relating
to motor vehicle
violations
pursuant to MGL
c. 90
Matching
funding
requirements
for police
grants or
the
purchasing
of
equipment
for the
Police
Department
$60,000
E Police
Department
Fund 040
Police
Chief
Fines received by
the Town relating
to marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol
(as defined in
MGL c. 94c, § 1,
as amended)
Purchasing
drug
prevention
materials
$1,000
§ 122-6 ABINGTON CODE § 124-1
98:88
Revolving
Fund
Authorized
to Spend Revenue Source
Use of
Funds
F Board of
Health Fund
028
Board of
Health
Receipts received
from CRT
disposal permits,
propane tank
disposal permits,
white good
disposal permits,
trash disposal
permits, curbside
collection fines
and the sale of
compost
Administrative
and disposal
costs
associated
with CRT's,
propane
tanks, white
goods,
waste or
compost
$10,000
G Board of
Health Fund
035
School
Committee
Fines levied
against Abington
businesses, which
violate state of
local tobacco
control laws,
bylaws and
regulations
Fund the
smoking or
substance
abuse
prevention
programs
$1,000
H School
Committee
Fund 086
School
Committee
Homeless
transportation
Fund the
cost of
transporting
homeless
student
transportation
$40,000
I Planning
Board Fund
022
Planning
Board
Review fees paid
to the Abington
Planning Board
Paying costs
related to
engineering
and
supervision
of proposed
subdivisions
and site
plans within
the Town
$60,000
J Town
Manager
Fund 034
COA
Director
Fees received
from the leasing/
renting of the
Senior Center
For the
maintenance
and
operation
$15,000
§ 124-1 LAND USE § 124-1
98:89
Revolving
Fund
Authorized
to Spend Revenue Source
Use of
Funds
K Building
Department
Fund 041
Building
Inspector
65% of permit
fees collected
from building,
wiring, plumbing,
gas, and zoning
permits
Fund the
costs of
operating
the building
department
including
payment of
wages and
benefits of
wiring,
plumbing
and gas
inspectors
$80,000
§ 124-2. Expenditures from revolving funds.
Expenditures from each revolving fund shall be subject to the spending limit
established by Town Meeting, and to any additional limitations as otherwise
set forth in General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E1/2.
Chapter 126
SAVING ABINGTON WITH GREEN ENERGY ("S.A.G.E.")
COMMITTEE
§ 126-1. Establishment; membership; and terms.
The S.A.G.E. Committee shall be comprised of up to nine voters of the Town,
with the number of members to be determined by the Board of Selectmen,
provided such number shall always be odd. Members shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen, to fill staggered, three-year terms. Members may
be reappointed for consecutive terms.
§ 126-2. Mission.
S.A.G.E shall serve the residents of the Town by advocating energy policies
that efficiently reduce energy consumption, increase awareness of the
environment, and provide information on relevant programs and
technologies to accomplish this mission.
§ 126-3. Goals and duties.
The goals and duties of S.A.G.E. shall include, but are not limited, to:
Obtaining "green community" status within the meaning of M.G.L. c.
25A, § 10;
A.
§ 124-1 ABINGTON CODE § 126-3
98:90
§ 126-4. Reporting requirement.
The S.A.G.E Committee shall annually report its progress, activities, and
goals to the Board of Selectmen for review and consideration by the Board.
Chapter 128
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200.
Educating and empowering residents to reduce their energy costs and
reliance on non-renewable energy sources;
B.
Developing strategies for the Town and municipal operations to reduce
overall energy consumption and promoting energy cost saving.
C.
Pursuing grant opportunities, including federal, state, and private
grants, and/or any other funding source;
D.
Supporting and promoting "the 4 R's," Reduce, Reuse, Recycle, and
Repurpose, among Town residents and in municipal operations;
E.
F. Any and all activities within the mission of S.A.G.E.
§ 126-3 LAND USE § 126-4
98:91

ARTICLE I
Connection of Runoff Sources to System
[Adopted 4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 87]
§ 128-1. Certain connections prohibited.
No property owner shall allow roof downspouts, foundation drains, sump
pumps, areaway drains, or any other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to be connected to a building sewer or other pipe which
discharges to the municipal sewer system.
§ 128-2. Notice to discontinue illegal connection.
Any property owner found to be in violation of this article shall be given
written notice by the Board of Sewer Commissioners requiring said
property owner to provide proof of discontinuance of said illegal connection
within 30 days thereafter, unless further extended by vote of the Board of
Sewer Commissioners.
§ 128-3. Violations and penalties.
Failure to discontinue said illegal connection pursuant to said notice shall
cause said property owner to be assessed a fine of $50 per day until the
violation is shown to be removed and proven to be remedied. Said fine shall
be added to the property owner's sewer usage bill and shall be subject to
the interest and lien penalties of the usage bill.
7. Editor's Note: This Article also superseded former Art. I, Connection of Runoff Sources to
System, adopted 6-13-2001 STM by Art. 14.
§ 128-1 LAND USE § 128-3
98:93

ARTICLE II
Illicit Discharges to Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 14]
§ 128-4. Purpose.
§ 128-5. Definitions.
Unless a different definition is indicated in other sections of this Bylaw, the
following definitions and provisions shall apply throughout this Article, also
referred to in this Article as this Bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — An activity, procedure, restraint,
or structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity or improve the
quality of storm water runoff.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to eliminate non-stormwater discharges to
the Town of Abington's municipal separate storm sewer system. Nonstormwater
discharges contain contaminants and supply additional
flows to the Town's storm drain system. Both increased and
contaminated stormwater runoff are major causes of:
Impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams,
rivers, wetlands and groundwater;
(1)
(2) Contamination of drinking water supplies;
(3) Alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and
(4) Flooding.
A.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is necessary for the protection of the
Town of Abington's natural resources, municipal facilities, and to
safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment.
B.
The objectives of this Bylaw are:
To prevent pollutants from entering the Town's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4);
(1)
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4;
(2)
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
(4)
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement.
(5)
C.
§ 128-4 LAND USE § 128-5
98:95
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the Wetland Resource Areas from any source.
DISCHARGER — A person or persons who discharge any pollutant or
combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system or into the
Wetland Resource Areas from any source.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Town Manager, and Town employees
and/or agents designated by the Town Manager to enforce this Bylaw.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance,
which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system,
including without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and
any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether
said connection was previously allowed or approved before the effective
date of this Bylaw.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
exempted herein.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION (IDDE) — One of six
Minimum Control Measures regulated under the Town's NPDES Phase II
MS4 Permit. The federal regulation governing implementation of the IDDE
program under this Permit is Section (b)(3) of 40 CFR 122.34, "Storm Water
Phase II Regulations."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious
surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks,
and roof tops.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Abington.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts that authorizes and regulates the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
§ 128-5 ABINGTON CODE § 128-5
98:96
NOTICE OF VIOLATION — A written notice given to a person by the
Enforcement Authority that states that said person has violated this Bylaw
on any specified occasion.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any Wetland Resource Areas. Effluent waters from
dewatering operations are adequately regulated under NPDES. Pollutants
shall include without limitation:
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through
the soil.
STORMWATER — Runoff from precipitation or snow melt.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material, which
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or
in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present or
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordinances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
F. Hazardous materials and wastes;
G. Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
H. Dissolved and particulate metals;
I. Animal wastes;
J. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
K. Construction wastes and residues; and
L. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 128-5 LAND USE § 128-5
98:97
potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment as
defined under MGL Ch. 21C and Ch. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR
30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000. Toxic or hazardous materials include any
synthetic organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or
infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance defined as Toxic or
Hazardous under these laws and regulations.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste
product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WETLAND RESOURCE AREAS — All wetlands and watercourses protected
under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and the Abington
Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
§ 128-6. Applicability.
This Bylaw shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm
drainage system, a watercourse, and any Wetland Resource Areas located
within the boundaries of the Town of Abington.
§ 128-7. Authority.
This Bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes, and
the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 128-8. Responsibility for administration.
The Enforcement Authority shall administer, implement and enforce this
Bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Enforcement
Authority may be delegated in writing by the Enforcement Authority to
employees or agents of the Enforcement Authority, including other Town
officials and employees.
§ 128-9. Regulations.
The Enforcement Authority may promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw. Failure by the Enforcement Authority
to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of
suspending or invalidating this Bylaw.
§ 128-10. Prohibited activities.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the
A.
§ 128-5 ABINGTON CODE § 128-10
98:98
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), into a watercourse, or
into the Wetland Resource Areas.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable
law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
B.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system (MS4). No Person shall
obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out
of the MS4 without prior consent from the Enforcement Authority. No
person shall dump or dispose of yard waste (leaves, grass clippings,
etc.) into the MS4, or into open watercourses (swales, brooks and
streams).
C.
Other prohibited activities.
Drains. No one shall tie any pump, cellar, yard, roof or area drain
directly into the storm water drainage system without approval
from the Enforcement Authority.
(1)
Catch basins. No Person shall directly or indirectly dump,
discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into any catchbasin,
any solid waste, construction debris, paint or paint product,
antifreeze, hazardous waste, oil, gasoline, grease and all other
automotive and petroleum products, solvents and degreasers, drain
cleaners, commercial and household cleaners, soap, detergent,
ammonia, food and food waste, grease or yard waste, animal feces,
dirt, sand, gravel or other pollutant. Any Person determined by the
Applicable Authority to be responsible for the discharge of any of
the above substances to a catchbasin may be held responsible for
cleaning the catchbasin and any other portions of the storm water
system impacted according to Town standards and requirements or
paying the cost for such cleaning. In addition, the Person shall be
responsible for paying any penalties assessed by the Town pursuant
to this Bylaw.
(2)
Septage. No Person shall discharge or cause or allow to be
discharged any septage, or septage tank or cesspool overflow into
the Town's storm water drainage system.
(3)
Storage and disposal of hazardous material. No one shall dispose
of anything other than clear water into the Town's storm drainage
system. The disposal of waste, gasoline or any other hazardous
material into the storm drainage system is strictly prohibited and
is in violation of state and federal pollution laws.
(4)
Private drainage systems. It is prohibited for anyone with a private
drainage system from tying into the municipal storm drainage
system without written approval from the Enforcement Authority.
The maintenance of any and all private drainage systems shall be
the responsibility of the owners.
(5)
D.
§ 128-10 LAND USE § 128-11
98:99
§ 128-11. Exemptions.
Discharges or flows resulting from fire fighting activities or other
authorized hydrant use are exempt.
A.
The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from the
prohibitions of this Bylaw provided that the source is not a significant
contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain system:
(1) Waterline flushing;
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or
air conditioning condensation;
(2)
(3) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(4) Water from individual residential car washing;
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine) provided the water is allowed to stand for one week
following last chlorination prior to draining and the pool is drained
in such a way as not to cause a nuisance;
(5)
(6) Discharge from street sweeping;
(7) Flow from potable water sources;
(8) Springs;
(9) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10)Diverted stream flow;
(11)Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater (e.g., sump
pump), provided that the operator seeks written approval from
the Enforcement Authority prior to discharge, and thereafter
discharges in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations
to be issued by the Enforcement Authority;
(12)
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the
Enforcement Authority prior to the time of the test;
(13)
Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided
that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of
the written approval, waiver, or order and applicable laws and
regulations; and
(14)
B.
§ 128-11 ABINGTON CODE § 128-11
98:100
§ 128-12. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
§ 128-13. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
§ 128-14. Watercourse protection.
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from
the Enforcement Authority as necessary to protect the public
interest.
(15)
The Enforcement Authority may suspend municipal storm drain system
access to any person or property without prior written notice when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health,
safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to
comply with an emergency suspension order, the Enforcement
Authority may take all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to
the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
A.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this Bylaw, without the prior written
approval of the Enforcement Authority.
B.
NPDES stormwater permit. Any person subject to an industrial or
construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply
with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit
may be required in a form acceptable to the Enforcement Authority
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
A.
Monitoring of discharges. Upon notice of an alleged illicit discharge
or connection, the Enforcement Authority have the right to investigate
any facility that has storm water discharges associated with industrial
activity, including construction activity. The exercise of this right does
not constitute a replacement or substitution for enforcement by federal
or state agencies for facilities that are adequately regulated either
under a NPDES permit or, if a violation is determined to have occurred,
under 310 CMR 40.00, the Massachusetts Contingency Plan.
B.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes,
or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the
use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
A.
Failure by the property owner to maintain the watercourse does not
constitute an obligation on the part of the Town to assume this
responsibility.
B.
§ 128-11 LAND USE § 128-15
98:101
§ 128-15. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in
or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage
system or Wetland Resource Areas, the person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a
release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify
the municipal fire and police departments. In the event of a release of
non-hazardous material, the reporting person shall notify the Enforcement
Authority no later than the next business day. The reporting person shall
provide to the Enforcement Authority written confirmation of all telephone,
facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter.
If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial
facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on-site
a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 128-16. Enforcement.
The Enforcement Authority or an authorized agent of the Enforcement
Authority shall enforce this Bylaw, regulations, orders, violation notices, and
enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such
violations.
Entry to perform duties. To the extent permitted by state law, or if
authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the
Enforcement Authority may enter upon privately owned property for
the purpose of performing their duties under these regulations and may
make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as
the Enforcement Authority deems reasonably necessary.
A.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this Bylaw, regulations,
written approval, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Enforcement
Authority may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
B.
Orders.
The Enforcement Authority may issue a written order to enforce
the provisions of this Bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which
may include:
(a) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4;
(b) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(1)
C.
§ 128-15 ABINGTON CODE § 128-16
98:102
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c)
(d) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith; and
(e) Implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation
of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline
by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said
order shall further advise that, should the violator or property
owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified
deadline, the Town may, at its option, undertake such work, and
expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2)
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate
the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the
property owner will be notified, in writing, of the costs incurred
by the Town, including administrative costs, for which payment
is due to the Town. The violator or property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with
the Enforcement Authority within 30 days of the Town's issuance
of the notification of the costs incurred. Payment of the Town's
costs is due within 30 days of the issuance of the notification,
or if a protest is filed, within 30 days following a decision of the
Enforcement Authority affirming or reducing the costs, whichever
is later. Pursuant to MGL Ch. 40, § 58, the Town is hereby
authorized to impose and record a municipal charges lien on the
property for any costs that have not been paid to the Town by the
applicable due date, and unpaid charges shall be added to the tax
on the property, in the manner provided in said statute.
(3)
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw,
regulation, order or written approval issued thereunder, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $300 per violation. Each day or
part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
D.
Non-criminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition
procedure set forth in MGL Ch. 40, § 21D in which case the
Enforcement Authority shall be the enforcing person. For non-criminal
disposition, the penalty for the first violation shall be $100, the penalty
for the second violation shall be $200, and the penalty for the third and
subsequent violations shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E.
Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Enforcement Authority shall be
final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F.
§ 128-16 LAND USE § 128-16
98:103
§ 128-17. Severability.
The provisions of this Bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this Bylaw or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
Bylaw.
§ 128-18. Transitional provisions.
Property owners shall have 90 days from the effective date of the Bylaw to
comply with its provisions provided good cause is shown for the failure to
comply with the Bylaw during that period.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this Bylaw are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
G.
§ 128-16 ABINGTON CODE § 128-18
98:104
Chapter 134
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art I. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200.
§ 134-1. Permit required; exception.
No person shall remove any soil or loam from the premises or from any
land not in public use unless such removal is authorized by permit issued
by the Board of Selectmen, except for the continued operation of the same
parcel of an existing sand and gravel pit, and except when incidental to
and reasonably required in connection with the construction of a legal or
approved use or structure or an approved subdivision.
Chapter 138
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 49.
§ 128-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 134-1
134:105

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Facilities
§ 138-1. Preamble.
General Laws Section 150A, Chapter 111, requires that every person
maintaining or operating a solid waste facility shall operate the facility in
such manner as will protect public health and safety and the environment.
Upon determination by the Board of Health that the operation or
maintenance of such a facility results in a threat to public health and safety
or the environment the Board shall rescind, suspend, or modify the site
assignment following due notice and a public hearing.
§ 138-2. Purpose.
This article establishes the following procedures in addition to the
procedures required by state law and regulation, to protect the rights of the
people of Abington to clean air and water guaranteed by Article 97 of the
Articles of Amendment to the Massachusetts Constitution.
§ 138-3. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment,
independent of the provisions of Section 150A of Chapter 111 of the General
Laws and regulations promulgated thereto.
§ 138-4. Petition.
Any 10 or more residents of Abington or of any town located within 1/2 mile
of a solid waste facility (an "abutting town"), if any, may petition the Board
of Health in writing alleging that said solid waste facility is operating in
violation of its site assignment or of any applicable law, regulation, order, or
bylaw or that the maintenance or operation of a solid waste facility results
or may result in a threat to public health or safety or the environment.
§ 138-5. Burden of proof.
When an allegation is made that a solid waste facility is in violation of
any applicable law, regulation, order, or bylaw or that the maintenance or
operation of a solid waste facility results in or may result in a threat to
public health or safety or the environment, the burden of proof shall be on
the owner or operator of said solid waste facility to prove that the facility
is not in violation or that the operation of the facility does not result in a
threat to public health, safety, or the environment, as the case may be.
§ 138-6. Preliminary hearing.
No later than 21 days following receipt of such a petition, the Board of
Health shall schedule a preliminary hearing. The purpose of the preliminary
hearing shall be to decide whether the Board should schedule a site
§ 138-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 138-6
134:107
assignment hearing pursuant to Section 150A of Chapter 111 of the General
Laws to consider whether to rescind, suspend, or modify the site
assignment of said facility. The preliminary hearing shall be held no later
than 60 days following receipt of the petition.
§ 138-7. Hearing notice.
Notice of the preliminary hearing shall be made at least 21 days prior to the
commencement of the hearing by notice printed in a display advertisement
in every newspaper of general circulation in Abington and an abutting town,
if any. Said notice shall include the entire text or concise summary of the
petition, the date, the time, and place of the preliminary hearing, how
residents can participate in the meeting, and where application materials
can be reviewed and the deadline for submitting written comments on the
petition to the Board of Health. At least 14 days prior to commencement
of said preliminary hearing, the Board of Health shall send a copy of said
notice of said preliminary hearing by first class mail to all residents and
landowners located within one mile of the proposed site, including residents
of an abutting town, if any.
§ 138-8. Hearing procedure.
The preliminary hearing shall be conducted as follows:
§ 138-9. Written decision.
No later than 30 days following the conclusion of the preliminary hearing,
the Board shall render a written decision whether or not to convene a
site assignment hearing pursuant to Section 150A, Chapter 111 of the
General Laws to consider whether the site assignment should be rescinded,
suspended, or modified.
§ 138-10. Severability.
Each of the paragraphs within this article shall be construed as separate to
the end that if any sentence, clause, or phrase thereof shall be held invalid
for any reason the remainder of that paragraph and all other paragraphs of
this article shall continue in force and effect.
A. The petitioners shall first describe the basis for their petition.
Then, the owner or operator of the affected facility shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to respond.
B.
The Board shall then allow public testimony, shall accept written
comments for a specific period of time that shall be announced at the
preliminary hearing. The hearing shall be conducted as informally as
possible, and shall follow the rules of evidence commonly followed in
the courts. Any resident of Abington or an abutting town, if any, and of
the general public, shall be allowed to present oral or written testimony
during the hearing.
C.
§ 138-6 ABINGTON CODE § 138-10
134:108
ARTICLE II
Site Selection Procedures
§ 138-11. Preamble.
This article establishes public participation requirements to improve the
public process following the filling of a site assignment application for a new
solid waste facility.
§ 138-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the rights of the people of Abington
to clean air and water guaranteed by Article 97 of the Articles of
Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution, and to protect their right
to petition government guaranteed by the Massachusetts Constitution,
Article 19 of the Declaration of Rights, and by the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution.
§ 138-13. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment,
independent of the provisions of Section 15A of Chapter 111 of the General
Laws and regulations promulgated thereto.
§ 138-14. Establishment of procedures.
This Bylaw establishes procedures to require an informational meeting by
the Board of Health which is held following the filing of an application for a
site assignment for a proposed solid waste facility.
The Board of Health shall hold a public informational meeting no later
than 45 days following the receipt by the Board of a site assignment
application for a proposed solid waste facility, where the applicant shall
be invited to give a short presentation and answer questions from
attendees.
A.
At least 14 days prior to commencement of said informational meeting,
the Board of Health shall require the applicant place a large four-foot
by eight-foot sign at the proposed site, on the nearest public way, which
states in a clearly readable typeface that "This is a proposed site of
a (type of facility) proposed by (name of applicant). An informational
meeting on the application will be held (date) (time) at (location). For
more information, contact, (name, title, phone number and address of
Board of Health contact)," and which shall contain a brief description of
the proposed project and where application materials can be reviewed.
B.
At least 14 days prior to commencement of said informational meeting,
the Board of Health shall send notice of said meeting, which shall
include a brief description of the project, the date, time and location
of the meeting, how residents can participate in the meeting, and were
C.
§ 138-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 138-14
134:109
§ 138-15. Severability.
Each of the paragraphs within this article shall be construed as separate to
the end that if any sentence, clause, or phrase thereof shall be held invalid
for any reason the remainder of that paragraph and all other paragraphs of
this article shall continue in force.
application materials can be reviewed, by first class mail to all residents
and landowners located within one mile of proposed site, including
residents and landowners in an abutting town if the proposed site is
within 1/2 mile of that town (an "abutting town").
At least 14 days prior to commencement of the informational meeting,
the Board of Health shall forward a copy of the application for a site
assignment to the Abington Town Clerk and to the Town Clerk in an
abutting town, if any, and place a copy on the Town website. [Amended
6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
D.
At least 14 days prior to commencement of the informational meeting,
the Board of Health shall publish notice as display advertisement in a
non-legal section of one or more newspapers in general circulation in
Abington and an abutting town, if any, which shall include notice of
the informational meeting and where the application materials can be
reviewed, and shall send the notice as a press release to all newspapers
and media outlets which circulate in the town(s).
E.
The Board of Health shall provide for either live public broadcast of the
informational meeting on the local cable access channel, or if that is
not feasible, for the videotaping of the informational meeting for later
broadcast.
F.
The Board of Health may assess upon the applicant the costs for
complying with the provisions of this article relative to the
informational meeting and providing notice thereof. Said applicant may
contest the amount so assessed and may request a hearing before the
Board, who may then reconsider the amount of the assessment thereof.
G.
§ 138-14 ABINGTON CODE § 138-15
134:110
Chapter 142
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Discharge of offensive matter into
streets — See Ch. 122, Art. I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200.
§ 138-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 138-15
142:111

ARTICLE I
Permits to Build Sidewalks
§ 142-1. Granting permits.
The Selectmen may, with the approval of the Planning Board, grant permits
to any persons to build sidewalks in front of their own land, or on any of the
streets or ways in the Town, wherever the public safety will permit.
§ 142-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 142-1
142:113

ARTICLE II
Obstruction
§ 142-2. Permit required.
No person shall obstruct in any manner any sidewalk or ways of the Town
without a permit from the Selectmen.
§ 142-2 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 142-2
142:115

ARTICLE III
Discharge of Water onto Streets
§ 142-3. Emergency permits.
No person shall pump or otherwise discharge water or other liquids onto
any street, public way or public place so as to create a dangerous condition
unless the Police Department, Fire Department or Highway Department
permits same in an emergency.
§ 142-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 142-3
142:117

ARTICLE IV
Openings and Excavations
§ 142-4. Road and sidewalk opening permit required.
No person shall excavate, remove material or open any Town-owned
property without first obtaining a road and sidewalk opening permit from
the Board of Selectmen or its designee.
§ 142-5. Fee.
The fee for a road and sidewalk opening permit shall be established
pursuant to MGL Ch. 40 § 22F, and a schedule of said fees shall be kept on
file at the Highway Department and with the Town Clerk.
§ 142-6. Regulations.
The Selectmen may adopt said regulations as deemed necessary to carry
out the intent of this Bylaw.
§ 142-7. Violations and penalties.
Penalty for breach of this article of this Bylaw shall be a fine of $200.
§ 142-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 142-7
142:119
Chapter 145
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
§ 145-1. Definitions.
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) — The
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code
created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted
by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the
establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy
efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy
conservation requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code are
the IECC with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of
Building Regulations and Standards.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of Building Regulations
and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the Ninth Edition
Massachusetts Building Code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to
the Massachusetts Building Code, based on further amendments to the
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy
efficiency of buildings built to this code.
§ 145-2. Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA is to provide a more energy
efficient alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant
sections of the Building Code for both new construction and existing
buildings.
§ 145-3. Applicability.
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not
included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 51, as applicable.
§ 145-4. Authority.
A municipality seeking to ensure that construction within its boundaries is
designed and built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780 CMR
may mandate adherence to this appendix. 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA may
be adopted or rescinded by any municipality in the Commonwealth in the
manner prescribed by law.
§ 145-5. Stretch Code.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions,
amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into the
Town of Abington General Bylaws.
§ 142-7 ABINGTON CODE § 145-6
142:120
§ 145-6. Enforcement.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the Building Commissioner.
Chapter 152
TOWN MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 53.
Finance Committee — See Ch. 67.
Town offices — See Ch. 155.
§ 152-1. Date of Annual Town Meeting and election of officers.
[Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the first Monday of April of
each year. The election of such officers as are required by law to be elected
by ballot and determination of such matters as are required by law to be
determined by ballot shall be considered part of the Annual Town Meeting
and shall be held on the last Saturday in April of each year. This section
shall not otherwise alter the existing statutory authority of the Board of
Selectmen to delay the date of Town Meeting pursuant to M.G.L. c. 39, § 9.
§ 152-2. Warrants for Special and Annual Town Meetings. [Amended
4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15L]
Posting. A copy of the warrant for every Annual and Special Town
Meeting shall be posted at the post offices and two or more other public
places in Town in accordance with the requirements of MGL c. 39, § 10.
A.
Availability of warrants and notice thereof. Forthwith following
execution of the warrant, the Town shall post a printable version of
the warrant on the Town's website, make copies available at the Town
Offices and Public Library, and, to the extent feasible, at two additional
publicly accessible locations in Town.
B.
Notice. No later than one week prior to the date of Town Meeting, a
notice shall be delivered to the post office for mailing to each residence
of one or more registered voters in the Town setting forth, at a
minimum, the date, time and place of the Town Meeting, as well as
language similar to the following: [Amended 10-29-2012 STM by
Art. 6]
The warrant and Finance Committee recommendations may be viewed
at the Town Clerk's office at 500 Gliniewicz Way or on the Town's
website at www.abingtonma.gov. Contact the Town Clerk at (781)
982-2112 to request a paper copy of the warrant.
C.
§ 145-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 152-2
142:121
§ 152-3. Use of checklist for admission to meetings.
At all Town Meetings, the Board of Selectmen shall be directed to use a
checklist of registered voters for admission of all persons to said meeting.
§ 152-4. Quorum.
The quorum of any Annual or Special Town Meeting shall be 150 registered
voters of the Town.
§ 152-5. Voting on amendments involving money.
In conducting Town Meeting, on the proposed amendments involving sums
of money the larger of the largest amount shall be put to the question first,
and an affirmative vote thereon shall be a negative vote on any smaller
amount.
§ 152-6. Reconsideration of motions.
In conducting Town Meeting, when a motion for reconsideration is decided,
that decision shall not be reconsidered and no question shall twice be
reconsidered. No motion to reconsider a vote shall be in order after the
meeting has been adjourned for any period of time subsequent to the
passing of the vote which is sought to be reconsidered.
§ 152-7. Secret written ballot and two-thirds votes.
§ 152-8. Order of articles in Warrant.
Articles for the Annual Town Meeting Warrant, except for Articles I (wage
classification) and II (budgets), shall be inserted in the Warrant in the order
in which said articles are received by the Board of Selectmen. Articles
for any Special Town Meeting Warrant shall be inserted in the Warrant in
the order in which said articles are received by the Board of Selectmen.
Validity of meeting. While it is the intent of this bylaw that every effort
shall be made to file, post, and comply with the mailing and copying
requirements set forth in § 152-2B and C, failure to do so shall not
invalidate the action of the meeting.
D.
Except on a motion on parliamentary procedure and except on a
question involving an appropriation of money less than $5,000, in
conducting all town meetings, when a vote on a motion or question is
doubted by seven voters or more, a count or a secret written ballot shall
be taken.
A.
Whenever a two-thirds vote is required by statute, such vote may
be declared as such by the Moderator without a count and shall be
recorded as such by the Town Clerk upon such declaration; provided,
however, that seven voters or more may challenge such declaration, at
which time a count shall be taken.
B.
§ 152-2 ABINGTON CODE § 152-8
142:122
All petition articles, when received by the Board of Selectmen, shall be
referred to the Town Clerk and Registrars of Voters for checking as to the
correctness of signatures.
§ 152-9. Order of consideration of articles.
In conducting Town Meeting, articles shall be considered in numerical order
unless voted otherwise by a four-fifths majority of the voters present and
voting at the meeting, or unless two or more articles are related in the
opinion of the Moderator, in which event, the articles may be considered
together.
§ 152-10. Voting on salary increases.
All proposed salary and wage increases for Town employees and officials
other than employees of the School Department and increases previously
approved shall be presented in a special article in the Town Warrant. Such
salaries shall be itemized by department and job classification. On a motion
duly seconded, a majority of voters present and voting at Town Meeting may
require the Moderator to order a separate secret ballot on any position or
classification included in a special article for proposed salary increases.
§ 152-11. Location of Town Meetings. [Added 4-2-2012 ATM by Art.
15C]
When the Board of Selectmen determines by separate vote that it is
necessary or appropriate, the Town may hold its annual or special Town
meetings outside the geographic boundaries of the Town. Reasons for
holding a Town meeting outside of the Town shall include, but not be limited
to: anticipated voter turnout; emergencies relating to commonly used Town
Meeting locations, or handicapped accessibility.
Chapter 155
TOWN OFFICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Meetings — See Ch. 152.
§ 155-1. Office hours. [Amended 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15D]
The Board of Selectmen, in consultation with the Town Manager, and
subject to any applicable collective bargaining agreements, shall fix the
time when all Town offices and Town departments (other than those under
the jurisdiction of the School Committee, Police and Fire Department, and
Board of Library Trustees), having one or more full time employee to whom
the Classification and Salary Plan is applicable, shall be open and the Town
employees present. The School Committee, Fire and Police Chiefs, and
§ 152-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 155-1
142:123
Board of Library Trustees shall inform the Town Manager of the hours that
buildings or departments over which they have jurisdiction, respectively,
shall be open and Town employees present.
§ 155-2. Extra duty. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
This shall not preclude, however, the authority of a department head to
assign employees to extra duty above and beyond their regular hours as set
forth by the Town Manager, provided such assignment conforms with the
governing statutes.
§ 155-3. Authority of Town Manager to close offices. [Amended
4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15D; 6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall have the exclusive authority
to close any Town office or department (with the exception of the public
schools and the public library) for a day or a portion thereof other than
regular scheduled holidays. The permanent full time employees of the Town
shall be paid for such period as the offices or departments are closed by
order of the Town Manager or his/her designee. The School Committee and
Board of Library Trustees shall inform the Town Manager when they close
any office or department over which they have jurisdiction for a day or
portion thereof other than regular scheduled holidays.
Chapter 159
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art I.
§ 155-1 ABINGTON CODE § 155-3
159:124
ARTICLE I
Interference With Snow Plowing
§ 159-1. Removal of offending vehicles; liability for costs.
No person shall place or cause to be placed any vehicle on the public ways
and public sidewalks in the Town of Abington which shall interfere with the
removing or plowing of snow or the removal of ice. The Superintendent of
Streets and the Chief of Police and those acting under the orders of either
in the lawful performance of their duties for the purpose of removing snow
or ice from any way may remove or cause to be removed to some convenient
place (including a public or private garage) any vehicle interfering with
such work and the owner of such vehicle shall thereupon be liable for the
cost of such removal and of the storage charged, if any, resulting therefrom.
§ 159-2. Unsafe conditions caused by ice and snow.
No person shall plow, shovel, discharge or block a sidewalk, street or public
way, place or cause to be placed, snow or ice which could cause an unsafe
condition.
§ 159-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provisions of this Bylaw shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 for each violation.
§ 159-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 159-3
159:125

ARTICLE II
Obstruction of Fire Lanes
§ 159-4. Obstruction of access of fire equipment.
No person or persons shall obstruct by any means a private way so as
to prevent access by fire apparatus or equipment to any multiple family
building, stores, shopping centers, schools and places of public assembly.
§ 159-5. Parking in fire lanes; measurement.
No person or persons shall park a vehicle in a fire lane designated by the
Fire Chief and so posted. Said fire lanes shall be a distance of 18 feet from
the curbing of a sidewalk in a shopping center, apartment complexes and
similar locations. Where no sidewalk or curbing exists, the distance and
location shall be established by the Fire Chief.
§ 159-6. Removal of offending vehicles or objects.
Any object or vehicle obstructing or blocking a fire lane or private way may
be removed or towed by the Town, under the direction of a police officer, at
the expense of the owner and without liability to the Town.
§ 159-7. Signs and road markings.
The owner of record of any building required to maintain a fire lane shall
provide and install signs and road markings as required by 527 CMR 10.00.
Said signs shall be no less than 12 inches by 18 inches and shall read "Fire
Lane — No Parking — Tow Zone - $250 Fine".
§ 159-8. Violations and penalties.
Any persons found in violation of the foregoing provisions shall, for each
offense, be punished by a fine of up to $250. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 159-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 159-8
159:127

ARTICLE III
All-Night Parking
§ 159-9. Parking restricted.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her
name, other than one acting in an emergency, to be parked on any street for
a period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. of any day from November 15th to April 15th.
§ 159-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 159-9
159:129
Chapter 163
VEHICLES, JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 94.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 122.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch 159.
§ 163-1. Time limit; written complaint.
No junked and dilapidated motor vehicle may be allowed to stand for a
period of more than 30 days on any premises unlicensed under Chapter
140, Section 57 of the General Laws, if the Selectmen have received a
written complaint on same. The Selectmen's judgment shall be final as to
determining whether or not a motor vehicle is junked and dilapidated.
§ 163-2. Violations and penalties.
Penalty for a breach hereof shall be in an amount not in excess of $200 for
each offense which may be removed by indictment or on complaint before a
District Court.
Chapter 164
VEHICLES, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 159.
§ 164-1. License required. [Amended 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15N;
6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No person, except on whose principal business is the manufacture and sale
of new motor vehicles but who incidentally acquires and sells secondhand
vehicles, or a person whose principal business is financing the purchase
of or insuring motor vehicles but who incidentally acquires and sells
secondhand vehicles, shall engage in the business of buying, selling or
exchange of secondhand motor vehicles or allow any property under his
control to be used as a place of sale or display of such motor vehicles
without first securing a Class II license as provided in MGL c. 140 § 59.
§ 159-9 ABINGTON CODE § 164-2
163:130
§ 164-2. Issuance of licenses. [Amended 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15N]
A Class II license shall be defined in MGL c. 140, § 58 and may be issued
to any person whose principal business is the buying and selling of
secondhand motor vehicles.
§ 164-3. Licensing authority; procedure.
The licensing authority in the Town of Abington shall be the Board of
Selectmen, and in issuing Class II licenses it shall follow the procedures set
forth in MGL c. 140, Section 59.
§ 164-4. Application criteria. [Amended 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15H;
6-6-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
No license will be granted to any applicant or renewed for any
application with outstanding unpaid taxes or fees owed to the Town of
Abington, or on any property for which such outstanding unpaid taxes
or fees are owed, all in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40,
§ 57 and Chapter 102 of the General Bylaws.
A.
The sale of motor vehicles shall be the principal business of the
applicant. Further, the applicant must be actively involved in the sale of
used motor vehicles in the Town of Abington. No "pocket" licenses will
be issued. (MGL c. 140, Section 58)
B.
The license holder must maintain or demonstrate access to repair
facilities sufficient to enable him or her to satisfy the warranty repair
obligations imposed by MGL c. 90, Section 7N 1/4. (MGL c. 140, Section
58)
C.
The Board of Selectmen shall cause an investigation of the facts stated
in the application, that the applicant is a proper person to engage in
the business of selling motor vehicles in the Town of Abington. (MGL c.
140, Section 59)
D.
A plot plan shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen in addition to
any plot plan that may be required by other boards.
E.
If the applicant had not held a Class 2 license in the year prior to
making of the application, the application must be completed in
duplicate, with one copy being filed with the licensing authority (Board
of Selectmen), and the other copy filed with the Registry of Motor
Vehicles. (MGL c. 140, Section 59)
F.
No Class 2 license shall be granted unless the licensing authority is
satisfied from its investigation of the facts stated in the application,
or other available information, that the applicant is a "proper person."
(MGL c. 140, Section 59)
G.
§ 164-2 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 164-4
163:131
§ 164-5. Operations criteria.
Any Class 2 license that is issued by the licensing authority shall specify
all of the premises to be occupied and used by the licensee for the
purpose of carrying on the licensed business. (MGL c. 140, Section 59)
H.
Permits for a change of situation of the licensed premises or any
lawfully permitted additions thereto may be granted at any time by the
licensing authority, in its discretion, in writing with a copy of any such
permit to be attached to the license.
I.
The rules and regulations promulgated by the Registry of Motor
Vehicles defining sufficient repair facilities for holders of used car
dealer's licenses (Class 2) represent minimum standards that must be
complied with by the holders of such licenses. (MGL c. 140, Section 58)
J.
An applicant for a Class 2 license must demonstrate compliance with
all requirements of the Abington Zoning Bylaws, or the approval of any
required zoning relief from the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall also
submit to the Board of Selectmen any plans required for such zoning
relief or approval; otherwise such license will not be issued by the
licensing authority. If not required in connection with the approvals
listed in the preceding sentence, there shall be submitted a plot plan
that, at a minimum, integrates green space to enhance the aesthetics
of the licensed premises, unless the Board of Selectmen determines
that the same is not reasonably feasible. A determination of reasonable
feasibility shall be based upon topographical limitations of the premises
and may not be predicated solely on financial hardship to the applicant.
K.
All licenses granted under MGL c. 140, Section 59, and this Bylaw shall
be revoked by the licensing authority if it appears after a hearing that
the licensee is not complying with all laws applicable to the licensed
business and property, including but not limited to MGL c. 140,
Sections 57 to 69, inclusive, this Bylaw, or the rules and regulations
made thereunder.
L.
All applicants for a Class 2 license shall undergo a criminal history
background check by a criminal offender record information certified
individual through the Department of Criminal Justice Information
Services and in compliance with MGL c. 6, § 172. If the Board of
Selectmen or its authorized designee is inclined to make an adverse
decision based on the results of this check, in accordance with MGL c.
6, § 171A, the applicant shall be notified, provided with a copy of the
criminal record and the Town's Criminal Offender Record Information
("CORI") policy, advised of the part(s) of the record that make the
applicant unsuitable for the license, and given the opportunity to
dispute the accuracy and relevance of the CORI record.
M.
No dismantled, incomplete, or damaged motor vehicles or parts thereof
shall be visible from the street or to abutters.
A.
§ 164-4 ABINGTON CODE § 164-5
163:132
§ 164-6. New license application criteria.
Chapter 167
WATER
All repairs and maintenance of motor vehicles on the premises are to
be done inside of a building or buildings.
B.
Appropriate fencing may be required if, in the opinion of the Board of
Selectmen, it is deemed necessary to control access to the property, or
to maintain the aesthetic value of the neighborhood.
C.
The number of motor vehicles on the premises shall be limited to the
available space as shown on the submitted plot plan. The spaces shall
be regulated by the Abington planning and zoning regulations.8
D.
Sufficient customer parking must be available on the premises to meet
the requirements of the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Abington.
Additionally, one parking space for every 1,000 square feet of lot area
used for the display of used motor vehicles must also be available on
the premises.
E.
The premises and abutting property must be kept free of debris
emanating from the licensed area.
F.
Violation of any of the foregoing provisions shall be cause for
suspension or revocation by the licensing authority of the license
granted. (MGL c. 140, Section 59)
G.
A. The specific site must be an appropriate location for such use.
The use of property for the sale of motor vehicles will not be
substantially detrimental to the established or future character of the
neighborhood or of the Town of Abington.
B.
The applicant must show that there will be no nuisance or serious
hazard to vehicles or pedestrians.
C.
The applicant must show that adequate and appropriate facilities will
be provided for the proper operation of the motor vehicle dealership, as
specified by state and Town regulations.
D.
The applicant must show that the public convenience and welfare will
be substantially served.
E.
The applicant must show evidence at the time of the public hearing
that he or she has notified in writing all abutters seven days prior to
the hearing of his or her application. Such notice shall be at the sole
expense of the applicant. [Amended 4-2-2012 ATM by Art. 15I]
F.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning, and Ch. 200, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
§ 164-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 164-6
163:133

ARTICLE I
Water Use Restrictions
[Adopted 4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 89]
§ 167-1. Authority.
This Bylaw is adopted by the Town under its police powers to protect public
health and welfare and its powers under M.G.L. c. 40 § 21 et seq. and
implements the Town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to M.G.L.
c. 41 § 69B. This Bylaw also implements the Town's authority under M.G.L.
c. 40 § 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of "Water Supply Emergency"
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 167-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect and preserve the public health,
safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water supply
conservation or a state of water supply emergency by providing for
enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town or by the Department of Environmental
Protection. This Bylaw is also intended to protect and preserve the public
health, safety and welfare, by restricting and prohibiting unauthorized
water use and/or unregistered water use by water users.
§ 167-3. Definitions.
PERSONS — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, or
other entity which uses or is serviced by the Town's public water supply.
STATE OF WATER EMERGENCY — A state of water emergency declared by
the Department of Environmental Protection under M.G.L. c. 21G §§ 15-17.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the Town pursuant to § 167-4 of this Bylaw.
UNAUTHORIZED WATER USE — All activations of water services, fire
hydrants (excluding Fire Department personnel during fire emergencies),
or other segments of the public water system by any person not authorized
by the Water Department.
UNREGISTERED WATER USE — Any water utilized or taken from the public
water system without a means of calculating actual consumption.
WATER USERS or WATER CONSUMERS — Any public or private users of
the Town's public water system, irrespective of any person's responsibility
for billing purposes for water used at any particular residence or facility.
9. Editor's Note: This Article also superseded former Art. I, Water Use Restrictions, adopted
4-30-2001 ATM by Art. 22, as amended.
§ 167-1 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 167-4
163:135
§ 167-4. Declaration of a state of water supply conservation.
The Town, through its Board of Water Commissioners, may declare a state
of water supply conservation upon determination by a majority vote of the
Board, at a public meeting, that a shortage of water exists and conservation
measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply and adequate water
pressure to all water customers. Upon notification to the public that a state
of water supply conservation has been declared, no person shall violate any
provisions, restrictions, or requirements intended to bring about an end to
the state of water supply conservation.
§ 167-5. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one or
more of the following restrictions, conditions or requirements limiting the
use of water as necessary to protect the public water supply. The applicable
restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public
notice required under § 167-7.
§ 167-6. State of water supply emergency; compliance with DEP
orders.
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental Protection,
no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of
any order approved or issued by the Department intended to bring about an
end to the state of emergency.
§ 167-7. Public notification.
Notification of any provisions, restrictions, requirements or conditions
imposed by the Town as part of a state of water supply conservation, or
by the Department of Environmental Protection as part of a state of water
supply emergency, shall be given by the publication of at least one display
Step One: Odd/even day outdoor watering restrictions. All outdoor
water uses by water users with odd numbered addresses is restricted
to odd numbered calendar days. All outdoor water uses by water users
with even numbered addresses is restricted to even numbered calendar
days.
A.
Step Two: Hand held hoses only. All outdoor water uses are restricted to
hand held hoses only. The odd/even outdoor watering restrictions shall
also be observed.
B.
Step Three: Outdoor watering hours. All outdoor water uses are
restricted to hand held hoses only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. The odd/even
day outdoor watering restrictions shall also be observed.
C.
Step Four: Outdoor watering ban. All outdoor water use is prohibited
for all uses.
D.
§ 167-4 ABINGTON CODE § 167-7
163:136
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, by
the posting of removable signs where any state highway crosses the Town
line, and by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform
all water users of the declaration of a state of water supply conservation
and/or emergency. Any restrictions imposed shall not be effective until
such notification is provided. Notification of the declaration of a state of
water supply conservation shall also be simultaneously provided to the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection in writing by the
Board of Water Commissioners.
§ 167-8. Termination of state of water supply conservation and/or
emergency.
A state of water supply conservation may be terminated by a majority vote
of the Water Commissioners, at a public meeting, upon a determination
that the water supply shortage no longer exists. A state of water supply
emergency shall be terminated by the Department of Environmental
Protection upon a determination that the emergency no longer exists. Public
notification of the termination of a state of water supply conservation and/
or emergency shall be given by the publication of at least one display
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, by the
removal of all erected water supply conservation and/or emergency signs,
and by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all
water users of the termination of the state of water conservation and/or
emergency.
§ 167-9. Unauthorized water usage.
No person, water user or water commissioner shall activate, or cause to be
activated, any water main and/or appurtenances to the public water system
without prior authorization of the Water Department.
§ 167-10. Unregistered water usage.
No person, water user, or water consumer shall activate, or cause to be
activated, water main and/or appurtenances to the public water system
without first having a Water Department-approved metering device
installed to calculate the amount of water utilized. No person, water user,
or water consumer shall remove and/or alter any metering device.
§ 167-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-6-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
Any person found to have violated § 167-5 and/or § 167-6 of this Bylaw will
receive a written warning for the first offense and shall be liable to the
Town in the amount of $100 for each subsequent offense within the same
calendar year. Any person found to have violated § 167-9 of this Bylaw shall
be liable to the Town in the amount of $300 for each offense. Any person
found to have violated § 167-10 of this Bylaw shall be liable to the Town
in the amount of up to $300 for each offense. Fines shall be levied and
§ 167-7 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 167-11
163:137
assessed by employees of the Water Department and/or authorized agents
of the Board of Water Commissioners upon witnessing any violation, or after
investigating and verifying that a violation in fact occurred. Violators shall
be entitled to appeal the assessment of any fines with the Board of Water
Commissioners, and said appeal shall be held at a public meeting of the
Board. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before the
District Court, or by non-criminal disposition in accordance with M.G.L. c.
40 § 21D. Each day on which a violation of § 167-5 and/or § 167-6 occurred
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 167-12. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision hereof.
§ 167-11 ABINGTON CODE § 167-12
163:138
Chapter 171
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 175. Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
200.
§ 171-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the wetlands, water resources,
and adjoining land areas in Abington by controlling activities deemed by
the Conservation Commission likely to have a significant or cumulative
effect upon resource area values, including but not limited to the following
public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion and
sedimentation control, storm damage prevention including water quality,
water pollution controls, fisheries, wildlife habitat, rare species habitat
including rare plant species, agriculture, aquaculture, and recreation
values, deemed important to the community (collectively, the "resource area
values protected by this Bylaw"). This Bylaw is intended to utilize the Home
Rule authority of this municipality to protect additional resource areas, for
additional values, with additional standards and procedures stricter than
those of the Wetland Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40) and Regulations
thereunder (310 CMR 10.00).
§ 171-2. Jurisdiction.
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided in
this Bylaw, no person shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon,
degrade, discharge into, or otherwise alter the following resource areas:
any freshwater wetlands, marshes, wet meadows, bogs, swamps, vernal
pools, banks, reservoirs, lakes, ponds of any size, rivers, streams, creeks,
beaches, dunes, estuaries, lands under water bodies, lands subject to
flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water, or flooding, and
lands abutting any of the aforesaid resource areas as set out in § 171-7
(collectively the "resource area protected by this Bylaw"). Said resource
areas shall be protected whether or not they border surface waters.
§ 171-3. Applications for permits and requests for determination.
Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities affecting resource areas protected by this Bylaw. The notice
of intent permit application shall include such information and plans
as are deemed necessary by the Commission to describe proposed
activities and their effects on the resource areas protected by this
Bylaw. No activity shall commence without receiving and complying
with a permit issued pursuant to this Bylaw.
A.
§ 167-12 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 171-3
171:139
The Commission will accept as the permit application and plans under
this Bylaw the notice of intent and plans filed under the Wetlands
Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40) and Regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
B.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an
area is subject to this Bylaw may in writing request a determination
from the Commission. Such a request for determination (RFD) shall
include information and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission.
C.
At the time of the permit application or RFD, or application for
certificate of compliance, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified in
Regulations of the Commission. The fee is in addition to that required
by the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40) and Regulations
(310 CMR 10.00).
D.
Upon receipt of a permit application or RFD, or at any point during the
hearing process, the Commission is authorized to require an applicant
to pay a fee for the reasonable costs and expenses borne by the
Commission to come to a final decision on the application. This fee
is called the "consultant fee." The specific consultant services may
include, but are not limited to, performing or verifying the accuracy
of resource area survey and delineation; analyzing resource area
functions and values, including wildlife habitat evaluations, hydro
geologic and drainage analysis; and researching environmental or land
use law.
E.
The Commission may require the payment of the consultant fee at any
point in its deliberations prior to a final decision. If a revolving fund
for consultant expenses and fees is authorized by the Town Meeting,
or by the general or special law, the applicant's fee shall be put into
such revolving fund, and the Commission may draw upon that fund
for specific consultant services approved by the Commission at one of
its public meetings. Any unused portion of the consultant fee shall be
returned to the applicant unless the Commission decides at a public
meeting that additional services will be required.
F.
The exercise of discretion by the Commission in making its
determination to require the payment of a consultant fee shall be based
upon its reasonable finding that additional information acquirable only
through outside consultants would be necessary for the making of an
objective decision. Any applicant aggrieved by the imposition of, or size
of, the consultant fee, or any act related thereto, may appeal according
to the provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws.
G.
The Commission may waive the filing fee, consultant fee, and costs and
expenses for a permit application or RFD filed by a government agency.
H.
The maximum consultant fee charged to reimburse the Commission for
reasonable costs and expenses shall be according to industry standard
fees.
I.
§ 171-3 ABINGTON CODE § 171-3
171:140
§ 171-4. Notice and hearings.
§ 171-5. Permits and conditions.
The project cost means the estimated, entire cost of the project
including, but not limited to, building construction, site preparation,
landscaping, and all site improvements. The consultant fee shall be paid
pro rata for that portion of the project cost applicable to those activities
within resource areas protected by this Bylaw. The project shall not be
segmented to avoid being subject to the consultant fee. The applicant
shall submit estimated project costs at the Commission's request, but
the lack of such estimated project costs shall not avoid the payment of
the consultant fee.
J.
Any person filing a notice of intent ("permit application") with the
Commission shall give written notification thereof, by delivery in hand
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to all abutters within 100
feet of the property line of the land where the activity is proposed,
at the mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list
of the assessors, including, but not limited to, owners of land directly
opposite said proposed activity on any public or private street or way,
and in another municipality or across a body of water. Said notification
shall be at the applicant's expense, and shall state where copies of the
notice of intent may be examined and obtained and the date, time and
place of the public hearing. Notices to abutters shall be postmarked or
hand delivered no less then 10 days prior to the public hearing. Proof
of such notification, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall
be filed with the Conservation Commission.
A.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any permit
application or RFD, with written notice given at the expense of the
applicant, five business days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
B.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed permit application or RFD unless an
extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
C.
The Commission shall issue its permit or determination in writing
within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless an
extension is authorized by the applicant.
D.
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine its hearing under
this Bylaw with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection
Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40) and Regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
E.
The Commission shall have the authority to continue the hearing to
a certain date announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the
hearing, which may include receipt of additional information from the
applicant or others deemed necessary by the Commission in its
discretion.
F.
§ 171-3 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 171-5
171:141
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities
which are subject to the permit application or the land and water uses
which will result therefrom are likely to have a significant individual
or cumulative effect upon the resource area values protected by this
Bylaw, the Commission, within 21 days of the close of the hearing shall
issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit,
the Commission shall impose conditions which the Commission deems
necessary or desirable to protect those values, and all activities shall
be done in accordance with those conditions. The Commission shall
take into account the cumulative adverse effects of loss, degradation,
isolation, and replication of protected resource areas throughout the
community and the watershed, resulting from past activities, permitted
and exempt, and unforeseeable future activities.
A.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements of this Bylaw; for failure to submit necessary information
and plans requested by the Commission; for failure to meet the design
specifications, performance standards, and other requirements in
regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent
unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the resource area
values protected by this Bylaw; and where no conditions are adequate
to protect those values. Due consideration shall be given to any
demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as
presented at the public hearing.
B.
Land within 20 feet of rivers, ponds, and lakes and lands within 100
feet of other resource areas are presumed important to the protection
of these resources because activities undertaken in close proximity to
resource areas have a high likelihood of adverse impact upon wetland
or other resource, either immediately, as a consequence of
construction, or over time, as a consequence of daily operation or
existence of the activities. These adverse impacts from construction
and use can include, without limitations, erosion, siltation, loss of
groundwater recharge, poor water quality, and loss of wildlife habitat.
The Commission therefore may require that the applicant maintain a
strip of continuous, undisturbed vegetative cover within two-hundredfoot
or one-hundred-foot area, unless the applicant convinces the
Commission that the area or part of it may be disturbed without harm
to the values protected by the Bylaw.
C.
To prevent the wetlands loss, the Commission shall require applicants
to avoid wetlands alteration wherever feasible; shall minimize wetland
alteration; and, where alteration is unavoidable, shall require full
mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require replication of
wetlands, but only with adequate security, professional design, and
monitoring to assure success.
D.
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission in its discretion may issue
a permit expiring five years from the date of issuance for recurring or
continuous maintenance work, provided that annual notification of time
E.
§ 171-5 ABINGTON CODE § 171-5
171:142
§ 171-6. Regulations.
§ 171-7. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this Bylaw.
and location of work is given to the Commission. Any permit may be
renewed for an additional period of up to three years, provided that a
request for a renewal is received in writing by the Commission at least
30 days prior to expiration. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may
contain requirements which shall be enforceable for a stated number of
years, indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in place, and shall
apply to all owners of the land.
For good cause the Commission may revoke or modify a permit or
determination issued under this Bylaw after notice to the holder of the
permit or determination.
F.
No work proposed in any permit application shall be undertaken until
the permit issued by the Commission with respect to such work has
been recorded in the Registry of Deeds or, if the land affected is
registered land, in the registry section of the Land Court for the district
wherein the land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies in
writing to the Commission that the permit has been recorded.
G.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall
promulgate rules and regulations relative to effectuate the purposes of
this Bylaw effective when voted and filed with the Town Clerk. Failure
by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend
or invalidate the effect of this Bylaw.
A.
At a minimum these regulations shall define key terms in this Bylaw not
inconsistent with the Bylaw and procedures governing the amount and
filing of fees.
B.
The term "bank" shall include the land area which normally abuts and
confines a water body, the lower boundary being the mean annual low
flow level, and the upper boundary being the first observable break in
the slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher.
A.
The term "vernal pool" shall include a confined basin depression which,
at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of two continuous
months during the spring and/or summer, and which is free of adult
fish populations, as well as the area within 100 feet of the mean annual
boundary of such depression, regardless of whether the site has been
certified by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife.
B.
The term "rare species" shall include, without limitation, all vertebrate
and invertebrate animal and plant species listed as endangered,
threatened, or of special concern by the Massachusetts Division of
C.
§ 171-5 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 171-7
171:143
§ 171-8. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this Bylaw, in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board, agency, or official, the
Commission may require that the performance and observation of the
Fisheries and Wildlife, regardless of whether the site in which they
occur has been previously identified by the Division.
The term "person" shall include any individual, group of individuals,
association, partnership, corporation, company, business organization,
trust, estate, the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the
extent subject to Town Bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasipublic
corporation or body, this municipality, and any other legal entity,
its legal representative, agents, or assigns.
D.
The term "alter" shall include, without limitation, the following
activities when undertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas
protected by this Bylaw:
Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
materials of any kind.
(1)
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns, or flood retention characteristics.
(2)
(3) Drainage, or other disturbance of water level or water table.
Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality.
(4)
(5) Placing of fill, or removal of materials, which would alter elevation.
Driving of piles, erection, or repair of building, or structures of any
kind.
(6)
(7) Placing of obstructions or objects in water.
(8) Destruction of plant life including cutting trees.
Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other
physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of any water.
(9)
Any activities, changes, or work which may cause or tend to
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater.
(10)
Incremental activities which have, or may have, a cumulative
adverse impact on the resource areas protected by this Bylaw.
(11)
E.
Except as otherwise provided in this Bylaw or in regulations of the
Commission, the definitions of terms in this Bylaw shall be set forth in
the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40) and Regulations (310
CMR 10.00).
F.
§ 171-7 ABINGTON CODE § 171-8
171:144
conditions imposed there under (including conditions required mitigation
work) be secured wholly or in part by one or more of the methods described
below:
§ 171-9. Enforcement.
§ 171-10. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of providing by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
By proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or other
undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the
Commission, to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a
certificate of compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit.
A.
By accepting a conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant
enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner
of record, running with the land to the benefit of this municipality
whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before
any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method
shall be used only with the consent of the applicant.
B.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise
alter resource areas protected by this Bylaw, or cause, suffer or allow
such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to
restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply
with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this Bylaw.
A.
The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this Bylaw and may make or cause
to make such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission
deems necessary, subject to the Constitution and laws of the United
States and the Commonwealth.
B.
Upon request of the Commission, the Selectmen and the Town Counsel
shall take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request
of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
C.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other
officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw, or regulations,
permits, or administrative orders issued thereunder, shall be punished
by a fine if not more that $300 each day or portion thereof during which
a violation continues, or unauthorized fill or other alteration remains
in place, shall constitute a separate offense, and each provision of
the Bylaw, regulations, permits, or administrative orders violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
E.
§ 171-8 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 171-10
171:145
permit application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative
effect upon the resource area values protected by this Bylaw. Failure to
provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall
be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit
with conditions.
§ 171-11. Appeals.
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable by the Superior Court in
accordance with M.G.L. c. 249 § 4.
§ 171-12. Relation to Wetlands Protection Act.
This Bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statues, independent of the
Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 49) and Regulations (310 CMR
10.0) thereunder.
§ 171-13. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or
determination which previously has been issued.
Chapter 175
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 63.
Historical Commission — See Ch. 89.
Investigation of land use complaints — See
Ch. 98, Art. I.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 171.
§ 171-10 ABINGTON CODE § 171-13
171:146
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Purpose
§ 175-1. Adoption; statutory authority.
The "Abington Zoning Bylaw and Map" adopted October 2, 1962 and all
subsequent amendments thereto is hereby amended in total and a revised
"Abington Zoning Bylaw and Map" hereinafter called "this bylaw" is adopted
pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 40A of the General Laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and amendments thereto, herein
called the "Zoning Enabling Act" and the powers granted to the Town under
the Home Rule amendment to the Massachusetts Constitution.
§ 175-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this Zoning Bylaw are to promote the health, safety, morals,
convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of Abington; to lessen
the danger from fire and congestion and from the hazards of flood water
inundation; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to protect and conserve the
value of property; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to preserve and increase the amenities of the
Town; to conserve natural conditions; to facilitate the adequate provisions
of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other requirements;
and to improve and beautify the Town by encouraging the most appropriate
uses of land within the Town under the provisions of Chapter 40A of the
General Laws as amended.
§ 175-3. Regulations in accordance with purposes.
In accordance with these purposes, the use, construction, erection,
establishment, movement, repair, alteration, enlargement, height,
appearance, location, and occupancy of buildings and structures and the
uses and occupancy of premises in the Town of Abington are hereby
regulated and restricted as hereinafter provided.
§ 175-1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-3
171:147

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 175-4. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this bylaw certain terms and words shall have the
following meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future;
the singular number includes the plural; the plural the singular; the words
"used" or "occupied" include the words "designed," "arranged," "intended,"
or "offered," to be used or occupied; the words "building," "structure," "lot,"
"land," or "premises" shall be construed as though followed by the words
"or any portion thereof"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory. Terms and words not defined herein but defined in
the Abington Subdivision Rules and Regulations10 shall have the meanings
given therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears.
ABANDONMENT — The visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner
to discontinue a use of a building, structure or lot, whether conforming
or nonconforming or the removal of the characteristic equipment or
furnishings used in the performance of the nonconforming use without its
replacement by similar equipment or furnishings or the replacement of the
nonconforming use or building for a period of two years or more.
ABUTTING — Having a common property line with; contiguous, fronting
upon.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS —
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other matter
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined
in Section 31 of Chapter 272 of the Massachusetts General Laws. For the
purposes of this definition "substantial or significant portion of stock" shall
mean greater than 25% of the subject establishment's inventory stock; or
25% of the subject premises' gross floor area, or 200 SF, whichever is
greater.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATRE — An enclosed building used for
presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in
Section 31 of Chapter 272 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock, devices, objects, tools, or toys
which are distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual
activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in Section
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
§ 175-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-4
171:149
31 of Chapter 272 of the Massachusetts General Laws. For the purposes
of this definition "substantial or significant portion of stock" shall mean
greater than 25% of the subject establishment's inventory stock; or 25% of
the subject premises' gross floor area, or 200 SF, whichever is greater.
ADULT LIVE NUDITY ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment which
provides live entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display
of nudity, as that term is defined in Section 31 of Chapter 272 of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
ADULT USE — For the purposes of this bylaw, adult use shall be defined
as any of the following: adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult
paraphernalia store, adult video store, and live nudity establishment or any
other business or establishment characterized by an emphasis depicting,
describing or related to sexual conduct or excitement as defined in Section
31 of Chapter 272 of the Massachusetts General Laws. For the purposes
of this definition an adult use is any use or combination of uses which
either have greater than 25% of the subject establishment's inventory stock;
or 25% of the subject premises' gross floor area, or 200 SF, whichever
is greater devoted to materials for sale or rent distinguished by or
characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual
conduct or sexual excitement as defined in Section 31 of Chapter 272 of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, videos, movies, or other film material
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined
in Section 31 of Chapter 272 of the Massachusetts General Laws. For the
purposes of this definition "substantial or significant portion of stock" shall
mean greater than 25% of the subject establishment's inventory stock; or
25% of the subject premises' gross floor area, or 200 SF, whichever is
greater.
ALTERATION — Any construction, reconstruction or other action resulting
in a change in the structural parts or height, number of stories or exits, size,
use or location of a building or other structure.
APARTMENT — One or more rooms forming a habitable unit, containing
complete and independent living facilities.[Amended 5-22-2017 ATM by
Art. 20]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This shall include any area designated as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30,
AE, A99, V1-30, VE, or V on the FIRM and FIS.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by
Art. 1]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
BASEMENT — A portion of a building partly below grade which has more
than 1/2 of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling
above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building. A
§ 175-4 ABINGTON CODE § 175-4
171:150
basement is not considered a story unless its ceiling is 4.5 feet or more
above the finished grade or one half of the total height above finished grade,
whichever is greater.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials whether portable or fixed
having a roof built to form a structure that is safe and stable supported
by columns or walls resting on its own foundation for the shelter, housing
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels of property of any kind. For the
purposes of this definition "roof" shall include an awning or any similar
covering whether or not permanent in nature.[Amended 5-21-2018 ATM
by Art. 22]
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached building the use of which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building and
which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building
to which it is accessory.
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building having any portion of one or more
walls in common with adjoining buildings.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building having open space on all sides.
BUILDING LINE — The closest location on a lot that any portion of a
foundation may be situated from the front lot (street) line, parallel to
the street. See front setback requirements of Article VI. On a lot with
an existing principal structure, this line exists at the closest point of the
foundation to the front lot (street) line, parallel to the street.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use on the lot on which it is located.
CELLAR — A portion of a building partly or entirely below grade which has
more than 1/2 of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling
below the average established finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building. A cellar is not deemed a story.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — The final permit required from the Town
before any use of structure may be occupied; issued by the Building
Inspector; a means of assuring that all work has been completed in
accordance with plans approved for building permits and that all work
conforms to the requirements of all building, zoning and health regulations
of the Town.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on the FIRM as Zone V,
V1-30, or VE.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX — An area of land designed for joint ownership
of property, or property so owned, such as an apartment complex with each
unit bought and sold, without the approval of other owners, and where
common facilities are maintained by a service fee.
§ 175-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-4
171:151
DEVELOPMENT — For floodplain management purposes any manmade
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
DISTRICT — A zoning district as established by Article III of this bylaw.
DRIVEWAY — A private access for vehicles to required parking, and for
vehicles to move between the required frontage and a location within a lot
provided that a "driveway" shall not be used to connect a lot through any
portion of another lot.
DUPLEX DWELLING — A two-family building designed with separated
dwelling units side-by-side separated by a fire wall.
DWELLING — A privately or publicly owned permanent structure
containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units. The terms "one-family," "twofamily"
or "multifamily" dwelling shall not include hotel, lodging house,
hospital, membership club, trailer, however mounted, or dormitory, or
structure solely for transient or overnight occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living or sleeping rooms arranged for
the use of one or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit
with permanent provisions for cooking, living, sanitary, eating, and sleeping
facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units constructed on a single lot.
FAMILY — One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying
a dwelling unit and living as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit provided
that a group of five or more persons who are not within the second degree
of kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a family.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — Administers
the National Flood Insurance Program. FEMA provides a nationwide flood
hazard area mapping study program for communities as well as regulatory
standards for development in the flood hazard areas.[Added 5-21-2012
STM by Art. 1]
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP — Shall include an official map
of a community issued by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analyses,
the boundaries of the 100-year and 500-year floods and the 100-year
floodway.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by FEMA where the boundaries of the flood and related
erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zone A or
E.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.[Added 5-21-2012
STM by Art. 1]
§ 175-4 ABINGTON CODE § 175-4
171:152
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
FLOODPLAIN — Any area that is subject to periodic flooding and that is
shown as an area mapped as flood plain on the Zoning Map or shown as a
special flood hazard area on the FIRM and FIS incorporated by reference
into the Zoning Map.[Amended 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.[Added
5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building,
measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars,
unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy or any floor
space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and designed
for parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements
of this bylaw, or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory
heating and ventilating equipment.
FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot contiguous with a street or street rightof-
way line and providing access thereto.[Amended 4-7-2008 by Art. 15]
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average finished grade of the
adjacent ground to the top of the structure or the highest roof beams of a
flat roof or the mean level of the highest gable or the slope of a hip roof.
HISTORICAL NEW ENGLAND CHARACTER — The general use of
architectural details and designs which conform to the traditional building
styles of New England, including but not limited to Colonial/Cape, Georgian,
Federal, Greek Revival and Victorian styles, and the use of traditional
exterior surfaces and accents on facades facing the street or nearby public
property, such as clapboard or siding, peaked roof lines, attractive light
fixtures, appropriate window sizes and styles, and the like, without,
however, prohibiting the use of modern building materials which may
replicate or mimic traditional styles but with longer lasting, more durable
or more energy efficient materials. The use of photovoltaic systems (solar
panels), satellite dishes or other exterior communication hardware shall not
be prohibited, but shall be encouraged to be screened from street view
wherever reasonably possible.[Added 5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 18]
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use which by custom has been carried
on entirely within a dwelling unit and is incidental and subordinate to
the dwelling use and which shall not occupy more than 25% of the floor
area or 400 square feet whichever is less of the dwelling unit so used.
No commodities except those processed on the premises shall be sold.
Permitted uses shall be carried on by the occupants of the dwelling unit
with no more than one non-resident employee, and shall not in any manner
change the residential character of the building.
§ 175-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-4
171:153
HOSPITAL — A building providing twenty-four-hour in-patient services for
the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments including, where
appropriate, a sanitarium, clinic, rest home, sanatorium, nursing homes,
and convalescent home.
HOTEL — A building or any part of a building containing rooming units
without individual cooking facilities for transient occupancy and having a
common entrance or entrances including an inn, motel, motor inn, and
tourist court, but not including a boarding house, lodging house, or rooming
house.
LODGING UNIT — One or more rooms for the use of one or more individuals
not living as a single housekeeping unit and not having cooking facilities.
A "lodging unit" shall include rooms in boarding houses, tourist houses or
rooming houses.
LOT — A single or contiguous tract of land held in the same ownership
throughout and defined by bounds or lot lines ascertainable by recorded
deed or plan.
LOT AREA — For all lots created after April 2, 2001, the horizontal area
exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. At
least 50% of the area required to meet the minimum lot area requirement
in the zoning district in which the lot is located must be contiguous upland
as defined in this Bylaw and not part of a detention and/or retention basin
or easement for drainage purposes, land under water, or land subject to
flooding.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets, the interior angle of intersection of the street lot
lines, or in the case of a curved street, extended lot lines, being not more
than 135 degrees.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance measured continuously along
the front lot line between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with
the front lot line. The street frontage for a lot on a cul-de-sac shall be the
measured frontage of the lot along the outside radius of the street right-ofway
line between the side lot lines.[Amended 4-7-2008 by Art. 15]
LOT LINE, FRONT — The property line dividing a lot from a street (right-ofway).
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line or lines opposite from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot lawfully existing at the effective date
of this bylaw or any subsequent amendment thereto which is not in
accordance with all provisions of this bylaw.
LOT, WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
measured at the minimum front yard depth (required setback distance)
required by this bylaw.
§ 175-4 ABINGTON CODE § 175-4
171:154
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of NFIP Regulations
60.3.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art.
1]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A social, sports or fraternal association or
organization which is used exclusively by members and their guests which
may contain bar facilities.
MOBILE HOME — A large trailer outfitted as a home meant to be parked
more or less permanently at a location. See “trailer.”
MULTI-UNIT DWELLING — A building exclusively for residential use with
three or more dwelling units. [Added 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."[Added 5-21-2012
STM by Art. 1]
OWNER (REAL ESTATE) — Any person or entity of record, holding fee
simple title to a lot of land.
OPEN SPACE — The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed
to the sky, not devoted to streets, driveways, or off-street parking or loading
spaces and expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space, whether inside or outside a
structure for exclusive use as a parking space for one motor vehicle as
required elsewhere in these bylaws.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — A business complex
excluding apartments which is planned, designed, and developed as a unit.
PLANNED CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, designed and
developed as a unit, with common open space as an integral characteristic
which departs from the zoning regulations conventionally required in the
district concerning lot size and dimensional requirements.
§ 175-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-4
171:155
PREMISES — A lot together with all buildings, structures, and uses thereon.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — See "floodway."[Added 5-21-2012 STM by
Art. 1]
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary representation used as, or which is in
the nature of, an advertisement, announcement, or direction, or is designed
to attract the eye by intermittent or repeated motion or illumination,
provided however that the following shall not be included in the application
of the regulations herein.
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF —
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood and/or
flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map
or FIRM or FIS as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, V, V1-30, or VE.[Added
5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
SPECIAL PERMIT —
Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
A.
Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs erected
or required by government bodies.
B.
Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but
bearing no advertising matter.
C.
For a sign the area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording,
and accompanying designs and symbols together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed. Frames and
structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be
included in computation of sign area.
A.
For a sign consisting of individual letters, designs and symbols attached
to or painted on a surface building wall or window the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle which encompasses all
of the letters, designs and symbols.
B.
A permit which may be issued by the special permit granting authority
(SPGA) as designated within this Bylaw or Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws, to authorize a use which would not be
allowed generally or without restriction throughout any particular
zoning district; but which, if controlled as to the number, area, location,
relation to the neighborhood and other characteristics would not be
injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare; a special
permit is not a "variance" but may include a variance of dimensional
and similar requirements incidental to the special permit. Special
permits may also impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations on
time and use.
A.
§ 175-4 ABINGTON CODE § 175-4
171:156
STREET — A way that is dedicated or devoted to public use by legal
mapping or by any other lawful procedure. A street includes all public
ways, a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a
public way, a way shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance
with the Subdivision Rules and Regulations in Abington, Massachusetts,11
and a way having in the opinion of the Abington Planning Board sufficient
width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs
of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed uses of the land abutting
thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to
serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. The
Planning Board shall not deem a way adequate for the purposes of the
Subdivision Control Law whether approval is required or not required and
this Zoning Bylaw unless said way meets the following minimum standards.
In granting a special permit, the SPGA shall give due regard to the
nature and condition of all adjacent structures and uses, and the district
within which the same is located. The SPGA shall also take into
consideration the fulfillment of the following general conditions in
addition to other appropriate safeguards as determined by the SPGA:
The use requested is listed in the Table of Use Regulations as a
special permit in the District for which application is made.
(1)
The requested use will not overload any public water, sewer, or
drainage system, or any other municipal system; create undue
traffic congestion, or unduly impair sight lines for traffic or hinder
pedestrian safety to such an extent that the requested use or any
developed use in the immediate area or in any other area of the
Town will be unduly subjected to hazards affecting health, safety,
or the general welfare.
(2)
(3) Any special regulations for the use, set forth in this Bylaw are met.
The requested use is desirable to the public convenience or
welfare.
(4)
Any special permit granted by the SPGA shall lapse if substantial
use or construction has not commenced within two years of the
expiration date of the appeal period, or within two years after such
time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal,
whichever is later.
(5)
B.
A. A right-of-way width of 40 feet.
B. A traveled way of 16 feet exclusive of berms or curbs.
An all-weather surface of bituminous concrete which is in suitable
condition to allow access for emergency vehicles.
C.
The way shall be properly graded so as to allow for drainage of surface
water runoff as determined by the Board or its agent.
D.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
§ 175-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-4
171:157
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street.
STRUCTURE —
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure lawfully existing at the
effective date of this bylaw or any subsequent amendment thereto which
does not conform to one or more provisions of this bylaw.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either (a) before the improvement or
repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the structure.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTES AND MATERIALS — Toxic or hazardous
materials include, without limitation organic chemicals, petroleum
products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkali's,
and include products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners.
TRAILER — Any vehicle which is designed primarily to be portable and
is arranged, intended, designed, or used temporarily for sleeping, eating,
or business use in conjunction with construction, or is a place in which
persons may congregate including a tent trailer, travel trailer, motor home,
or camper.
A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location that is safe
and stable to give support or shelter such as a building, bridge, trestle,
tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, reviewing
stand, platform, bin, sign, fence, flagpole, swimming pool, shelters,
sheds, or the like.
A.
For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure," for insurance
coverage purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a
gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground and affixed
to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on foundation.
For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course
of construction, alteration, or repair, but does not include building
materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration,
or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed
building on the premises. [Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
B.
§ 175-4 ABINGTON CODE § 175-4
171:158
TWO-FAMILY/THREE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed to
accommodate two- or three-family households, each with separate units on
each floor within the structure. [Added 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
UPLAND — Non-wetland as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act and/or
the Town of Abington Wetlands Bylaw.12
USE — The purpose for which a structure or lot is arranged, designed, or
intended to be used, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of a structure or lot, or a use, not the principal use, which is located on the
same lot as the principal structure.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use lawfully existing at the time of adoption
of this bylaw or any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not
conform to one or more provisions of this bylaw including an existing use
permissible on special permit from the Board of Appeals but which has not
been so authorized.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure,
building, or lot is designed, arranged, constructed, or intended, or for which
it may be used, occupied or maintained under this bylaw. Any other use
within the main structure or the use of any other structure or land on the
same lot and incidental or supplementary to the principal use and permitted
under this bylaw shall be considered an accessory use.
USE, SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT — A use which by reason of its normal
operation would cause readily observable differences in patronage, service,
sight, noise, employment or similar characteristics from the use to which it
is being compared.
VARIANCE — See § 175-82D(3).
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A structure, including a
tower, antenna, monopole, satellite dish, or other similar devices and
accessory structures, built for the providing of wireless communications
services. A wireless communications facility may include accessory
mechanical, electronic or telephone equipment and/or building(s) necessary
to operate such facility.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The communications
services provided for radio, television, cellular telephone, personal
communications, and enhanced specialized mobile radio via wireless
communications facilities.
YARD — A portion of a lot upon which the principal building is situated,
unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as otherwise provided
herein.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending for the width of the lot between the front
line of the nearest building wall and the front lot line.
12.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A, and Ch. 171, Wetlands Protection, of the
Code of the Town of Abington
§ 175-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-4
171:159
YARD, REAR — A yard, unoccupied except by an accessory structure or
accessory use as herein permitted, extending for the full width of the lot
between the rear line of the building wall and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending for the full length of the lot between the
nearest building wall and the side lot line.
ZONE A — The 100-year floodplain area where the base flood elevation
(BFE) has not been determined.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ZONE A1-30 and ZONE AE — The 100-year floodplain where the base flood
elevation has been determined.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ZONE AH and ZONE AO — The 100-year floodplain with flood depths of one
to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.[Added 5-21-2012 STM
by Art. 1]
ZONE A99 — Areas to be protected from the 100-year flood by federal flood
protection system under construction.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ZONES B, C, AND X — Areas identified in the community Flood Insurance
Study as areas of moderate or minimal flood hazard. Zone X shall replace
Zones B and C on the revised maps.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ZONE V — A special flood hazard area along a coast subject to inundation
by the 100-year flood with the additional hazards associated with storm
waves.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ZONE X — An Area identified in the Flood Insurance Study as an area of
moderate minimal flood hazard.[Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
ZONING ENABLING ACT — Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General
Laws and subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 175-4 ABINGTON CODE § 175-4
171:160
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 175-5. Division into districts. [Amended 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25;
5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 31]
The Town of Abington, Massachusetts, is hereby divided into the following
Zoning Districts.
Full Title Short Name
High Density Residential R-20
Medium Density Residential R-30
Low Density Residential R-40
General Commercial GC
Highway Commercial HC
Industrial I
Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection FW
Watershed Protection District WPD
Business Development BD
Transit Oriented Development District TOD
Central Business District CBD
Multiple Use Planned Development District MUPDD
Transitional Commercial District TCD
§ 175-6. Zoning Map. [Amended 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25;
5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
The Zoning Map for the Town of Abington shall include the following maps.
The location and boundaries of the Zoning Districts shall be and are as
shown on a map entitled, "Town of Abington, Massachusetts, Zoning Map,"
dated February 3, 2003, which is incorporated into this Bylaw by reference.
The locations and boundaries of the Flood Plain Watershed Protection
District shall be and are as shown on a map entitled, Town of Abington,
Zoning Map, as adopted by the May 3, 1976 Town Meeting (the "1976 Flood
Plain Map") and as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for
FEMA, dated and effective on July 17, 2012, with respect to the following
panels shown on the map panels of the Plymouth County FIRM that are
wholly or partially within the Town of Abington, including Map Panels;
25023C0069J, 25023C0088J, 25023C0089J, 25023C0093J, 25023C0157J,
25023C0176J, 25023C0177J, 25023C0178J, 25023C0179J, and
25023C0181J. Furthermore, the exact boundaries of the Floodplain District
shall be defined as the floodplain areas shown on the 1976 Flood Plain
Zoning Map and shall include the 100-year base flood elevations and all of
the special flood hazard areas within the Town of Abington as shown on the
FIRM and as further defined by the Plymouth County Flood Insurance Study
report dated July 17, 2012 (FIS). The enumerated FIRM panels and the FIS
§ 175-5 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-6
171:161
report are hereby incorporated by reference and are on file with the Town
Clerk and Planning Department. The authenticity of the Zoning Map shall
be identified by the signature of the Town Clerk, and said Bylaw and Map
shall be on file with the Town Clerk.13
§ 175-7. Changes to Zoning Map.
Any change in the location of boundaries of a Zoning District hereafter
made through the amendment of this bylaw shall be indicated by the
alteration of such map and the map thus altered as declared to be part of
the bylaw thus amended. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board
to direct such alterations.
§ 175-8. Boundaries of districts.
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as
shown on the Zoning Map the following rules apply:
Where a boundary is indicated as a street, railroad, watercourse or
other body of water it shall be construed to be the centerline of middle
thereof, or where such boundary approximates a Town boundary, then
to the limits of the Town boundary.
A.
Where a boundary is indicated as following approximately or parallel to
a street sideline, railroad, watercourse, or other body of water, it shall
be construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance there from, as
dimensioned on the Zoning Map. If no dimension is given such distance
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
B.
Where a dimensioned boundary coincides with a lot line, the boundary
established by Tax Assessor records as of 1975 shall be construed to be
the lot line.
C.
Where a boundary is indicated as intersecting the centerline of a street,
railroad, watercourse or other water body, it shall be construed to
intersect at right angles to said centerline, or in the case of a curved
centerline, at right angle to the tangent to the curve at the point of
intersection.
D.
The Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection District shall be and hereby
is established as an overlay district which shall include the floodplain
areas shown on the 1976 Flood Plain Zoning Map and the 100-year
base flood elevations and all of the special flood hazard areas within
the Town of Abington that are shown on the FIRM and the FIS that
are incorporated by reference into the Zoning Map and this Zoning
Bylaw. The Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection District boundary lines
shown on the 1976 Flood Plain Zoning Map shall be determined by
the use of the scale appearing on that map. If a conflict between the
boundary illustrated on the 1976 Flood Plain Zoning Map and actual
E.
13.Editor’s Note: Said Zoning Map is also included in the online version of the Code of the
Town of Abington (eCode360®).
§ 175-6 ABINGTON CODE § 175-8
171:162
§ 175-9. District boundary interpretation.
The Building Inspector in consultation with the Planning Board shall have
the authority to interpret district boundaries where there is some question
in the interpretation of the rules in this article or where boundaries on the
ground are unclear or at variance with those on the Zoning Map.
field conditions, the affected party may request a special permit to
allow an exception according to the procedures set forth under Zoning
Bylaw § 175-35G. [Amended 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
§ 175-8 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-9
171:163

ARTICLE IV
Interpretation and Application
§ 175-10. Interpretation.
The provisions of this bylaw shall be interpreted to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, or the general
welfare of the Town of Abington, Massachusetts and except for the Zoning
Bylaw of the Town of Abington dated 10/2/62 and any amendments thereto,
the provisions of this bylaw are not intended to repeal, or in any way
impair or interfere with any lawfully adopted bylaw, regulations, or rules.
Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those
prescribed by any bylaw or other regulations, that provision which imposes
the greater restriction or the higher standard shall govern.
§ 175-11. Application.
Except as herein provided, or as specifically exempted by the Zoning
Enabling Act, the provisions of this bylaw shall apply to the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use of buildings and structures
or use of land. Except as herein provided, any existing conforming use,
structure, or lot shall not by any action become nonconforming, and any
existing nonconforming use, structure, or lot shall not become further
nonconforming.
§ 175-12. Portions of lots situated in adjacent municipalities.
When a lot is situated in part in the Town of Abington and in part in an
adjacent municipality, the provisions of the bylaw shall be applied to the
portion of such lot in the Town of Abington in the same manner as if the
entire lot were situated in the Town of Abington
§ 175-13. Lots transected by district boundary line.
When a lot is transected by a zoning district boundary line, the regulations
of the bylaw applicable to the larger part (50% or greater) of such lot may
also at the option of the lot owner be deemed to govern in the smaller part
up to a maximum distance of 50 feet beyond such zoning district boundary
line, provided that the buffer areas required in § 175-66 of this bylaw are
met.
§ 175-14. Location of and driveway access to principal building
[Amended 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
No principal building shall be built except on a lot fronting on a street.
There shall be not more than one principal building on a lot except for
attached dwellings, apartments, and condominium developments in
accordance with §§ 175-31 and 175-32 of this bylaw or for commercial
development in accordance with §§ 175-33, 175-37, 175-38 or 75-39 of this
bylaw. For any residential dwelling unit, the driveway access to all principal
§ 175-10 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-14
171:165
buildings shall be from the same location on which the required lot frontage
is located.
§ 175-15. Land within street lines.
Land within the lines of a street on which a lot abuts shall not be counted
as part of such lot for the purposes of meeting the area requirements of the
bylaw even though the fee to such land may be in the owner's abutting lots.
§ 175-16. Existing structures and uses; applicability to alterations
and reconstruction.
This bylaw shall not apply to existing buildings, structures, or recorded lots,
nor to the existing use of any building, structure, or land to the extent to
which it is used at the adoption of this bylaw. It shall apply to any change of
use thereof and to any alteration of a building or structure when the same
would amount to reconstruction, extension or structural change, and to any
alteration of a building or structure to provide for its use for a purpose or
in a manner substantially different from the use to which it was put before
alteration or for its use for the same purpose to a substantially greater
extent.
§ 175-17. Mixed occupancy.
In cases of mixed occupancy, the regulation for each use shall apply to the
portion of the building or land so used.
§ 175-14 ABINGTON CODE § 175-17
171:166
ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 175-18. Applicability of Table of Use Regulations.
Except as provided by law or in this bylaw, in each district no building,
structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes
permitted as set forth in the accompanying Table of Use Regulations,
§ 175-21.
§ 175-19. Key to Table of Use Regulations.
A use listed in § 175-21 is permitted as of right in any district under which
it is denoted by the letter "Y" subject to such requirements as may be
specified elsewhere in this bylaw. If designated in the table by the letters
"SP" the use may be permitted as an exception only if the Board of Appeals
so determines and grants a special permit therefore as provided in Article
XII subject to such restrictions as set forth elsewhere in this bylaw and such
further restrictions as said Board of Appeals may establish. The letter "N"
shall designate that the use is not permitted, except by a variance from the
Board of Appeals.
§ 175-20. Districts' intent.
High Density Residential, R-20 - To encourage compact residential
development.
A.
Medium Density Residential, R-30 - To provide areas for a reasonably
spacious residential environment.
B.
Low Density Residential, R-40 - To provide areas for a particularly
spacious residential environment.
C.
General Commercial, GC - To primarily establish compact business
centers which do not include noxious or land expansive uses and which
are centrally located, have adequate vehicular access, and are designed
for pedestrian shoppers as much as possible.
D.
Highway commercial, HC - To primarily provide locations for
businesses which cater to a traffic-oriented market or which need large
expanses of land and would not be appropriate in compact general
commercial centers.
E.
Industrial, I - To reserve areas for the development of industry that will
be compatible with the Town and the immediate area.
F.
Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection, FW - To protect and preserve the
marshes, bogs, ponds, water courses and their adjoining wetlands; to
reduce the hazards of floods upon the public heath, safety and general
welfare; to protect flood plain occupants from a flood that is or may
be caused by their own land use and that is or may be undertaken
without full realization of the dangers therein; to protect the public
G.
§ 175-18 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-20
171:167
§ 175-21. Table of Use Regulations. [Amended 4-7-2003 ATM by Art.
25]
(Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this
chapter.)
from the burden of extraordinary financial expenditure for flood control
and relief; to protect the capacity of flood plain and wetland areas
to absorb, transmit and store runoff; to assure retention of sufficient
floodway area to convey flows which can reasonably be expected to
occur.
Business Development, BD – To primarily establish general commercial
and business uses which require or cater to traffic-oriented business,
pass-by visibility and/or adequate large vehicle or large volume access
as provided by the state highway, but also prohibiting the future
development of residential uses. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art.
31]
H.
Watershed Protection District, WPD - To protect existing and future
water resources.
I.
Transit Oriented Development, TOD - To encourage the development
of land uses that compliment both the existing commuter rail line and
the established residential areas surrounding the station, by providing
for a mix of small uses on well buffered sites to support commuters
and adjacent residential development, encourage the continued use
of rail service, increase the number of pedestrian and bicycle trips,
while decreasing the number of automobile trips within the Town. (See
§ 175-37.) [Added 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
J.
Central Business District, CBD - To allow for the reasonable use,
enhancement, expansion and redevelopment of those areas of the Town
that are currently developed in a building intensive manner where
parking is available on-street as well as in common lots. (See § 175-38.)
[Added 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
K.
Multiple Use Planned Development District, MUPDD - To establish
areas and standards for the overall planned development of land with
mixed-uses. The District attempts to accommodate low-impact activities
in an overall low density but with intensive use clusters, making use
of natural features and vegetation, screening and setbacks to have
minimal impact on surrounding land uses. (See § 175-39.) [Added
4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
L.
Transitional Commercial District, TCD - To preserve the residential
character of existing development along thoroughfares that are
undergoing pressure for commercial development by providing for the
transition to more intensive but compatible uses. (See § 175-40.)
[Added 4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
M.
§ 175-20 ABINGTON CODE § 175-22
171:168
§ 175-22. Adult entertainment establishments.
All adult entertainment establishments as defined in Article II of this Zoning
Bylaw are allowed in the Industrial District (I) upon the granting of a special
permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals. All adult entertainment uses shall
comply with the following requirements:
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within the
following designated areas:
Within 500 feet from the nearest boundary line of any residential
zoning district or from the nearest property line of any residential
use;
(1)
Within 500 from the nearest property line of any public or private
school, or municipal building open to the general public;
(2)
Within 500 feet from the nearest property line of any church or
other religious facility;
(3)
Within 500 feet from the nearest property line of any public park or
recreation area and any principal or accessory private recreational
facility use;
(4)
Within 500 feet from the nearest property line of any group day
care center, family day care center, nursing home and hospital;
(5)
Within 1,000 feet from the nearest property line of any other adult
entertainment establishment.
(6)
Within 500 feet from any establishment licensed under the
provisions of Section 12 of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
138.
The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight
line from the nearest property line of the premises on which
the adult entertainment establishment is to be located to the
nearest boundary line of a residential zoning district, or to the
nearest property line of any residential use, public or private
school, church or other religious facility, public park or
recreational area, group day care center, family day care center,
nursing home, hospital or any other adult entertainment use, as
the case may be.
(7)
Within 50 feet of a public or private way or 50 feet from all other
property lines.
(8)
A.
Additional siting requirements.
The maximum lot coverage, including building, parking and
driveways shall be 50% of the upland lot area.
(1)
A fifty-foot vegetated buffer containing adequate screening
appropriate to the character of the area and the intensity of the use
(2)
B.
§ 175-22 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-22
171:169
shall be provided between an adult entertainment establishment
and other abutting commercial uses.
An adult entertainment use shall not be allowed within a building
containing other retail, consumer or residential uses, or within a
shopping center, shopping plaza, or mall.
(3)
The appearance of buildings for adult uses shall be consistent with
the appearance of buildings in similar (but not specifically "adult")
use, and not employ unusual color or building design which would
attract attention to the premises.
(4)
There shall be screening of windows and doors to prevent the
public's view of the interior from any public or private right-of-way
or abutting property.
(5)
Sign requirements.
Sign content shall identify the name of the establishment only and
shall contain no advertisement in addition to the identification of
the use. Only one identification sign to be mounted on the building
wall face shall be allowed for an adult use. All other signs whether
on the exterior of the building or visible from the exterior of the
building are prohibited.
(1)
No adult entertainment establishment may have any flashing lights
visible from outside the establishment. Furthermore, no sign shall
rotate, or contain reflective or fluorescent elements.
(2)
No pictures, publications, videotapes, movies, covers or other
advertising items that fall within the definition of an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult
paraphernalia store or adult video store shall be displayed in the
windows of, or on the building of, any adult entertainment
establishment.
(3)
C.
Special permit submission and approval.
A site plan shall be submitted by the applicant in order that the
special permit granting authority may determine that the above
standards have been met. The site plan shall be prepared and
submitted in accordance with § 175-3, Site Plan Review, of this
bylaw. The site plan shall also show when appropriate the distances
between the proposed adult entertainment establishment and any
residential zoning district, public or private school, church or other
religious facility, public park or recreation area, group day care
center, family day care center, nursing home and hospital,
municipal building, and any other adult entertainment
establishment(s).
(1)
All applications for a special permit must include the following
information:
(2)
D.
§ 175-22 ABINGTON CODE § 175-22
171:170
Names and addresses of the legal owner(s) of the adult
entertainment establishment.
(a)
Name and address of all persons having a fee, equity and/
or security interest in such establishment. In the event a
corporation, partnership, trust or other entity is listed, the
name and address of every person who has an ownership
interest and/or beneficial interest in the entity must be listed
in order that the special permit granting authority will know
who are the persons who will actually own and control the
establishment. The applicant and/or owner must disclose if
they have been convicted of violating the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws Section 63 of Chapter 119 or
Section 28 of Chapter 272.
(b)
(c) Name and address of the manager.
The number of employees, or proposed number of employees,
as the case may be.
(d)
(e) Proposed security precautions.
Special permits shall be granted for adult entertainment
establishments only upon determination by the special permit
granting authority that the location and design of the facility are in
harmony with its surroundings, and that adequate safeguards exist
through licensing or other means to assure on a continuing basis
that activities therein will not be patently contrary to prevailing
standards of adults in the community and will not involve minors in
any way.
(3)
In approving a special permit, the special permit granting authority
may attach such conditions, limitations and safeguards as are
deemed necessary to protect the immediate area and the Town,
provided however that no such conditions in fact prohibit the use
of the property for the use intended. No special permit shall take
effect until such decision has been recorded in the Registry of
Deeds. Conditions of approval may include but are not limited to
the following:
Street, side or rear setbacks greater than the minimum
required by this bylaw.
(a)
Requirement of screening of parking areas or other parts of
the premises from adjoining premises or from the street, by
walls, fences, planting, or other means.
(b)
Modification of the exterior features or appearances of the
structure.
(c)
Limitation of size, number of occupants, method or time of
operation, or extent of facilities.
(d)
(4)
§ 175-22 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-22
171:171
Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or
other traffic features.
(e)
Requirement of off-street parking or other special features
beyond the minimum required by this or other applicable
ordinances.
(f)
The special permit shall be issued to the owner of the
establishment and shall not transfer with a change in
ownership of the business and/or property.
(g)
Where the adult use is not governed by other state or local
licensing boards, the following conditions shall apply:
A manager responsible for the operation of the
establishment shall be designated by the owner, if the
owner is not the manager. The manager shall register with
the Board of Selectmen. No manager shall be designated
who has been convicted of violating MGL Ch. 119, Section
63, (Inducing or abetting delinquency of a child) or MGL
Ch. 272, Section 28, (Matter harmful to minors, etc.) or
similar laws in other states.
[1]
The special permit granting authority may limit the hours
of operation.
[2]
(h)
Special permits for adult entertainment establishments shall not
be granted to any person or persons convicted of violating the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 119, Section
63, nor Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 272, Section 28,
similar laws in other states.
(5)
Lapse of permit.
Any special permit granted hereunder for an adult entertainment
establishment shall lapse after one year, including such time
required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal from
the grant thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner
commenced except for good cause, or if in the case of a permit
for construction, if construction has not begun by such date except
for good cause, including such time to pursue or await the
determination of an appeal referred to in Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 40A, Section 17, from the grant thereof.
(1)
The special permit shall lapse after two years, unless a shorter
term is specified by the special permit granting authority. Upon
receipt of a valid application, the special permit granting authority
may grant another special permit provided that the Board finds
that all conditions of this section and of approval have been
complied with.
(2)
E.
§ 175-22 ABINGTON CODE § 175-22
171:172
§ 175-23. Wireless communications facilities.
The special permit shall not be renewed if any of the following has
taken place on or in proximity to and associated with the premises:
(a) Unlawful sexual activity;
(b) Gambling;
(c) Drug use;
(d) Violent crimes;
(e) Offenses against children;
Repeated public disturbances requiring intervention by the
police; and
(f)
(g) Any other illegal activities.
(3)
Violation of any of the conditions of approval of the special permit
shall be grounds for non-renewal of the special permit as provided
for above.
(4)
Existing adult entertainment establishments. Any adult entertainment
establishment that was in existence as of the first date of the
publication of the notice of public hearing on the this zoning
amendment regulating adult uses may continue to operate in the same
location, without material change in scale or content of the business
but shall apply for such special permit within 90 days following the
adoption of this bylaw.
F.
Prohibited uses. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to authorize,
legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any
business, building or use which violated any Town ordinance or statute
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regarding public nuisances,
sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter, or the
exhibition or public display thereof.
G.
Purpose. This section as been created to protect the general public
from hazards associated with wireless communications facilities and
to minimize visual impacts from wireless communications facilities on
residential districts. This section does not apply to satellite dishes and
antennas with a diameter of less than five feet.
A.
General requirements.
Free-standing monopoles, with associated antenna and/or panels
are the only wireless communications facilities allowed. Lattice
style towers and similar facilities requiring three or more legs and/
or guy wires for support are not allowed.
(1)
To the extent feasible, all service providers shall co-locate on a
single facility. Wireless communications facilities shall be designed
(2)
B.
§ 175-22 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-23
171:173
to accommodate the maximum number of users technologically
practicable. The intent of this requirement is to reduce the number
of facilities which will be required to be located within the
community.
Any proposed extension in the height, addition of cells, antennas or
panels, construction or alteration of a facility shall be subject to an
application for an amendment to an existing special permit.
(3)
New facilities shall be permitted by the special permit granting
authority only upon a finding by the Board that existing or
approved facilities cannot accommodate the wireless
communications equipment planned for the proposed facility.
(4)
In no event shall any facility be located closer than one mile to any
other such facility.
(5)
No facility or attached accessory antenna shall exceed 100 feet in
height as measured from ground level at the base of the facility. All
facilities shall be designed to be constructed at the minimum height
necessary to accommodate the anticipated and future use. Greater
heights shall require a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals
in accordance with § 175-82 of this Zoning Bylaw.
(6)
A facility shall not be erected nearer to any property line than a
distance equal to the vertical height of the facility (inclusive of any
appurtenant devices), measured at the mean finished grade of the
facility base. Provided however that a facility shall not be erected
nearer to a lot line for residential use than 500 feet.
(7)
Siting of the facility shall be such that the view of the facility from
adjacent abutters, residential neighbors and other areas of Town
shall be as limited as possible. All facilities shall be painted or
otherwise colored so they will blend in with the landscape or the
structure on which they are located. A different coloring scheme
shall be used to blend the facility with the landscape below and
above the tree or building line.
(8)
Wireless communications facilities shall be suitably screened from
abutters and residential neighborhoods. Existing on-site vegetation
shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
(9)
Fencing shall be provided to control access to wireless
communications facilities and shall be compatible with the adjacent
land uses.
(10)
There shall be no signs, except for announcement signs, no
trespassing signs and a required sign giving a phone number where
the owner can be reached on a twenty-four-hour basis. All signs
shall comply with Article IX of this Bylaw.
(11)
§ 175-23 ABINGTON CODE § 175-23
171:174
Night lighting of the facilities shall be prohibited unless required
by the Federal Aviation Administration. Lighting shall be limited to
that needed for emergencies and/or as required by the FAA.
(12)
There shall be a minimum of one parking space and one off-street
loading space for each facility, to be used in connection with the
maintenance of the facility and the site, and not to be used for the
permanent storage of vehicles.
(13)
To the extent technologically feasible, all network interconnections
from the facility shall be via land lines.
(14)
Satellite dishes and/or antenna may be located on structures or
may be free-standing. Satellite dishes and/or antenna shall be
situated on a structure in such a manner that they are screened,
preferably not being visible from abutting streets. Free-standing
dishes or antenna shall be located on the landscape in such a
manner so as to minimize visibility from abutting streets and
residences and to limit the need to remove existing vegetation. All
equipment shall be colored, molded and/or installed to blend into
the structure and/or the landscape.
(15)
Antennas or dishes located on a structure shall not exceed 10 feet
in height above the level of its attachment to the structure.
(16)
Annual certification demonstrating continuing compliance with the
standards of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal
Aviation Administration and the American National Standards
Institute and required maintenance shall be filed with the Building
Inspector by the special permit holder.
(17)
All unused facilities or parts thereof, or accessory facilities and
structures, which have not been used for two years shall be
dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. The Town shall
require a surety bond at the time of application for the dismantling
and removal of the facility.
(18)
Procedure for a special permit.
All applications for wireless communications facilities, antennas
or satellite dishes shall be made and filed on the applicable
application forms for a special permit in compliance with the
Abington Zoning Board of Appeals. In addition, site plan review by
the Planning Board under § 175-77 of this bylaw shall be required.
The following additional information shall be included in the
application for a special permit.
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which shall
show all property lines, the exact location of the proposed
structure(s), streets, landscape features, residential dwellings
and neighborhoods and all buildings within 500 feet of the
facility.
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 175-23 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-23
171:175
§ 175-24. Watershed Protection District.
The following information must be prepared by a registered
professional engineer.
A description of the facility and the technical, economic
and other reasons for the proposed location, height and
design.
[1]
Confirmation that the facility complies with all applicable
federal and state standards.
[2]
A description of the capacity of the facility including the
number and type of panels, antennas and/or transmitter
receivers that it can accommodate and the basis for these
calculations.
[3]
If applicable, a written statement that the proposed facility
complies with, or is exempt from applicable regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FFA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
[4]
(b)
Applicants proposing to erect facilities on municipally owned
land or structures shall provide evidence of contractual
authorization from the Town of Abington to conduct wireless
communications services on municipally owned property.
(c)
Exemptions. The following types of wireless communication facilities
are exempt from the requirements of this section.
Amateur radio towers used in accordance with the terms of any
amateur radio service license issued by the Federal
Communications Commissions, provided that the tower is not used
or licensed for any commercial purpose.
(1)
(2) Facilities used for the purposes set forth in M.G.L. c. 40A, Sec. 3.
Wireless communication facilities which are ground mounted with
a height of no more than six feet, provided the Building Inspector
determines that the facility is designed to blend in with its
surroundings or is adequately screened from adjacent areas.
(3)
D.
The Watershed Protection District (WPD) is an overlay district whose
limits are as shown on the Abington Zoning Map. The requirements
of the WPD shall be superimposed upon the underlying districts
established in this bylaw. Regulations pertaining to the WPD District
shall be in addition to the regulations of the underlying districts and
other Town bylaws. This overlay district shall apply to all new
construction, reconstruction or expansion of existing buildings and new
or expanded uses.
A.
§ 175-23 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24
171:176
Purpose: The purpose of the WPD is to protect the public health by
preventing contamination of the ground and surface water resources
both existing and future which provide drinking water to the Town.
Because pollution of groundwater resources can occur as a result of the
cumulative effect of many insignificant uses, there is a need to establish
parameters for land use in these specific areas to avoid pollutants
which would affect the water supplies.
B.
Watershed Protection District boundary disputes. If a landowner
disputes the location of the district boundary in relation to a particular
parcel the resolution of the boundary shall be through a determination
by the Board of Appeals.
C.
Use regulations. The Watershed Protection District shall be considered
to be superimposed over any other district established in this Bylaw.
Land in the Watershed Protection District may be used for any use
otherwise permitted in the underlying district, subject to the following
limitations:
Prohibited uses. The following are prohibited on any lot or portion
of a lot within a Watershed Protection District:
Manufacture, storage or disposal of toxic or hazardous
materials, as that term is defined by state and local laws. (See
definitions.)
(a)
Sanitary landfill and open dump as defined in 310 CMR 19.006,
junkyard, salvage yard or road salt stockpile.
(b)
Motor vehicle service or repair and automobile graveyards and
junkyards, as defined in M.G.L. C. 140B.
(c)
Storage of hazardous materials (as that term is defined by
state and local laws), fuel oil or gasoline either aboveground or
underground except as follows:
Five hundred fifty gallons of aboveground fuel oil storage
per lot unless fully contained within a building.
[1]
[2] For normal household use.
Aboveground waste oil retention facilities required by
statute, rule or regulation.
[3]
Emergency generators required by statute, rule or
regulation.
[4]
Treatment works approved pursuant to 314 CMR 5.00,
including privately owned sewage treatment facilities for
treatment of groundwater and surface-waters.
[5]
Storage of chemicals used for the treatment of potable
water in accordance with 310 CMR 22 and the Department
[6]
(d)
(1)
D.
§ 175-24 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24
171:177
of Environmental Protection's Guidelines and Policies for
Public Water Systems, as amended.
The exceptions [1], [3], [4], [5] and [6] under Subsection
D(1)(d) are permitted only to the extent that the materials
are stored in double-lined containers within buildings or
above ground with secondary containment adequate to
contain a spill 125% of the size of the total storage
capacity of the container, as approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection and in accordance with state
law.
Except in areas serviced by public sewers, individual on-site
sewage disposal systems having an estimated sewage flow
exceeding 110 gallons per day per 10,000 square feet of lot
area, provided that the replacement or repair of a system
which will not result in an increase in the design capacity over
the original design, or the design capacity of 310 CMR 15.00,
whichever is greater, shall be exempted.
(e)
Disposal and stockpiling of snow and ice that contain deicing
chemicals and that have been brought in from outside the
district.
(f)
Removal, excavation or grading of vegetation, soil and/or other
geological material solely for commercial earth removal
purposes.
(g)
Hazardous waste generation, treatment, storage and disposal,
as defined by MGL C. 21C and 310 CMR 30.00 and which
require the obtaining of an Environmental Protection Agency
identification number, except for the following:
Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR
30.000.
[1]
Household hazardous waste centers and events under 310
CMR 30.390.
[2]
Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL C. 21,
Section 52A.
[3]
Water remediation treatment works approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection for the treatment
of contaminated groundwater or surface waters.
[4]
(h)
Any use having on-site disposal of industrial waste as defined
in Title V of the State Environmental Code.
(i)
On-site sewage disposal having an estimated sewage flow
greater than 10,000 gallons per day, regardless of composition
or lot size. On-site sewage disposal having an estimated
sewage flow greater than 2,500 gallons per day, but less than
(j)
§ 175-24 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24
171:178
10,000 gallons per day, shall be permitted by special permit
by the Board of Appeals only upon the approval of the design
by a hydrogeologist retained by the Town of Abington at the
expense of the applicant. Exempt from this subsection shall
be water treatment works approved by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection for treatment of
contaminated groundwater found on site.
Rendering impervious more than 15% or 2,500 square feet of
the lot area, whichever is greater, of a lot located within the
Watershed Protection District. However, rendering impervious
more than 15% but no more than 50% of the lot area of a lot
located within the Watershed Protection District is permitted
in industrial and commercial districts upon the issuance of a
special permit by the Board of Appeals. An applicant for a
special permit must provide artificial recharge that does not
degrade groundwater quality. The proposed water recharge
efforts shall be permitted by the Board of Appeals only upon
the approval of the design by a hydrogeologist retained by the
Town of Abington at the expense of the applicant, under the
provisions of MGL C. 44.
(k)
(l) Landfilling of sludge and septage as defined in 310 CMR 32.05.
Storage of sludge and septage, unless in compliance with 310
CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31.
(m)
(n) Storage of animal manure unless covered or contained.
Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in MGL C. 128,
Section 64, and soil conditioners, unless within a structure
designed to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated runoff or leachate.
(o)
The use of septic system cleaners which contain toxic or
hazardous chemicals.
(p)
Storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage, including
loading areas, is within a structure designed to prevent the
generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.
(q)
Storage of liquid petroleum except for normal household use,
outdoor maintenance, heating of a structure, waste oil
retention facilities, emergency generators or treatment works
for contaminated groundwater or surface water, provided that
such storage is indoors or above ground with adequate spill
containment as determined by the Fire Department and the
Water Department.
(r)
Industrial and commercial uses which discharge process
wastewater on site.
(s)
§ 175-24 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24
171:179
Change of use. A change in activity on premises developed prior to
the adoption of this bylaw, if resulting in exceeding any limitations
established in a special permit or thresholds of Subsection D(1),
shall constitute a change of use. Such change of use may be
allowed upon application to and approval of a special permit by the
Board of Appeals, subject to conditions as may be required by the
Board.
(2)
Uses permitted only by special permit. The following uses are
permitted only by special permit by the Board of Appeals:
Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 2,500
square feet of any lot, whichever is greater. Artificial recharge
must be provided that does not degrade groundwater quality.
(a)
Activities involving the handling of toxic or hazardous
materials in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use.
(b)
The construction of dams or other water control devices or
water bodies or courses created for recreational or agricultural
uses or drainage improvements.
(c)
The application of pesticides or fertilizers for non-domestic or
non-agricultural uses.
(d)
(3)
Design and operation guidelines. Within the Watershed Protection
District, the following design and operation guidelines shall be
observed in all new construction except for single-family dwellings:
Safeguards. Provisions shall be made to protect against hazardous
materials discharge or loss through corrosion, accidental damage,
spillage or vandalism. Measures such as spill control in the vicinity
of chemical or fuel delivery points, secure storage areas for
hazardous materials and indoor storage provisions for corrodible
or dissolvable materials shall be provided.
(1)
Location. Where the premises are partially outside of the
Watershed Protection District, such potential pollution sources as
on-site waste disposal systems shall, to the degree feasible, be
located outside the district.
(2)
Disposal. Provisions shall be made to assure that any waste
disposed on the site shall contain no hazardous materials in
quantities substantially greater than associated with normal
household use.
(3)
Drainage. Provision shall be made for on-site recharge of all
stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces unless, following
consultation with, and written approval from, the Conservation
Commission, the Building Inspector determines that either
recharge is not feasible because of site conditions or is undesirable
(4)
E.
§ 175-24 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24
171:180
because of uncontrollable risk to water quality from such recharge.
Recharge shall be by surface infiltration through vegetative
surfaces unless otherwise approved by the Building Inspector
following consultation with the Conservation Commission. Dry
wells shall be used only where other methods are infeasible and
shall employ oil, grease and sediment traps. Drainage from loading
areas for hazardous materials shall be separately collected for safe
disposal. Floor drainage systems are specially prohibited.
Placement of fill. Prior to the placement of any construction fill in
a Watershed Protection District, a certification shall be presented
to the Building Inspector from a Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) licensed site professional (LSP) that the fill
material does not exceed the standards for oil and hazardous
material set forth in the most recently published Massachusetts
Contingency Plan (MCP). For the purposes of this bylaw only, the
term "construction fill" shall include the following materials:
ordinary and special borrow, gravel, processed gravel for sub-base,
sand borrow, sand borrow for subdrains, loam, peat, processed
planting material and topsoil.
(5)
Installation of new public sewers.
New public sewers within the Watershed Protection District shall
be designed and constructed in a manner such that groundwater
levels, flows and/or recharge will not be significantly lowered,
diverted or otherwise altered by such construction.
(1)
Review by the Sewer Department and Water Department. Within
the Watershed Protection District, all plans and specifications for
new public or private sewers must meet Sewer Department
standards and shall also be submitted to the Water Department for
review and approval.
(2)
Proximity to municipal wells. Where possible, no sewer line shall
be placed within 600 feet of a municipal well or within the zone of
influence of a municipal well, whichever is the greater distance. In
addition, no private septic system shall be located closer than the
distance required pursuant to 310 CMR 15.00, as amended.
(3)
Cleaning and inspection. A schedule of regular periodic cleaning
and inspection of all sewers within the Watershed Protection
District shall be maintained and reports filed with the Sewer
Department until such time as the street has been accepted by the
Town.
(4)
Alternatives. Design and construction proposals differing from
Sewer Department standards may be approved by special permit
by the Board of Appeals after consultation with the Water
Department, the Conservation Commission and the Board of
Health, if the Board of Appeals determines, based on reports of
subsurface investigations, that the alternative design affords
(5)
F.
§ 175-24 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24
171:181
groundwater protection as great as or greater than the
requirements of this section.
Special permits.
Authority and procedure. For purposes of this section, the special
permit granting authority shall be the Board of Appeals. Upon
receipt of the special permit application, the Board of Appeals
shall transmit one copy each to the Planning Board, Conservation
Commission, Board of Health and Building Inspector for their
written recommendations. Failure to respond within 35 days of
transmittal shall indicate approval by said agencies.
(1)
Submittals. In applying for a special permit under this section, the
information listed below shall be submitted:
A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, herbicides,
fertilizers, fuels or other hazardous or potentially hazardous
materials to be used or stored on the premises in containers
each holding more than 55 gallons' liquid volume or 25 pounds'
dry weight, accompanied by a detailed description of:
The measures proposed to protect all storage containers
or facilities from vandalism, corrosion and leakage.
[1]
[2] The methods of containment.
[3] Spill prevention and control measures.
[4] Emergency cleanup procedures.
[5] On-site personnel training program.
Evidence of compliance with the regulations of the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, 310
CMR 30, including obtaining an Environmental Protection
Agency identification number from the Department of
Environmental Protection, and compliance with Chapter
99, Hazardous Materials.
[6]
(a)
A description of potentially hazardous wastes to be generated,
including storage and disposal methods as in Subsection
G(2)(a) above.
(b)
For aboveground storage of hazardous materials or wastes,
evidence of qualified professional supervision of design and
installation of such storage facilities or containers and the
information required by Subsection G(2)(a).
(c)
For disposal on site of domestic wastewater with an estimated
sewage flow greater than 2,500 gallons per day and less than
10,000 gallons per day, evidence of qualified professional
(d)
(2)
G.
§ 175-24 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24
171:182
supervision of design and installation, including an assessment
of nitrate or coliform bacteria impact on groundwater quality.
Results of water quality testing for groundwater located
beneath the site.
(e)
(f) Proposed location(s) for groundwater monitoring well(s),
Special permit criteria.
Special permits under this subsection shall be granted only if
the Board of Appeals determines that:
Groundwater quality resulting from on-site waste disposal,
other operations on site and natural recharge will not fall
below federal or state standards for drinking water or
that, if existing groundwater quality is already below those
standards, on-site disposal or operations will result in no
further deterioration.
[1]
Proposed control and response measures adequately and
reliably mitigate risk to groundwater quality resulting
from accident or system failure.
[2]
The proposed use is designed to avoid substantial
disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage, vegetation,
and other water-related natural characteristics of the site
to be developed.
[3]
(a)
In its decision, the Board of Appeals shall explain any
departures from the recommendations of other Town agencies
in its decision. The Board of Appeals shall retain qualified
experts, upon notice to and at the reasonable expense of the
applicant, if necessary in order to evaluate the application.
If necessary, the Board of Appeals may attach reasonable
conditions to its approval as necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(b)
(3)
Conditions. Special permits shall be granted only subject to such
conditions as necessary to assure adequate protection of the public
health and safety and the safeguarding of water quality and shall
include the following, among others:
Potential pollution sources shall have monitoring wells, with
periodic sampling to be provided to the Board of Health
annually, or as directed by the Board of Health, at the owner's
expense.
(a)
Pollutant source reduction, including limitations on use of
parking area deicing materials and periodic cleaning or
renovation of pollution control devices such as catch basin
sumps.
(b)
(4)
§ 175-24 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.1
171:183
§ 175-24.1. Special requirements for registered marijuana
dispensaries. [Added 6-9-2014 ATM by Art. 25]
Purposes.
To provide for the establishment of registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD), as defined by Massachusetts Department of
Public Health (DPH) regulations, 105 CMR 725.000, in appropriate
places and under strict conditions and in accordance with the
Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana Act, MGL c. 94C, App. 1-I,
as approved by the voters on the November 2012 state ballot (the
Act).
(1)
To minimize the adverse impacts of RMD on adjacent properties,
residential neighborhoods, schools and other places where children
congregate, local historic districts, and other land uses potentially
incompatible with said dispensaries.
(2)
To regulate the siting, design, placement, security, safety,
monitoring, modification, and removal of RMD.
(3)
A.
Applicability.
The commercial cultivation, unless it meets the requirements for
an agricultural exemption under MGL c. 40A, § 3, production,
processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade,
distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use is
prohibited unless a special permit for the RMD is issued under this
section.
(1)
No RMD shall be established except in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(2)
Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to supersede federal and
state laws governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs.
(3)
If any provision of this section or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other
than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby,
and to this end the provisions of this section are severable.
(4)
B.
Definitions.
MARIJUANA — The same substance defined as "marijuana" under MGL
c. 94C.
MARIJUANA FOR MEDICAL USE — Marijuana that is designated and
restricted for use by, and for the benefit of, qualifying patients in the
treatment of debilitating medical conditions as set forth in the Act and
DPH regulations.
C.
§ 175-24.1 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24.1
171:184
MIPS - MARIJUANA INFUSED PRODUCT — As defined in the DPH
regulations.
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A "medical marijuana
treatment center" to mean a not-for-profit entity, as defined by DPH
regulations, 105 CMR 725.00, only, registered under this law, that
acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of
related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments),
transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers
marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or
educational materials to qualifying patients or their personal
caregivers. These dispensaries shall be wholly located inside a
structure or building.
Eligible locations for registered marijuana dispensaries.
RMDs, other than agricultural operations meeting exemption
standards under MGL c. 40A, § 3, may be allowed in the HC, 1, and
TB Zoning Districts by special permit from the Abington Planning
Board provided the RMD meets the requirements of this section.
(1)
D.
General requirements and conditions for all registered marijuana
dispensaries.
All non-exempt RMDs shall be contained wholly within a building
or structure.
(1)
No RMD shall have a gross floor area of less than 2,500 square feet
or in excess of 20,000 square feet.
(2)
A RMD shall not be located in buildings that contain any medical
doctor's offices or the offices of any other professional practitioner
authorized to prescribe the use of marijuana for medical use.
(3)
The hours of operation of RMDs shall be set by the special permit
granting authority, but in no event shall a RMD be open for retail
business between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(4)
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing
marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the
premises of a RMD.
(5)
No RMD shall be located inside a building containing residential
units, including transient housing such as motels and dormitories,
or inside a movable or mobile structure such as a van, truck or
mobile home.
(6)
RMDs shall provide the Abington Police Department, Building
Commissioner and the special permit granting authority with the
names, phone numbers and email addresses of all management
staff and key holders to whom one can provide notice if there are
operating problems associated with the RMD.
(7)
E.
§ 175-24.1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.1
171:185
All RMDs shall be located 500 feet away from the nearest boundary
line of any residential zoning district or from the nearest property
line of any residential use and 1,000 feet away from places where
children congregate, including but not limited to: schools, day
cares, dance schools, private home housing day care, Town parks,
any areas that children commonly congregate in a structured,
scheduled manner or any principal or accessory private
recreational facility use.
(8)
No RMD shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest property
line of any public or municipal building.
(9)
No RMD shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest property
line of any church or other religious facility.
(10)
No RMD shall be located within 500 feet from the nearest property
line of any family day care center, nursing home or hospital.
(11)
(12)No RMD shall be located within 1,000 feet from another RMD.
Special permit requirements.
A RMD shall only be allowed by special permit from the Abington
Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 9, subject to the
following additional requirements, conditions and limitations.
(1)
A special permit for a RMD shall be limited to one or more of
the following uses that shall be prescribed by the special permit
granting authority:
Cultivation of marijuana for medical use (horticulture) except
that sites protected under MGL c. 40A, § 3, shall not require a
special permit;
(a)
Processing and packaging of marijuana for medical use,
including marijuana that is in the form of smoking materials,
food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, and other products;
(b)
Retail sale or distribution of marijuana for medical use to
qualifying patients;
(c)
(2)
In addition to the application requirements set forth in Subsections
E and F of this Bylaw, a special permit application for a RMD shall
include the following:
(a) The name and address of each owner of the RMD;
Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the
applicant by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of
its agencies for the RMD;
(b)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the site of the RMD for
the RMD, such as a deed, or lease;
(c)
(3)
F.
§ 175-24.1 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24.1
171:186
If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under oath
disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners, members,
managers, directors, officers, or other similarly situated individuals
and entities and their addresses. If any of the above are entities
rather than persons, the applicant must disclose the identity of the
owners of such entities until the disclosure contains the names of
individuals.
A certified list of all parties in interest entitled to notice of the
hearing for the special permit application, taken from the most
recent tax list of the town and certified by the Town Assessor;
(a)
Proposed security measures for the RMD, including lighting,
fencing, gates and alarms, and the like, to ensure the safety of
persons and to protect the premises from theft.
(b)
(4)
Mandatory findings. The special permit authority shall not issue a
special permit for a registered marijuana dispensary unless it finds
that:
The RMD is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic
impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in
MGL c. 40A, § 11;
(1)
The RMD demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting
requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state
laws and regulations; and
(2)
The Applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements
of Subsection G(3)(a) and (b) herein;
Annual reporting. Each RMD permitted under this Bylaw shall,
as a condition of its special permit, file an annual report to
and appear before the special permit granting authority and
the Town Clerk no later than January 31, providing a copy of
all current applicable state licenses for the dispensary and/
or its owners and demonstrate continued compliance with the
conditions of the special permit.
(a)
A special permit granted under this section shall have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership of the
premises as a RMD. A special permit may be transferred only
with the approval of the special permit granting authority
in the form of an amendment to the special permit with all
information required in this section.
(b)
(3)
G.
Abandonment or discontinuance of use.
A special permit shall lapse if not exercised within one year of
issuance.
(1)
H.
§ 175-24.1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.1
171:187
A RMD shall be required to remove all material, plants equipment
and other paraphernalia:
(a) Prior to surrendering its state issued licenses or permits; or
Within six months of ceasing operations, whichever comes
first.
(b)
(2)
The Board shall require the applicant to post a bond or other
form of security acceptable to the special permit granting authority
prior to obtaining a building permit. The purpose of the bond
or other security is to cover costs for the removal of the RMD
in the event the Town must remove the dispensary. The value of
the bond shall be based upon the ability to completely remove
all the items and properly clean the RMD at prevailing wages.
The value of the bond or other security shall be developed based
upon the applicant providing the Planning Board with three written
bids to meet the noted requirements. The bond shall be reviewed
yearly when the RMD appears before the special permit granting
authority to ensure that adequate funds are still being held. The
RMD is responsible for providing updated bids that meet the noted
requirements.
(3)
Signs, marketing and advertising requirements: Signage, marketing
and advertising shall be compliant with the Town of Abington Zoning
Bylaw, and DPH regulations found in 105 CMR 725.105(L) 1-8 and the
following:
A RMD may develop a logo to be used in labeling, signage, and
other materials. Use of medical symbols, images of marijuana,
related paraphernalia, and colloquial references to cannabis and
marijuana are prohibited from use in signs.
(1)
RMD external signage shall not be illuminated except for a period
of 30 minutes before sundown until closing and shall comply with
local requirements regarding signage. Neon signage is prohibited
at all times.
(2)
A RMD shall not display on the exterior of the facility
advertisements for marijuana or any brand name, and may only
identify the building by the registered name.
(3)
A RMD shall not utilize graphics related to marijuana or
paraphernalia on the exterior of the RMD or the building in which
the RMD is located.
(4)
A RMD shall not advertise the price of marijuana, MIPs, and
associated products, except that it shall provide a catalogue or
a printed list of the prices and strains of marijuana available at
the RMD to registered qualifying patients and personal caregivers
upon request.
(5)
I.
§ 175-24.1 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24.1
171:188
§ 175-24.2. (Reserved)14
§ 175-24.3. Marijuana Overlay District. [Added 5-21-2018 ATM by
Art. 17]
Marijuana, MIPs, and associated products shall not be displayed or
clearly visible from the exterior of a RMD.
(6)
A RMD shall not produce any items for sale or promotional gifts,
such as T-shirts or novelty items, bearing a symbol of or references
to marijuana or MIPs, including the logo of the RMD.
(7)
All advertising materials and materials produced by a RMD and
disseminated pursuant to 105 CMR 725.105 (K) or (L) are
prohibited from including:
Any statement, design, representation, picture, or illustration
that encourages or represents the use of marijuana, MIPs or
associated products for any purpose other than to treat a
debilitating medical condition or related symptoms;
(a)
Any statement, design, representation, picture, or illustration
that encourages or represents the recreational use of
marijuana, MIPS or associated products.
(b)
Any statement, design, representation, picture, or illustration
related to the safety or efficacy of marijuana unless supported
by substantial evidence or substantial clinical data with
reasonable scientific rigor, which shall be made available upon
the request of a registrant or the Department; or
(c)
Any statement, design, representation, picture, or illustration
portraying anyone under 18 years of age.
(d)
(8)
Inside the RMD, all marijuana shall be kept in a limited access area
inaccessible to any persons other than dispensary agents, with the
exception of displays allowable under 105 CMR 725.105 (L)(10).
Inside the RMD, all marijuana shall be stored in a locked access
controlled space in a limited access area during nonbusiness hours.
(9)
An RMD may display in secure locked cases no more than one
sample of each product offered for sale. These display cases may
be transparent.
(10)
Signage for the registered marijuana dispensary shall include the
following language: "Registration card issued by the MA Department of
Public Health required." The required text shall be a minimum of two
inches in height.
J.
14.Editor’s Note: Former § 175-24.2, Temporary moratorium on the sale and distribution of
recreational marijuana, added 5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 19, as amended, was removed from
the Code as the Attorney General of Massachusetts determined that with the adoption of §
175-24.3, Marijuana Overlay District, the moratorium set forth expired.
§ 175-24.1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.3
171:189
Purpose. To provide for the placement of adult use marijuana
establishments, in accordance with An Act To Ensure Safe Access to
Marijuana, c. 55 of the Acts of 2017, and all regulations which have
or may be issued by the Cannabis Control Commission, including, but
not limited to 935 CMR 500.00, in locations suitable for such uses,
which will minimize adverse impacts of marijuana establishments on
adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools, playgrounds,
public beaches and other locations where minors congregate by
regulating the siting, design, placement, security, and removal of
marijuana establishments.
A.
Establishment.
The Recreational Marijuana Overlay District ("MOD") is established as
an overlay district. The boundaries of the MOD are shown on the Zoning
Map on file with the Town Clerk15 and shall comprise the property
within the Technology Business and Industrial zoning districts as set
forth on the Marijuana Overlay District ("MOD") map.
Within the MOD, all requirements of the underlying zoning district
remain in effect, except where these regulations provide an alternative
to such requirements. Land within the MOD may be used for (1) any
state-licensed adult use marijuana establishment, including cultivation,
processing, independent testing laboratory, product manufacturing,
and retail sales, in which case the requirements set forth in this section
shall apply; or (2) a use allowed in the underlying district, in which case
the requirements of the underlying district shall apply. If the provisions
of the MOD are silent on a zoning regulation, the requirements of the
underlying district shall apply. If the provisions of the MOD conflict with
the requirements of the underlying district, the requirements of the
MOD shall control.
B.
Definitions. Where not expressly defined in the Zoning Bylaws, terms
used in the MOD Bylaw shall be interpreted as defined in MGL c. 94I
and MGL c. 94G and any regulations issued by the Cannabis Control
Commission implementing these laws, and otherwise by their plain
language.
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY — Means a laboratory that is
licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission pursuant to 935 CMR
500.000 with respect to the regulation of the adult use of marijuana
that is: (i) accredited to the most current International Organization
for Standardization 17025 by a third-party accrediting body that is
a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Accrediting
Cooperation mutual recognition arrangement or that is otherwise
approved by the Commission; (ii) independent financially from any
medical marijuana treatment center or any licensee or marijuana
C.
15.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included in the online version of the Code of the Town of
Abington (eCode 360®).
§ 175-24.3 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24.3
171:190
establishment for which it conducts a test; and (iii) qualified to test
marijuana in compliance with 935 CMR 500.160 and MGL c. 94C, § 34.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — Means an entity licensed by the Cannabis
Control Commission pursuant to 935 CMR 500.000 with respect to
the regulation of the adult use of marijuana to cultivate, process and
package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments
and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to
consumers.
MARIJUANA DELIVERY-ONLY RETAILER — Means an entity licensed
by the Cannabis Control Commission pursuant to 935 CMR 500.000
with respect to the regulation of the adult use of marijuana that does
not provide a retail location accessible to the public, but is authorized
to deliver directly from a marijuana cultivator facility, craft marijuana
cultivator cooperative facility, marijuana product manufacturer facility,
or micro-business.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — Means a marijuana cultivator,
independent testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturer,
marijuana retailer or any other type of marijuana-related business
licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission pursuant to 935 CMR
500.000 with respect to the regulation of the adult use of marijuana.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — Means an entity licensed
by the Cannabis Control Commission pursuant to 935 CMR 500.000
with respect to the regulation of the adult use of marijuana to obtain,
manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana products,
to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana
establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to
other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA RETAILER — Means an entity licensed by the Cannabis
Control Commission pursuant to 935 CMR 500.000 with respect to
the regulation of the adult use of marijuana to purchase and deliver
marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and
to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products
to marijuana establishments and to consumers.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER — Means an entity
licensed by the Department of Public Health or the Cannabis Control
Commission under a medical use marijuana license that acquires,
cultivates, possesses, processes, transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing
marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials for the benefit
of registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers in the
treatment of debilitating medical conditions or the symptoms thereof.
Number of licenses. The number of recreational marijuana retailers
permissible to be located in the MOD shall be limited to 20% of the
number of licenses issued within the Town for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages not to be drunk on the premises where sold pursuant to MGL
c. 138, § 15. In the event that 20% of said issued licenses shall not be
D.
§ 175-24.3 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.3
171:191
a whole number, the limit shall be rounded up to the nearest whole
number.
Location and dimensional controls.
Marijuana establishments may be permitted in the MOD pursuant
to a special permit and site plan approval by the Planning Board.
(1)
Marijuana establishments may not be located within 500 feet of the
following pre-existing uses:
Public or private school providing education in kindergarten or
grades 1 through 12;
(a)
(b) State-licensed child-care facility;
Library, playground, public park, public beach, youth center;
or similar facility in which minors commonly congregate.
The distance under this section shall be measured in a
straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the
protected uses identified above to the nearest point of the
property line of the proposed marijuana establishment.
(c)
(2)
Cultivation and processing facilities located within the MOD shall
be separated from adjacent uses by a fifty-foot buffer strip, unless
the applicant can demonstrate, and the Planning Board finds, that
adequate buffering can be provided in a narrower buffer strip.
(3)
Marijuana establishments shall be located only in a permanent
building and not within any mobile facility. All sales shall be
conducted either within the building or by home delivery pursuant
to applicable state regulations.
(4)
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, marijuana establishments shall
conform to the dimensional requirements applicable to
nonresidential uses within the underlying zoning district.
(5)
All marijuana establishments shall conform to the signage
requirements of Article IX of the Zoning Bylaw. The Planning Board
may impose additional restrictions on signage, as appropriate, to
mitigate any aesthetic impacts.
(6)
E.
Special permit.
Procedure. The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit
Granting Authority (SPGA) and shall conduct site plan review for
an applicant for a marijuana establishment.
Application. In addition to the material submission
requirements of §§ 175-82 and 175-77, the applicant shall also
include:
(a)
(1)
F.
§ 175-24.3 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24.3
171:192
A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed
marijuana establishment that identifies the square footage
available and describes the functional areas of the facility;
[1]
Detailed site plans that include the following information:
Compliance with the requirements for parking and
loading spaces, for lot size, frontage, yards and
heights and coverage of buildings, signage and all
other provisions of this Bylaw;
[a]
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian
movement on the site to provide secure and safe
access and egress for clients and employees arriving
to and from the site;
[b]
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian
movement off the site, if vehicular and pedestrian
traffic off-site can reasonably be expected to be
substantially affected by on-site changes;
[c]
Adequacy as to the arrangement and the number of
parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed
use of the premises, including designated parking for
home delivery vehicle(s), as applicable;
[d]
Site design such that it provides convenient, secure
and safe access and egress for clients and employees
arriving to and from the site;
[e]
Design and appearance of proposed buildings,
structures, freestanding signs, screening and
landscaping; and
[f]
Adequacy of water supply, surface and subsurface
drainage and light.
[g]
[2]
A description of the security measures, including
employee security policies;
[3]
[4] A copy of the emergency procedures;
[5] A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures; and
A copy of all licensing materials issued by the Cannabis
Control Commission, and any materials submitted to the
Cannabis Control Commission by the applicant for
purposes of seeking licensing to confirm that all
information provided to the Planning Board is consistent
with information provided to the Cannabis Control
Commission.
[6]
§ 175-24.3 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.3
171:193
The SPGA shall refer copies of the application to all Town
departments and boards/commissions, including but not
limited to the Building Department, Fire Department, Police
Department, Board of Health, and the Conservation
Commission. These boards/departments shall review the
application and shall submit their written recommendations.
Failure to make recommendations within 35 days of referral of
the application shall be deemed lack of opposition.
(b)
After notice and public hearing in accordance with §§ 175-82
and 175-77 of the Bylaw and consideration of application
materials, consultant reviews, public comments, and the
recommendations of other Town boards and departments, the
SPGA may act upon such a permit and request for site plan
approval.
(c)
Special permit conditions for marijuana establishments. The SPGA
shall impose conditions reasonably appropriate to improve site
design, traffic flow, public safety, protect water quality, air quality,
and significant environmental resources, preserve the character
of the surrounding area and otherwise serve the purpose of this
section. In addition to any specific conditions applicable to the
applicant's proposed marijuana establishment, the SPGA may
include the following conditions in any special permit granted
under this Bylaw:
The use shall not generate outside odors from the cultivation
or processing of marijuana and marijuana products.
(a)
A security plan shall be required for all marijuana
establishments, which shall be subject to approval by the Fire
and Police Chiefs and submitted to the Planning Board.
(b)
The permit holder shall provide to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and Chief of the Police Department, the name,
telephone number and electronic mail address of a contact
person in the event that such person needs to be contacted
after regular business hours to address an urgent issue. Such
contact information shall be kept updated by the permit holder.
(c)
Marijuana establishments may not operate, and the special
permit will not be valid, until the applicant has obtained all
licenses and permits issued by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the facility.
(d)
Marijuana establishments may not operate, and the special
permit will not be valid, until the applicant has entered into
a host community agreement with the Town relative to any
facility permitted under this Bylaw.
(e)
A special permit granted under this section shall have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership and use of
(f)
(2)
§ 175-24.3 ABINGTON CODE § 175-24.3
171:194
the premises as a marijuana establishment. A special permit
may be transferred only with the approval of the Planning
Board in the form of an amendment to the special permit.
The special permit shall lapse upon the expiration or
termination of the applicant's license by the Cannabis Control
Commission.
(g)
The permit holder shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and SPGA in writing within 48 hours of the cessation of
operation of the marijuana establishment's expiration or
termination of the permit holder's license with the Cannabis
Control Commission.
(h)
Prohibition against on-site consumption. No marijuana shall be smoked,
eaten, or otherwise consumed or ingested in public or on the premises
of a marijuana establishment absent a positive vote by ballot question
presented to the voters of the city or town at a biennial state election
pursuant to MGL c. 94G, § 3(b).
G.
Prohibition against nuisances. No use shall be allowed in the MOD
which creates a nuisance to abutters or to the surrounding area, or
which creates any hazard, including but not limited to, fire, explosion,
fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust, vapors, offensive sound or
vibration, flashes, glare, objectionable effluent or electrical
interference, which may impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment
of any property, structure or dwelling in the area.
H.
Severability. The provisions of this Bylaw are severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Bylaw or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this Bylaw.
I.
§ 175-24.3 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-24.3
171:195

ARTICLE VI
Dimensional and Density Regulations
§ 175-25. Conformity to regulations required.
No principal building or structure shall be built nor shall any existing
building or structure be enlarged except in conformance with the
regulations of the Abington Zoning Bylaw as to lot coverage, lot area per
dwelling unit, lot width, front, side and rear yards, and maximum height of
structures, in the districts as set forth below except as may otherwise be
provided elsewhere in the Abington Zoning Bylaw.
§ 175-25.1. Nonconforming area, frontage or setback. [Added
6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 21]
No lot shall be reduced in area or frontage if it already has or will be
caused to have less area or frontage than required by this section, except
by a taking by eminent domain or a conveyance for a public purpose. Such
lots reduced in the area or frontage by a taking by eminent domain or a
conveyance for a public purpose shall be entitled to the protections afforded
by statute and in this Bylaw to lawfully preexisting nonconforming lots.
Further, if an existing structure is rendered nonconforming as to setback
(or more nonconforming as to setback) by a taking by eminent domain
or conveyance for a public way or accessway or by the approval of a
subdivision way for a third party, said structure shall be entitled to the
protections afforded by statute and in this Bylaw to lawfully preexisting
nonconforming structures. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the protections
afforded by this section shall not apply to vacant lots existing prior to the
effective date of this section which are less than 5,000 square feet and/or
with less than 50 feet of frontage.
§ 175-26. Accessory uses and accessory buildings.
A detached accessory building may be erected in the side or rear yard
area no closer than 10 feet from any side or rear lot line, no closer than
10 feet from the principal building, and in conformance with the front
yard requirement of the district in which it is located. An accessory
building attached to its principal building (excluding pools) shall be
considered an integral part thereof and as such shall be subject to
the front, side and rear year requirements applicable to the principal
building. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 23]
A.
A detached accessory building shall cover no more than 25% of the rear
yard area required for the principal building.
B.
One garage for private motor vehicles, attached or detached, of not
more than 875 square feet of floor area shall be considered as an
accessory building and may provide for as many as three cars in
residence districts and for dwellings in a commercial district subject
to the provisions of Subsections A and B (above) in this section, unless
a special permit is otherwise granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C.
§ 175-25 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-26
171:197
§ 175-27. Visibility at intersections.
On a corner lot, to provide unobstructed visibility at intersections, no sign,
fence, wall, tree, hedge or other vegetation, and no building or other
structure between three feet and eight feet above the established street
grades shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the area formed by
the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at
points which are 20 feet from the point of intersection of ways or tangents
of curves of rounded curbs, measured along said street lines.
§ 175-28. Minimum floor area requirements for apartment units.
The primary apartment unit within an apartment building shall have a
minimum interior floor area of 600 square feet; each additional apartment
unit shall have a minimum interior floor area of 400 square feet.
§ 175-29. Dimensional and Density Regulations Table. [Amended
4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
(Editor's Note: The Dimensional and Density Regulations Table is included
at the end of this chapter.)
This subsection creates a limit of one garage or vehicular storage
structure to be built upon a lot except by a special permit granted by
the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-6-2005 ATM by Art. 18;
4-2-2007 ATM by Art. 11; 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 18]
One storage pod/container for the storage of personal property,
provided such storage container does not exceed 1,700 cubic feet and is
not maintained for more than 90 days in any twelve-consecutive-month
period; or one storage pod/container, not to exceed 1,700 cubic feet,
for the storage of personal property and construction materials and
equipment, provided such storage pod/container is required as a result
of ongoing construction at the property which is being undertaken in
accordance with a lawfully issued building permit; provided, however,
such storage pod/container shall be removed from the property upon
the earlier of (i) cessation of construction work on the property for
any ten-consecutive-day period, (ii) final sign-off of the building permit;
and (iii) 150 days following issuance of the building permit, or by
extension from the Building Inspector, permitting such construction.
[Added 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 18]
D.
§ 175-26 ABINGTON CODE § 175-29
171:198
ARTICLE VII
Special Provisions
§ 175-30. Permitted uses.
The uses outlined in this article may be permitted as designated in § 175-21,
Table of Use Regulations provided they meet the requirements detailed in
this article, in addition to any other applicable requirements of this bylaw.
§ 175-31. Requirements.
§ 175-32. Multi-unit dwellings, apartments or condominium
complexes of 12 residential units or more. [Amended 4-6-2005 ATM
by Art. 20; 4-2-2007 ATM by Art. 11]
Applicants seeking a special permit for an apartment, condominium,
attached dwelling (§ 175-32), planned commercial development
(§ 175-33), or the excavation of sand and gravel (§ 175-34) shall submit
a site plan in accordance with the requirements of § 175-77 with the
Planning Board. Furthermore, no removal of sand and gravel shall be
made without the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
A.
Where a proposed development will also fall under subdivision control,
the applicant shall submit the information required for a definitive
plan according to the latest Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land16 and the Procedures of the Abington Planning
Board, Abington, Massachusetts in addition to the site plan required in
this article. Planning Board endorsement of the information submitted
under this bylaw, however, shall not constitute approval under the
Subdivision Control Law.17 The site plan shall bear the stamp of a
registered professional engineer (civil) and a registered land surveyor
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B.
Administration:
The applicant shall file a request for a special permit under this
section of the Zoning Bylaw for multi-unit dwellings, apartments,
or condominium complexes of 12 residential units or more with
the Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant,
only after a public hearing with due notice, a special permit for
the construction of such multi-unit dwellings, apartments or
condominium complexes, only in the districts indicated in § 175-21
Table of Use Regulations A(4).
(1)
The applicant shall also simultaneously file a copy of the
application with the Planning Board and the Town Clerk.
(2)
A.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
17.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 175-30 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-32
171:199
The applicant shall file with the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Appeals a site plan of the proposed development in
accordance with § 175-77, Site plan review.
(3)
Within 45 days of filing said application, the Planning Board shall
evaluate the application and site plan with regard to the conditions
and standards set forth in the bylaw and shall submit an advisory
report to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall not
render a decision without considering the report of the Planning
Board unless 45 days expire without receipt of such report.
(4)
Minimum lot size. The lot shall have not less than 200 feet of frontage
nor contain less than 40,000 square feet of land area.
B.
Density. For each dwelling unit constructed on a lot/premises, the
following minimum land space requirements are required:
(1) First eight units: 10,000 sq. ft./unit.
(2) Each additional unit: 5,000 sq. ft./unit.
C.
Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for
developments of 12 housing units or more in any zoning district within
the Town of Abington require that any building shall be at least:
(1) Sixty feet from any lot line that abuts the proposed development;
(2) Sixty feet from any street line;
(3) Fifteen feet from any parking area;
Fifty feet apart in the event a variance for more than one building
on a lot is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals; and
(4)
(5) Not more than 35 feet in height.
D.
Building design/placement. Any building shall insure maximum
compatibility with surrounding land uses and structures. Where the site
adjoins single family residential areas, the Board of Appeals may adjust
building heights and side yard requirements in certain portions of the
development. There shall be no more than 12 units per building. The
SPGA may take into consideration the proposed exterior architectural
appearance to ensure it generally conforms with the Historical New
England character of the Town. [Amended 5-22-2017 ATM by Art.
18]
E.
F. Screening and buffers. See § 175-66.
G. Parking. See Article VIII.
H. Drainage. See § 175-63.
Accessory apartments in residence districts. Notwithstanding the
foregoing Subsections A through H, it is the intent of this section to
I.
§ 175-32 ABINGTON CODE § 175-32
171:200
allow accessory apartments, including kitchens, within single-family
properties in Residence Districts for the purpose of meeting the special
housing needs of grandparents, parents, brothers and sisters, children
and their respective spouses of families of owner-occupants and their
spouses of properties in the Town of Abington. To achieve this goal and
to promote the other objectives of this bylaw one accessory apartment
per single-family residence may be allowed by special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the specific standards set
forth below for such accessory apartment uses.
Owner occupancy required. The owner(s) of the single-family lot
upon which the accessory apartment is located shall occupy at least
one of the dwelling units on the premises. Only a family member
of the homeowner or the homeowner’s spouse shall occupy the
other dwelling unit. For the purposes of this section, a family
member shall be defined as mother, father, sister, brother, son,
daughter, uncle, aunt, grandmother, grandfather, grandchild and/
or their spouse. The special permit shall be issued to the owner of
the dwelling units on the property.
(1)
Not more than two persons shall occupy the accessory apartment.
At least three off-street parking spaces must be provided or created
on the property.
(2)
Apartment size. The maximum floor size for an accessory
apartment shall not exceed the lesser of 900 square feet or 50% of
the floor area of the principal dwelling, as determined at the time
of the special permit request.
(3)
Code compliance. The accessory apartment must comply with
current safety, health and construction requirements before
occupancy and at every change in ownership.
(4)
Preservation of single-family characteristics. The accessory
apartment shall not change the single-family characteristic of the
dwelling, except for the provision of an additional access or egress.
The space designated as the accessory apartment shall have at
least one access to the main unit if attached.
(5)
Existing detached dwellings may continue to be used for the same
purposes subject to special conditions imposed by the Board of
Appeals.
(6)
There shall be no more than one accessory apartment for a total of
two dwelling units permitted per lot.
(7)
The special permit for the accessory apartment shall become null
and void upon the sale of the property to a non-family member or
upon the vacancy of the residence by the owner-occupant and his/
her family members.
(8)
§ 175-32 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-32
171:201
§ 175-33. Planned commercial development.
Upon receiving a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals,
the owner(s) shall record a Declaration of Covenants at the
Plymouth County Registry of Deeds, which Declaration of
Covenants shall be made available from the Building Inspector. A
time stamped copy of this recorded Declaration and a recorded
copy of current deed to the property shall be provided to the
Building Inspector prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy.
The recorded Declaration shall include the following requirements
which shall appear as conditions of all special permits issued under
this section:
That the owner(s) shall occupy one of the units on said
premises and that only family members shall occupy the other
unit defined by this section of the Bylaw.
(a)
At the beginning of each calendar year, the owner(s) shall file
a notarized statement with the Building Inspector listing the
name and family relationship of all occupants residing on the
premises.
(b)
(9)
Any accessory apartment existing as of this Bylaw amendment (02/
07/05) shall be required to comply with the annual statement filing
date provisions of this Bylaw subsequent to this date.
(10)
Administration.
The applicant shall file a request for a special permit with the
Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may grant, only after
a public hearing with due notice, a special permit for the
development.
(1)
The applicant shall also simultaneously file a copy of the
application with the Planning Board and the Town Clerk.
(2)
The applicant shall also file with the Planning Board and the Board
of Appeals a site plan of the proposed development in accordance
with § 175-77.
(3)
Within 45 days of filing said application, the Planning Board shall
evaluate the application and site plan with regard to the conditions
and standards set forth in this bylaw and shall submit an advisory
report to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall not
render a decision without considering the report of the Planning
Board unless said 45 days has expired without receipt of such
report.
(4)
A.
Purpose. To establish compact business areas for planned commercial
development of land subject to maximum building coverage more than
the maximum permitted in the Table of Density and Dimensional
B.
§ 175-32 ABINGTON CODE § 175-33
171:202
§ 175-34. Excavation of sand and gravel or other earth materials.
Regulations, § 175-29, and less than the parking requirements
contained in the Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations, § 175-52.
Tract area. The tract shall be in single or consolidated ownership at the
time of application and shall be at least five acres in size.
C.
Parking. The development shall be served by common parking areas
and by preferably a common exit and entrance. Reduction in parking
space requirements shall generally not exceed more than 15% of those
required under normal application of requirements for the particular
uses proposed in § 175-52, unless a special permit is granted by the
Board of Appeals in accordance with § 175-53.
Applicants should note in particular the visual relief requirements in
§ 175-50.
D.
E. Drainage. See § 175-63.
Building design. Uses may be contained in one continuous building or
groupings of buildings where such groupings are consistent with the
safety of the users of the development and the intent of this section. The
SPGA may take into consideration the proposed exterior architectural
appearance to ensure it generally conforms with the Historical New
England character of the Town. [Amended 5-22-2017 ATM by Art.
18]
F.
Floor area. The total gross floor area of all buildings shall not exceed
50% of the total parcel area.
G.
Dimensional requirements. Buildings shall be at least:
(1) Fifty feet from any lot line;
(2) Fifty feet from any street line;
(3) Twenty-five feet from any parking area; and
(4) Not more than 35 feet in height.
H.
Except when incidental to and reasonably required in connection with
the construction of an approved use of structure or an approved
subdivision on the same site as prescribed previously, no removal for
sale, trade, or other considerations, or for other use on a separate site,
of sand and gravel of other earth materials in excess of 30 cubic yards
shall be allowed except by special permit from the Board of Selectmen.
Applicants shall follow the procedure set forth below.
A.
B. Administration:
§ 175-33 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-34
171:203
The applicant shall file a request for a special permit with the
Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen may grant, only after
a public hearing with due notice, a special permit.
(1)
The applicant shall also simultaneously file a copy of the
application with the Planning Board and the Town Clerk.
(2)
The applicant shall also file with the Planning Board and the Board
of Selectmen a site plan in accordance with § 175-77 of the
proposed operation.
(3)
Within 45 days of filing said application, the Planning Board shall
evaluate the application and site plan with regard to the conditions
and standards set forth in the bylaw and shall submit an advisory
report to the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall not
render a decision without considering the report of the Planning
Board unless 45 days expire without receipt of such report.
(4)
The following conditions shall govern:
Removal and processing operations shall not be conducted closer
than 100 feet to a public street or an abutting lot line.
(1)
All equipment for sorting, washing, crushing, grading, drying,
processing and treating, or other operation machinery, shall not
be used closer than 100 feet from any public street or from any
adjoining lot line.
(2)
(3) Off-street parking as required in Article VIII shall be provided.
Any access to excavated areas or areas in the process of excavation
will be adequately posted with KEEP-OUT-DANGER signs.
(4)
Any work face or bank that slopes more than 30 degrees downward
adjacent to a public street will be adequately fenced at the top.
(5)
Adequate provision is to be made for drainage during and after the
completion of operations.
(6)
(7) Lateral support shall be maintained for all adjacent properties.
The use of explosives shall be done in accordance with the
regulations for storage or handling of an explosive as published by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(8)
All operations shall be conducted in such a manner so as to comply
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regulating
water pollution and air pollution.
(9)
(10)The work hours of operation shall be designated in the permit.
A plan for re-grading of all or parts of the slopes resulting from
such excavation or fill shall be approved.
(11)
C.
§ 175-34 ABINGTON CODE § 175-34
171:204
§ 175-35. Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection District.
A plan for replacement of at least six inches of topsoil over all
excavated, filled, or otherwise disturbed surfaces and seeding with
a perennial cover crop, reseeded as necessary to assure uniform
growth and soil surface stabilization shall be approved.
(12)
(13)A plan for lighting shall be provided.
Proper provision for vehicular traffic, service roads, control of
entrances and exits to adjacent roads shall be made.
(14)
Provision for a fence enclosing the excavation or quarry where any
excavation or quarry will extend under original ground level or will
have a depth of 10 feet or more or create a slope of more than one
foot in two feet. Such fence shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
or more from the edge of the excavation or quarry, and shall be six
feet in height.
(15)
(16)A plan for the ongoing cleanup of the site and adjacent streets.
Purpose. The Flood Plain and Wetland Protection District and the
regulations herein have been established with the following purposes
intended: to protect and preserve the marshes, bogs, ponds, water
courses and their adjoining wetlands; to reduce the hazards of floods
upon the public health, safety and general welfare; to protect flood
plain occupants from a flood that is or may be caused by their own land
use and that is or may be undertaken without full realization of the
dangers therein; to protect the public from the burden of extraordinary
financial expenditure for flood control and relief; to protect the capacity
of flood plain and wetland areas to absorb, transmit and store runoff; to
assure retention of sufficient floodway area to convey flows which can
reasonably be expected to occur. For purposes of this Bylaw, in cases
of a building permit involving a one-family or a two-family dwelling, the
word "Board" as found throughout this Bylaw § 175-35 shall be deemed
to refer to the Board of Appeals. For building permits involving all other
structures or uses (multi-family, commercial, definitive subdivision,
mixed use, etc.), the word "Board" as found in this Bylaw § 175-35 shall
be deemed to refer to the Planning Board. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM
by Art. 21]
A.
Delineation of the Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection District. The
District shall be as established under the Zoning Map and Zoning Bylaw
pursuant to Zoning Bylaw § 175-6 and § 175-8E. [Amended 5-21-2012
STM by Art. 1]
B.
Determination of applicability. Whenever an application is made for
a building permit on land which the Building Inspector believes may
be situated partially or completely in the Flood Plain and Wetlands
Protection District, he shall require that the applicant provide as part
of his permit application a plan of the lot on which such building is
C.
§ 175-34 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-35
171:205
intended to be built. The plan shall show elevations above mean sea
level at two-foot contour levels, indicating the bench marks used and
certified by a registered land surveyor or registered engineer. The
Inspector shall transmit one copy of this plan to the Conservation
Commission who shall review said plan and provide written
interpretation within 14 days of receipt of said plan to the applicant,
Building Inspector, and Board. If the Building Inspector determines that
the proposed construction or alteration of the land is not in the Flood
Plain and Wetlands Protection District, he shall so advise the applicant
who may then apply for a building permit as set forth in § 175-76.
If the Building Inspector determines that the proposed construction
or alteration of the land is in the Flood Plain and Wetlands District,
the Inspector shall notify the applicant who may then seek a special
permit for the proposed use as set forth below in § 175-35F. [Amended
4-6-2005 ATM by Art. 18; 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 21]
D. Permitted uses. See § 175-21.
E. Prohibited uses. See § 175-21.
Flood plain requirements. The following requirements shall be satisfied
in the Flood Plain and Wetlands Protection District: [Added 5-21-2012
STM by Art. 1]
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available Federal, State,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(1)
In Zone AE, along watercourses within the Town of Abington that
have a regulatory floodway designated on the Plymouth County
FIRM, encroachments shall be and are prohibited in the regulatory
floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2)
Within Zones A and AE, no new construction, substantial
improvement to an existing structure, filing, or other land
development shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated by the
applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
(3)
All subdivision proposals shall be designed to assure that:
(a) Each such proposal shall minimize potential flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate potential flood damage;
and
(b)
(4)
F.
§ 175-35 ABINGTON CODE § 175-35
171:206
Adequate stormwater drainage controls shall be provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(c)
Base flood elevation data shall be required and provided for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots
or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.
(5)
In a riverine situation, the applicant and Conservation Agent shall
notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
(a) Planning Board for each Adjacent Community.
NFIP State Coordinator.
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
(b)
NFIP Program Specialist.
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
(c)
(6)
Special permits. [Amended 4-6-2005 ATM by Art. 18; 4-3-2006
ATM by Art. 13; 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1; 5-21-2018 ATM by Art.
21]
For any land that is not within the Flood Plain and Wetlands District
as shown under the FIRM and the FIS, but that is shown on the
Town's 1976 Flood Plain Zoning Map to be within the flood plain,
a landowner may apply to the Board for a special permit exception
from inclusion in the Flood Plain and Wetland District and shall be
eligible for such a special permit if the Board finds that the subject
land is not in fact subject to seasonal or periodic flooding and if
the proposed development is consistent with the purpose of this
Bylaw, the Board may grant, after a public hearing with due notice,
a special permit for the use of such land and for the construction
and erection of a building or structure for any purpose permitted
in the underlying district subject to reasonable conditions and
safeguards.
(1)
The application for a special permit exception shall include a site
plan which shall include the items set forth in § 175-77B(5) and
other engineering and hydrological data that the Board finds
necessary.
(2)
The application for a special permit exception shall include an
environmental impact statement prepared by an environmentally
qualified registered professional engineer. This statement shall
describe the impact of the proposed use with respect to drainage,
(3)
G.
§ 175-35 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-35
171:207
sewage, groundwater, surface water pollution, and other
parameters as specified by the Board.
The Board may waive some of the requirements of the site plan
and/or the environmental impact statement where it determines
that the probable impact upon the physical environment of the
proposed use is to be minimal and that the technical data or a
plan and/or environmental impact statement is not necessary to
its consideration of the application. Because of the substantial
scope, substance and impact of such projects, a waiver will not
generally be granted where the proposed use involves a subdivision
of land pursuant to Sections 81K — 81GG of Chapter 41 of the
General Laws, a proposed site plan for construction of multiple
family housing, or a proposed business, industrial, transportation
or institutional use.
(4)
The applicant shall provide the Board with an original and 10
copies of the application and any plan and/or environmental impact
statement required by the Board. The Board will forward one copy
of each to the Building Inspector, Conservation Commission, Board
of Health, Highway Department, and other Town board or
department deemed appropriate by the Board. These agencies may
file written advisory reports with the Board within 30 days. The
Board shall not grant approval of an application for an exception
until these advisory reports have been received or until expiration
of the said thirty-day period.
(5)
Requirements for all projects in the Flood Plain and Wetlands
Protection District. [Added 5-21-2012 STM by Art. 1]
For every development, including all structural and non-structural
activities, in the Flood Plain and Wetlands District, whether
permitted by right or by special permit exception, every project
shall comply with the all application state laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to the following:
(a) MGL c. 131, § 40;
780 CMR (Massachusetts State Building Code), in its entirety,
including the portions that address floodplain and coastal high
hazard areas;
(b)
310 CMR 10.00 [Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP)];
(c)
(d) 310 CMR 13.00 (Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP); and
310 CMR 15 (Title 5, Minimum Requirements for the
Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP).
(e)
(1)
Furthermore, any variances from the above provisions and
requirements of the above referenced state regulations may be
(2)
H.
§ 175-35 ABINGTON CODE § 175-35
171:208
§ 175-36. Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations.18 [Added 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 26]
granted only in full accordance with the required variance
procedures of the state regulations.
Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw shall be to promote the creation of new
large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations in the
appropriate locations by providing standards for the placement,
design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and
removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize
impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources, and to provide
adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of
such installations.
(1)
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the
construction, operation, and/or repair of large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations.
(2)
A.
Applicability. This section shall apply to large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the
effective date of this section. This section also pertains to physical
modifications that materially alter the type configuration or size of
these installations or related equipment.
B.
Definitions.
AS-OF-RIGHT SITING — That development may proceed without the
need for a special permit, variance, amendment, waiver, or other
discretionary approval. As-of-right development may be subject to site
plan review to determine conformance with local zoning ordinances or
bylaws. Projects cannot be prohibited, but can be reasonably regulated
by the Inspector of Buildings, Building Commissioner or local inspector,
or if there is none in a town, the Board of Selectmen, or person or board
designated by local ordinance or bylaw.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Inspector of Buildings, Building
Commissioner, or local inspector, or person or board designated by
local ordinance or bylaw charged with the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance.
BUILDING PERMIT — A construction permit issued by an authorized
building inspector that evidences that the project is consistent with
the state and federal building codes as well as local zoning bylaws,
including those governing large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations.
C.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 175-36, Phased development, added 11-26-2001 STM by Art. 8, as
amended, was repealed 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 19.
§ 175-35 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-36
171:209
DESIGNATED LOCATION — The locations designated by the Town, in
accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 5, where large ground-mounted scale
solar photovoltaic installations may be sited are limited to the locations
indicated in § 175-21 of the Zoning Bylaws. Said locations are shown on
a Zoning Map pursuant to MGL c. § 4. This map is hereby made a part
of this Zoning Bylaw and is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally
mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum
nameplate capacity of 250kW DC, or requires an area larger than one
acre for installation.
ON-SITE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar
photovoltaic installation that is constructed at a location where other
uses of the underlying property occur.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of
electric power production of the photovoltaic system in direct current
(DC).
SITE PLAN REVIEW AUTHORITY — For purposes of this Bylaw, Site
Plan Review Authority refers to the body of local government
designated as such by the municipality.
SMALL-SCALE ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT —
Roof-mounted solar equipment that shall be located so as not to
increase the total height of the structure more than one foot above the
applicable zoning regulations related to height in the district in which it
is located or such other height as determined by the Building Inspector
to be essential for proper operation, but in no case more than four feet
above the applicable zoning regulations related to height in the district
in which it is located.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAY — An arrangement of solar
photovoltaic panels.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special permit review by the Site Plan Review
Authority to determine conformance with local zoning ordinances or
bylaws shall be obtained before the development proceeds.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The person or board charged
with enforcing the zoning ordinances or bylaws.
General requirements for all large-scale ground-mounted solar power
generation installations. The following requirements are common to all
solar photovoltaic installations to be sited in designated locations.
D.
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and
federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety,
construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All
E.
§ 175-36 ABINGTON CODE § 175-36
171:210
buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation
shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
Building permits and building inspections. No large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed
or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building
permit and only in accordance with the requirements of the Table of
Uses and this section. Smaller scale ground-mounted or small-scale
roof-mounted solar equipment installations which are an accessory
structure to an existing residential or nonresidential use do not need
to comply with this Section, but shall conform to the Table of Uses
and shall require a building permit and shall comply with the other
provisions of this Zoning Bylaw as applicable.
F.
Fees. The application for a building permit for a large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation must be accompanied by the fee
required for a building permit.
G.
Site plan review. Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations with 250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity shall
undergo site plan review by the Site Plan Review Authority prior to
construction, installation or modification as provided in this section.
General. All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed
by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts,
except in accordance with any exemption provided for under MGL
c. 112, § 81R.
(1)
Required documents. Pursuant to the site plan review process, the
project proponent shall provide a site plan in conformance with
§ 175-77, Site plan review, of the Town of Abington Zoning Bylaws
in addition to the following:
Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the
project site;
(a)
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading,
vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening
vegetation or structures;
(b)
Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation
signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout
of the system and any potential shading from nearby
structures. The proponent may not take any actions to modify
any existing structures or vegetation on adjacent properties
which may shade the installation without express written
consent of the property owner.
(c)
One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
(d)
(2)
H.
§ 175-36 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-36
171:211
electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical
Code compliant disconnects and over current devices;
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
(e)
Name, address, and contact information for proposed system
installer;
(f)
Name, address, phone number and signature of the project
proponent, as well as all coproponents or property owners, if
any;
(g)
The name, contact information signature of any agents
representing the project proponent; and
(h)
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of
the project site;
(i)
(j) An operation and maintenance plan;
District designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the
project site (submission of a copy of a zoning map with the
parcel(s) identified is suitable for this purpose);
(k)
(l) Proof of liability insurance; and
(m) Description of financial surety that satisfies § 175-36Q.
The Site Plan Review Authority may waive documentary
requirements as it deems appropriate.
(3)
Site control. The project proponent shall submit documentation of
actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to
allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic
installation.
I.
Operation and maintenance plan. The project proponent shall submit
a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures
for maintaining safe access to the installation, stormwater controls,
as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the
installation.
J.
Utility notification. No proposed large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be submitted for review until evidence
has been given to the Site Plan Review Authority that the utility
company that operated the electrical grid where the installation is
to be located has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation
owner or operator's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator, and that the electrical grid can safely transmit the proposed
power output of the installation. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement.
K.
§ 175-36 ABINGTON CODE § 175-36
171:212
Dimension and density requirements.
Setbacks.
For large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be at least 50
feet; provided, however, that where the lot abuts a residential
district or residential use or is in a residential district, the
setbacks shall not be less than 100 feet. Every abutting
property shall be visually screened from the installation
through either existing vegetation or new plantings of not
less than six feet in height at the time of planting throughout
the required setback dimension, or alternately shall provide a
minimum setback of 2,000 feet. The provided screening shall
obscure from view at least 75% of the project from adjacent
properties, including upper levels of existing structures, within
five years of the issuance of the permit. Security fences,
roadways, and equipment shall not be placed within the
required setback, except for that which is required to access
the site from an adjacent roadway, or to transmit the generated
power to the grid.
(a)
The provided setbacks shall be suitable to limit the noise
generated by the installation to no more than 40 decibels at
the property lines.
(b)
(1)
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be subject
to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of
structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building
coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including
but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities,
transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible
with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be
shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid
adverse visual impacts.
(2)
L.
Design standards.
Lighting. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be
consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts
of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited
to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall
be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible,
lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed
downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light
pollution.
(1)
Signage. Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall comply with the Town's sign requirements. A
sign consistent with the Town's sign requirements shall be required
to identify the owner and provide a twenty-four-hour emergency
(2)
M.
§ 175-36 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-36
171:213
contact phone number. Solar photovoltaic installations shall not
be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable
identification of the operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Site
Plan Review Authority, shall be made to place all utility connections
from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on
appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and
any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers
for utility interconnections may be aboveground if required by the
utility provider.
(3)
Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials stored, used, or
generated on site shall not exceed the amount for a very small
quantity generator of hazardous waste as defined by the DEP
pursuant to Mass DEP regulations 310 CMR 30.000 and shall
meet all requirements of the DEP including storage of hazardous
materials in a building with an impervious floor that is not adjacent
to any floor drains to prevent discharge to the outdoor
environment. If hazardous materials are utilized within the solar
equipment, including the photovoltaic panels, then impervious
containment areas capable of controlling any release to the
environment and to prevent potential contamination of
groundwater are required.
(4)
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services. The large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of
the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Fire
Chief. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with
local emergency services in developing an emergency response
plan. All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation
shall be clearly marked, and training required to allow emergency
response personnel to safely shut down the installation in event of
an emergency provided at no cost to the Town as requested by the
Town. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for
public inquires throughout the life of the installation. All changes in
the identity or contact information for the responsible person shall
immediately be brought to the attention of the Town.
(1)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by
applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws.
(2)
Control of vegetation. Herbicides may not be used to control
vegetation at the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation. Mowing or the use of pervious pavers or geotextile
materials underneath the solar array is a possible alternative.
(3)
N.
§ 175-36 ABINGTON CODE § 175-36
171:214
Monitoring and maintenance.
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. The large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall
maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to, snow removal, painting, structural repairs,
and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained
to a level acceptable to the Fire Chief and emergency medical
services. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost
of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any access
road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
(1)
Modifications. All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic
installation made after issuance of the required building permit
shall require approval by the Site Plan Review Authority.
(2)
Annual reporting. The owner or operator of the installation shall
submit an annual report demonstrating and certifying compliance
with the operation and maintenance plan and the requirements
of this Bylaw and their approved site plan including control of
vegetation, noise standards, and adequacy of road access. The
annual report shall also provide information on the maintenance
completed during the course of the year and the amount of
electricity generated by the facility. The report shall be submitted
to the Board of Selectmen, Town Manager, Planning Board, Fire
Chief, Building Inspector, Board of Health and Conservation
Commission (if wetlands permit was issued) no later than 45 days
after the end of the calendar year.
(3)
O.
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Removal requirements. Any large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful
life or has been abandoned through intent or discontinuance for
two years or more shall be removed. The owner or operator shall
physically remove the installation no more than 120 days after the
date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify
the Site Plan Review Authority by certified mail of the proposed
date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Site Plan Review Authority may allow
the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated
(c)
(1)
P.
§ 175-36 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-36
171:215
§ 175-37. Transit Oriented Development District. [Added 4-7-2003
ATM by Art. 25]
below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
Abandonment. Each site plan approval and special permit shall
require that, absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning
or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the solar
photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned when it
fails to operate for more six months without the written consent of
the Site Plan Review Authority or special permit granting authority.
Each site plan approval and special permit shall provide that, if
the owner or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in
accordance with the requirements of this section and the site plan
approval or special permit, within 120 days of abandonment or
the proposed date of decommissioning, then the Town shall be
provided with all necessary permission to enter the property and
physically remove the installation. As appropriate, cost of removal
shall be charged to the property owner in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 58.
(2)
Financial surety. Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of surety, either through
escrow account, or other means mutually agreed upon with the Town,
under MGL c. 44, § 53A, or by other lawful means, to cover the cost
of removal in the event the Town must remove the installation and
remediate the landscape, in an amount and form determined to be
reasonable by the Site Plan Review Authority, but in no event to be
less than 75% nor to exceed more than 125% of the cost of removal
and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as
determined by the project proponent. Such surety shall not be required
for municipally or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall
submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal,
prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a
mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
Q.
Severability. If any provision herein is determined to be unlawful, it
shall be severed from this section and all remaining provisions shall
remain in force and effect.
R.
Purpose and intent. The purpose of this district is to encourage the
development of land uses that compliment both the existing commuter
rail line and the established residential areas surrounding the station,
by providing for a mix of small uses on well buffered sites to support
commuters and adjacent residential development, encourage the
continued use of rail service, increase the number of pedestrian and
bicycle trips, while decreasing the number of automobile trips within
the Town.
A.
§ 175-36 ABINGTON CODE § 175-37
171:216
Design considerations.
Buildings shall be set close to the street to provide for convenient
pedestrian access while also enhancing the visual aspects of the
Town. Building facades and streetscapes shall be pedestrian
oriented.
(1)
Parking shall not be located in the front yard area. The number
of parking spaces shall be provided according to the requirements
contained herein that supersede Article VIII of this Zoning Bylaw.
(2)
Common access driveways and shared parking facilities shall be
provided where possible to minimize traffic problems.
(3)
Pedestrian connections to adjacent properties and the rail station
shall be provided where possible and appropriate as determined by
the Planning Board as part of the site plan review process. When
multiple uses exist on a lot covered walkways should be provided to
protect pedestrians from the weather shall be incorporated into the
building design. Benches for public seating should also be provided
on the site plan.
(4)
Landscaping for and architectural elements of the proposed
development shall be of high quality and reflect the historical New
England character of the Town's Central Business District. Use of
street trees and ground level lighting are required.
(5)
Existing residential development adjacent to uses under this bylaw
shall be adequately buffered in accordance with Article X,
§§ 175-66 and 175-67 of this Bylaw.
(6)
B.
Uses.
Mixed-use developments in accordance with the uses identified in
§ 175-21, Table of Use Regulations. Residential uses are allowed
within the district only as part of a larger, mixed-use development
and not as a stand-alone principal use except by special permit
from the Planning Board. Residential components may not exceed
50% of the total gross floor area of a proposed development except
where the residential use is located on the upper floors of
commercial buildings in accordance with § 175-37C(2). [Amended
4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 13]
(1)
Residential units may be located on the upper floors of commercial
buildings as part of a mixed-use development without limitation as
to percentage of total gross floor area provided that:
(a) The building is connected to the public sewer system.
(b) One parking space is provided for each dwelling unit.
(c) No units are located on street level or within a basement.
(2)
C.
§ 175-37 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-37
171:217
§ 175-38. Central Business District. [Added 4-7-2003 ATM by Art.
25]
(d) There shall be no more than two bedrooms per unit.
Units must have a means of egress separate from the
commercial use. No access to the units shall be through a
commercial establishment.
(e)
All units must meet the minimum requirements of the building
and health codes for habitable space.
(f)
Residential uses within the TOD District are not subject to the
requirements of Article VII, § 175-32A, B, C, D or E of this Zoning
Bylaw. The following supersede those standards.
For each dwelling unit constructed on a lot/premises, except
those in accordance with § 175-37C(2), a minimum of 2,500 SF
of lot area shall be provided for each unit in addition to the
minimum lot area required by Article VI, § 175-29.
(a)
All buildings shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any parking
area.
(b)
All buildings shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any lot line
that abuts the proposed development including the street line.
(c)
(3)
No single retail use shall exceed 2,000 SF of total floor area
[exclusive of any residential use in accordance with Subsection
C(2) above], except by the issuance of a special permit from the
Planning Board.
(4)
The maximum floor area for retail and/or commercial use on a
single lot shall not exceed 20,000 SF unless approved as part of
a master site development plan approved by special permit by the
Planning Board.
(5)
Parking.
The number of parking spaces required by Article VIII, § 175-52
of this bylaw for commercial uses may be reduced by up to 50%
without the requirement for a special permit provided that the
requirements of § 175-53B and C are met.
(1)
One ten-unit bicycle rack shall be provided for each proposed use.
The racks shall be sheltered from the weather and conveniently
located.
(2)
D.
Purpose and intent. The purpose of this district is to allow for the
reasonable use, enhancement, expansion and redevelopment of those
areas of the Town that are currently developed in a building intensive
manner where parking is available on-street as well as in common lots.
A.
§ 175-37 ABINGTON CODE § 175-38
171:218
Design considerations.
New buildings shall be set close to the sidewalk or street line to
encourage pedestrian access. Pedestrian connections to adjacent
properties shall also be provided where appropriate.
(1)
Parking shall not be allowed in the front or side yard areas and
shall only be located in the rear yard area. The number of parking
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
this section that supersede the requirements of Article VIII of this
Zoning Bylaw.
(2)
Common access driveways and shared parking shall be provided
where possible.
(3)
Landscaping, signage, and architectural elements of proposed uses
shall be of high quality consistent with existing buildings that
reflect the Historical New England character of the Town.
Maximum consideration shall be given to building design and
landscape elements that improve the streetscape of the district.
[Amended 5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 18]
(4)
B.
Uses. The following are specifically allowed within the district in
addition to those uses that are identified in § 175-21, Table of Use
Regulations.
(1) Mixed-use developments.
Residential uses as part of a mixed-use development where the
residential units or components may not exceed 50% of the total
gross floor area of a proposed multi-use project except as provided
in Subsection C(3). Strictly residential units on lots as stand-alone
residential uses in the Central Business District may be permitted
by Special Permit from the Planning Board where such uses are
appropriate and where the minimum lot size is at least 5,000
square feet and meets the provisions of Subsection C(3)(a), C(3)(b),
C.(3)(d) and C(3)(f). [Amended 4-2-2007 by ATM by Art. 11]
(2)
Residential units may be located on the upper floors of commercial
buildings as part of a mixed-use development without limitation as
to percentage of total gross floor area provided that:
(a) The building is connected to the public sewer system.
(b) One parking space is provided for each dwelling unit.
(c) No units are located on street level or within a basement.
(d) There shall be no more than two bedrooms per unit.
Units must have a means of egress separate from the
commercial use. No access to the units shall be through a
commercial establishment.
(e)
(3)
C.
§ 175-38 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-38
171:219
All units must meet the minimum requirements of the building
and health codes for habitable space.
(f)
Parking requirements. The following specific parking requirements for
the Central Business District modify and supersede the relevant
requirements contained in Article VIII of this Bylaw.
Parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
One space for each employee on-site at any one time. The
space(s) may be located on-site or be situated off-site provided
a formal agreement exists for use of the space and such
evidence is presented to the Building Inspector as part of the
permitting process.
(a)
One space for each residential unit located within the building,
provided that no on-street parking space may be used to satisfy
this requirement.
(b)
One parking space for each 500 SF of net floor area devoted to
commercial or retail use. One existing on-street parking space
may be used to meet the requirements of this section for each
2,000 SF of net floor area.
(c)
Off-premises parking in accordance with Article VIII,
§§ 175-44, 175-45 and 175-46 may be located up to 1,000 feet
from the proposed use.
(d)
Loading spaces may coincide with areas used to satisfy the
parking requirements of this section, provided delivery times
are scheduled to allow non-conflicting multiple use of the
space.
(e)
One ten-unit bicycle rack shall be provided for each proposed
use in lieu of one required parking space. These racks may be
dispersed throughout the site or sites.
(f)
(1)
Where strict compliance with the standards for off-street parking
are not feasible in the district, the Planning Board may reduce the
parking requirements for business use by not more than 20% by
special permit. Any such request for reduction shall be supported
by the submission of credible evidence of adequate municipal
parking, on-street parking or infeasibility of compliance due to site
conditions, specific design considerations, or other such similar
factors.
(2)
D.
Historic building reuse and new construction of high architectural
quality within the Central Business District, projects which rehabilitate
and reuse existing buildings of historical or architectural significance,
or projects that propose new construction of high quality as to
architectural design, materials, site planning, lighting and landscaping,
E.
§ 175-38 ABINGTON CODE § 175-38
171:220
§ 175-39. Multiple Use Planned Development District. [Added
4-7-2003 ATM by Art. 25]
as determined by the Planning Board as part of § 175-77, Site Plan
Review, may:
Be exempt from Article VIII, § 175-41 of the parking requirements
of this Zoning Bylaw, provided that there is no decrease in the
number of parking spaces existing before redevelopment/reuse.
(1)
Calculate the number of required parking spaces based upon net
floor area.
(2)
Reduce the landscaped buffer strip required in Article VIII,
§ 175-50 to a minimum of five feet and the buffer required in Article
X, § 66A to a minimum of 10 feet provided suitable landscaping is
provided in accordance with this Bylaw.
(3)
Modify any other design requirement or setback of this Zoning
Bylaw by special permit from the Board of Appeals.
(4)
Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Multiple Use Planned
Development District is to establish areas and standards for the overall
planned development of land with mixed-uses. The District attempts to
accommodate low-impact activities in an overall low density but with
intensive use clusters, making use of natural features and vegetation,
screening and setbacks to have minimal impact on surrounding land
uses. The following regulations strive to allow a more flexible planned
development process than is possible through strict conventional
zoning regulations. For the purpose of this district and section the
Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority for
special permit uses identified in § 175-21, Table of Uses.
A.
Design considerations.
Parking is prohibited in the front yard area and shall only be
located in the side and/or rear yard. The number of parking spaces
shall be provided according to the following requirements that
supersede the requirements of Article VIII of this Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
Common access driveways and shared parking shall be provided
where possible.
(2)
Pedestrian connection to adjacent building and properties shall be
provided.
(3)
(4) Bicycle racks shall be provided as part of the parking plan.
Landscaping and architectural elements of the proposed use(s)
shall include features to minimize visual impacts on surrounding
lands.
(5)
B.
§ 175-38 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-39
171:221
Landscaping, signage, and architectural elements of proposed uses
shall be of high quality consistent with existing buildings that
reflect the Historical New England character of the Town.
Maximum consideration shall be given to building design and
landscape elements that improve the streetscape of the district.
[Added 5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 18]
(6)
Uses. Uses including mixed-uses consistent with the § 175-21 may be
permitted provided that:
Residential uses (not including transient accommodations) may
only allowed as part of a larger, mixed-use development and shall
not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the proposed
development.
(1)
Not more than 10% of the gross floor area may be devoted to
retail use and commercial services for supporting the overall
development unless by special permit of the Planning Board.
(2)
C.
Tract area and frontage. The tract shall be in single or consolidated
ownership at the time of application and shall be at least 10 acres in
size with a minimum of 200 feet of frontage. If proposed developments
are to be subdivided under the Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land each resulting lot shall comply with the
requirements of this section. All internal driveways providing access
to parking areas and buildings shall comply with the design and
construction standards of the Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land, as amended, whether or not the driveway network
constitutes a subdivision.19
D.
Parking. Developments shall be served by common parking areas with a
common exit and entrance. A reduction in parking space requirements
for common parking area shall not exceed more than 15% of those
required under normal application of requirements for the particular
uses proposed in Article VIII, § 175-52, unless a special permit is
granted by the Planning Board in accordance with § 175-53. Applicants
should note in particular the visual relief requirements in Article VII,
§ 175-50.
E.
F. Drainage. See Article X, § 175-63.
Building design. Uses may be contained in one continuous building or
groupings of buildings where such groupings are consistent with the
safety of the users of the development and the intent of this section.
G.
Floor area and lot coverage. The total gross floor area of all buildings
shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area except by special permit from
the Planning Board. Gross floor area may be increased to 60% of the
total lot area provided that a parking garage is provided for the use(s).
Lot coverage shall not exceed 30% of the total lot area.
H.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
§ 175-39 ABINGTON CODE § 175-39
171:222
§ 175-40. Transitional Commercial District. [Added 4-7-2003 ATM
by Art. 25]
Dimensional requirements. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 28]
Buildings shall be located a minimum of:
(a) Fifty feet from any existing lot line or existing street line;
(b) Ten feet from any proposed parking area; and
Be not more than forty 40 feet in height except by special
permit from the Planning Board.
(c)
(1)
Parking areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
existing lot line or existing street line.
(2)
I.
Purpose and intent. The purpose of this district is to preserve the
residential character of existing development along thoroughfares that
are undergoing pressure for commercial development by providing
for the transition to more intensive but compatible uses. The district
emphasizes the preservation and use of existing structures; provides
for buffers and uses compatible with nearby residential areas; provides
for property owners in such transitional areas an additional opportunity
to use their land without severely diminishing the amenity and
residential value of other properties within and in close proximity to
the district; to minimize congestion on major streets, and protects the
character and appearance of areas that are the key elements of the
Town by allowing limited, low-traffic generating non-residential uses
which can operate in adapted/expanded existing houses or compatible
new small-scale office/retail buildings.
A.
Design considerations.
Parking shall not be allowed in the front yard area. Parking may
be permitted in the side yard if properly screened. The number
of parking spaces shall be provided according to the requirements
contained in Article VIII of this Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
Common access driveways and shared parking facilities should be
provided and are encouraged where possible to minimize traffic
problems.
(2)
Pedestrian access to adjacent properties shall be provided where
possible and appropriate as determined by the Planning Board as
part of the site plan review process.
(3)
Existing residential development adjacent to uses under this bylaw
shall be adequately buffered in accordance with Article X,
§§ 175-66 and 175-67 of this Bylaw.
(4)
Lighting and signs shall be carefully located and sized to minimize
impacts on adjacent residential uses.
(5)
B.
§ 175-39 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-40
171:223
Landscaping, signage, and architectural elements of proposed uses
shall be of high quality consistent with existing buildings that
reflect the Historical New England character of the Town.
Maximum consideration shall be given to building design and
landscape elements that improve the streetscape of the district.
[Added 5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 18]
(6)
Uses.
One and/or two family dwellings on existing lots, or new lots that
comply with the dimensional requirements of § 175-29. [Amended
4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 13]
(1)
One accessory residential dwelling unit as part of the principal use
of the site.
(2)
Uses in the TC Zone as identified in § 175-21 (table) with a total
gross square footage of less than 5,000 SF per lot.
(3)
Uses in the TC Zone as identified in § 175-21 (table) with a total
gross square footage of between 5,000 SF and 10,000 SF per lot by
special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4)
C.
§ 175-40 ABINGTON CODE § 175-40
171:224
ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
§ 175-41. Compliance required.
In any district if any structure is constructed, enlarged or extended and
any use of land established, or any existing use is changed, after the
effective date of this bylaw, parking and loading spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations and the Table
of Off-Street Loading Regulations. An existing structure which is enlarged
or an existing use which is extended after the effective date of this bylaw
shall be required to provide parking and loading spaces in accordance with
the following tables for the entire structure or use, unless the increase in
the number of dwelling units or building floor area amounts to less than
25% of that existing at the time of the adoption of this bylaw, whether
such increases occur at one time or in successive stages. In this case only
the additional parking spaces required by the increase in area shall be
provided.
§ 175-42. Existing spaces.
Parking or loading spaces being maintained in any district in connection
with any existing use on the effective date of this bylaw shall not be
decreased so long as said use remains, unless a number of parking or
loading spaces is constructed elsewhere such that the total number of
spaces conforms to the requirements of the tables in this article. This
regulation shall not require the maintenance of more parking or loading
spaces than is required according to the tables.
§ 175-43. Space area requirement.
Off-street parking spaces. All off-street parking area designs shall
conform to the following dimensional requirements:
Space dimensions:
(a) Ten feet by 18 feet for perpendicular or angled spaces.
(b) Ten feet by 22 feet for parallel spaces.
(1)
Aisle widths:
Twenty-five feet for two-way traffic and/or with perpendicular
parking.
(a)
(b) Twelve feet for one-way traffic with angled or parallel parking.
(2)
A.
Loading area.
Each space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and not less than
45 feet in length. Height clearance shall not be less than 14 feet.
In all cases, required loading space shall not encroach on customer
parking, employee parking, maneuvering space.
(1)
B.
§ 175-41 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-43
171:225
§ 175-44. Off-premises off-street parking.
§ 175-45. Joint use of required parking.
Joint use may be made of required parking spaces by intermittent use
establishments such as churches, assembly halls, or theaters whose peak
parking demand is only at night or on Sundays and by other uses whose
peak demand is only during the day. A formal agreement shall be made in
writing by the owners of the uses involved concerning the number of spaces
involved, substantiation of the fact that such joint use is not overlapping
or in conflict, and the duration of the agreement. Required spaces shall be
within 300 feet of churches and public assembly halls and 400 feet of other
uses.
§ 175-46. Cooperative establishment and operation of parking
areas.
Required spaces for any number of uses may be provided in a combined lot
or lots, provided that the number of spaces in the combined facility shall not
be less than the sum of those required of the individual uses. An allowance
may be made, upon formal determination by the Planning Board for night
use, or for separate and distinct working shifts, and further provided also
that such lot or lots shall be within 300 feet of the principal buildings
served.
§ 175-47. Entrance and exit points.
Loading spaces shall be designed to provide adequate off-street
maneuvering areas so that it will not be necessary for vehicles to
use a public right-of-way in maneuvering into a loading space and
so that egress from such areas will not require backing into public
streets.
(2)
Required parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the principal use
served, or if not reasonably possible, on other property in the same
district within 300 feet of the principal use.
A.
Such off-premises parking shall be in possession, by deed or lease, of
the owner of the use served. Such required parking shall thereafter
be associated with and maintained for the use established and shall
not be reduced or encroached upon. The owner of any property to
be used for any off-premises parking shall sign a recorded declaration
of restrictions with the Town of Abington binding the property to
prescribed use as parking until such time as said restriction shall be
released by an instrument of the owner and the Town of Abington.
B.
Suitable provision shall be made along all property lines and along the
borders of parking areas to prevent entrance upon any public right-ofway
except at approved points. No existing curb shall be cut, broken
out, or removed except in conformance with an approved site plan or
A.
§ 175-43 ABINGTON CODE § 175-47
171:226
as authorized by the Building Inspector under the terms of this bylaw.
[Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 29]
Driveways. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 29]
One- and two-family uses:
No driveway or parking area shall be closer than three feet
from a side lot line.
(a)
For lots with 20,000 square feet or less of lot area, no driveway
and parking area shall cover more than 40% of the required
front yard setback area or existing front yard area, whichever
is the smaller area.
(b)
For lots with more than 20,000 square feet of lot area, no
driveway and parking area shall cover more than 25% of the
required front yard setback area or existing front yard area,
whichever is the smaller area.
(c)
(1)
All other uses. Unless otherwise authorized pursuant to a waiver
voted by a majority of the Planning Board:
No more than one driveway shall be allowed on any street
frontage.
(a)
A pair of one-way drives separated by a median may be
considered one driveway.
(b)
Driveways shall be no closer than 75 feet to any intersection of
street lines, which shall be measured from the midpoint on the
radius of the street layout lines.
(c)
Multiple driveways on the same street frontage shall be not
less than 75 feet apart.
(d)
No driveway shall be closer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot
line.
(e)
(2)
B.
Driveway width shall fall within the following limits:
Min. Max.
1-5 family residential 10 20
Multi-family (above 5 dwellings
units)
20 30
Commercial and Industrial
One-way 12 20
Two-way 24 30
C.
§ 175-47 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-48
171:227
§ 175-48. Surfacing requirements. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by
Art. 29]
Off-street parking areas shall be paved with mix asphalt or other approved
hard surface, unless otherwise authorized pursuant to a waiver voted by a
majority of the Planning Board. One- and two-family dwellings not part of
a larger complex are not subject to these surfacing requirements provided
that areas shall be clearly defined.
§ 175-49. Lighting requirements.
All parking areas providing more than 10 spaces and providing access (e.g.,
walkways) to and from the principal building shall be suitably illuminated
as prescribed by the Building Inspector. Lighting shall be so placed or
hooded as to prevent direct light from becoming a nuisance to surrounding
property.
§ 175-50. Visual relief for lots. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art.
29]
§ 175-51. Parking and storage.
Parking lots that abut public ways shall be separated there from by at
least a ten-foot strip of landscaping (which shall contain at least five
trees per 200 linear feet that are at least three inches diameter at
four feet above the ground. Parking lots that abut residential districts
or existing residential uses shall also provide a minimum ten-foot
landscaped buffer strip on the affected side yards.
A.
Parking lots shall contain visual relief from vast expanses of unbroken
pavement and cars. In parking areas 10,000 square feet but less than
40,000 square feet in area, landscaping islands containing trees of
greater than six feet in height shall be provided at a rate of at least
six per 80 parking spaces. At least half of these shall be of a species
expected to mature to a height greater than 30 feet. Landscaping in
islands shall be protected from damage from parking cars and snow
removal operations.
B.
When the total amount of parking on a lot or building site exceeds
40,000 square feet, the parking shall be separated into smaller lots or
segments of not more than 20,000 square feet each with dividers at
least five feet wide and containing vegetation. In lots of this size cut
into a hillside or rolling topography with relief greater than 15 feet,
these segments shall be terraced with the slope and the divider strips
stabilized against erosion.
C.
No vehicles of any type in inoperable condition or without current
license plates shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential
district other than in carports or completely enclosed buildings;
provided, however, that one such vehicle may be kept behind the
building line of the principal structure in any side or rear yard not
A.
§ 175-48 ABINGTON CODE § 175-51
171:228
§ 175-52. Table of off-street parking regulations.
When the computation of parking spaces results in the requirement for a
fractional space, any fraction over 1/2 shall require one additional space.
Uses Number of Parking Spaces
A. Automobile repair garage One space for each two employees
in maximum employment on a
single shift, plus one space for
each 150 square feet of floor
space
B. Bank One parking space for each 175
square feet of gross floor area on
the lobby floor. Office area not on
the lobby floor shall be treated in
the same manner as business and
professional offices. Refer to D
below.
C. Bowling alley Five spaces for each alley.
D. Business, professional, and other
offices
One space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area
E. Church, or other place of worship,
college, or other institutions of
higher learning, business, trade,
or other schools, libraries,
accessory uses to such facilities,
schools, stadiums, and places of
public assembly or theater
1 space per each 3 seats of
occupancy
F. Dwellings (one-family detached) Three spaces per dwelling unit
abutting a public street or publicly used area. No large trucks, trailers,
or other major transportation equipment shall be parked in any yard
between the building line and a public street in any residential zone.
Excepting, however, an unregistered vehicle that is the property of an
Abington resident on active military service that is parked or stored on
his/her lot or the lot of an immediate relative in a residential district.
[Amended 4-3-2006 ATM by Art. 13]
Parking lots where large trucks, trailers, and other major
transportation or construction equipment are stored in the front yard
area and which are visible from the street shall be screened from the
street view by a solid fence at least six feet in height and/or a suitable
dense vegetated evergreen buffer, unless otherwise waived or approved
by the Planning Board for aesthetic, security or other business reasons.
Refer to Article VI, § 175-27. [Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 29]
B.
§ 175-51 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-52
171:229
Uses Number of Parking Spaces
G. Dwellings (single-family attached,
multi-family and accessory
apartments) [Amended 4-6-2005
ATM by Art. 31; 6-8-2015 ATM
by Art. 22]
Each one-bedroom unit, 1.3
spaces, each two-bedroom unit,
2.0 spaces, each three-bedroom
unit, 2.6 spaces, each fourbedroom
unit, 3.0 spaces, plus 0.5
additional space for each dwelling
unit
H. Food and beverage establishment One space for each three seats or
one space for each 50 square feet
of net floor area
I. General business, commercial or
personal services, service
establishment catering to the
retail trade, including stores,
variety stores, or drugstores
One space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area
J. Hospital One space for each bed
K. Hotel/motel One space for each unit, plus
additional spaces for any public
eating or assembly spaces as
required in H and E
L. Manufacturing uses and
processing plants excluding
warehouse area
One parking space for each two
employees during the shift of
maximum employment or one
space for each 600 square feet of
open or enclosed area devoted to
the compounding, manufacturing
or processing of any goods or
articles, whichever is less, plus
one space for each vehicle used in
conjunction with the business
M. Medical and dental clinics and
offices
One space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area
N. Mortuary One space for each three seats
within the chapel or one space for
each 20 square feet of floor space
not containing fixed seats within
the chapel plus one parking space
for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area within the building
outside the chapel
O. Rooming houses, lodging houses,
and clubs and fraternities having
sleeping rooms
Two spaces for each structure
plus one space for each guest
room or sleeping unit
P. Sanitariums, rest homes, nursing
homes
One space for each two beds
§ 175-52 ABINGTON CODE § 175-52
171:230
Uses Number of Parking Spaces
Q. Service stations Four spaces for each service bay
or similar facility
R. Warehouse and storage building One space for each 4,000 square
feet of gross floor area, plus one
space for each 400 square feet of
office area
§ 175-53. Reduction in parking requirements.
Less parking than required in this article may be permitted by the Planning
Board by special permit subject to the following:
§ 175-54. Location of loading spaces.
The loading spaces required by the Table of Off-Street Loading
Requirements shall in all cases be on the same lot as the use they are
intended to serve. In no case shall the required loading spaces be part of
the area used to satisfy the parking requirements of this bylaw.
§ 175-55. Table of Off-Street Loading Regulations.
Loading Spaces Required Per 1,000 Square Feet
of Floor Area
Uses 2-15 15-50 51-100 101-150 Over 150
Retail trade,
wholesale and
storage, industry,
communication
and utilities
1 2 3 4
Consumer
services, hotel and
dormitory,
institutional,
educational
1 1 2 3
1 space for
each
additional
150,000 SF
The applicant shall demonstrate that lower requirements are
appropriate as demonstrated by data from the latest edition of the
Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, or from
actual trip generation counts from similar uses.
A.
The area which would otherwise be devoted to parking spaces shall be
kept in open space use and shall not be built on.
B.
The Building Inspector shall require the unbuilt parking area to be
constructed at a later date if parking space is found to be inadequate to
accommodate customers, patron, patients and/or employees.
C.
§ 175-52 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-55
171:231

ARTICLE IX
Signs
[Amended 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 17; 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 27]
§ 175-56. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this Bylaw shall be to assure that all signs be
appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are appurtenant;
be protective of property values and the safety of the public; and not
unnecessarily detract from the historic qualities and characteristics of the
Town of Abington without unduly restricting the conduct of lawful
enterprise or expression.
§ 175-57. Permit requirements.
General. Except as required by law and as otherwise set forth below,
no sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without a permit issued
by the Building Department. Where multiple signs are to be attached
to a building, the exact location of the signs on the building shall be
subject to approval by the Building Department at the time the permit
is issued, which approval shall only be withheld due to safety concerns
or nonconformity with this Bylaw.
A.
Applications. The applicant must submit to the Building Department
a completed sign permit application, together with all supporting
materials specifying building and sign dimensions, colors, attachment
methods, position and location of the sign, including the height of
the bottom and the top of the sign, and any other such pertinent
information the Building Department may require to ensure compliance
with this Bylaw and any other applicable laws.
B.
Fees. Fees for sign permits shall be paid in accordance with the
schedule of fees established by the Board of Selectmen.
C.
Nullification; extension. A sign permit shall become null and void if the
work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a
period of 12 months from the date of the permit. For all sign permits,
the Building Department may, in its discretion, issue an extension to the
permit expiration date not to exceed six months.
D.
Compatibility with neighborhood and building context. Signs shall be
visually compatible with the building, neighboring buildings, and the
character of the neighborhood or district in which they are located.
Signs shall be carefully located to avoid obscuring important
architectural building features, property sightlines, and views.
Sign material(s), scale, coloring, and details should be compatible with
the structure or context with which they are associated.
Any sign mounted to a building shall be in a location suitable for
that particular sign. The scale and proportions of the sign shall be
E.
§ 175-56 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-57
171:233
compatible with the surrounding building elements, and the materials
shall be compatible with surrounding materials. Sign attachment shall
be accomplished in such a manner that when the sign is removed, there
is no permanent damage to the building or important architectural
features.
Relocation of an existing, authorized sign to a new location requires
review and approval by the Building Department. A sign which may
have been well integrated with its previous location may not necessarily
fit as well in a new location.
If lighting is proposed, it shall be placed appropriately given the
location with a minimum of wattage and ambient light. All lighting shall
comply with the International Dark Sky Association (IDA) "fixture seal
of approval" program certification standards. Applicant is responsible
for providing such certification to the Building Department.
Inspection. Any sign may be inspected periodically by the Building
Department for compliance with this Bylaw. All signs and other
advertising structures, together with all their supports, braces, hooks,
guys and anchors, shall be of substantial and sturdy construction, shall
be kept in good repair and shall be painted or cleaned as often as
necessary to maintain a clean, neat, safe and orderly appearance which
does not noticeably display any of the following or similar conditions,
including but not limited to: peeling paint, visible rust, visible rot,
damaged support structures, or missing letters.
Notice of noncompliance. Written notice shall be given via hand
delivery or certified mail to the owner of any sign which violates
any section of this Bylaw, and if different, to the property owner
upon which the sign is situated. Said notice shall describe the
violation and required remedial action to be undertaken in order
to bring said sign into compliance and a reasonable deadline to
commence said remedial action, which shall not be less than 14
days except in cases of emergency or public safety.
(1)
Response required. If an effort to bring the sign into compliance
is not undertaken and completed within 14 days from the date
of notice of violation, the Building Department shall cause the
sign to be repaired or removed at the property owner's expense,
subject to constitutional limitations, and/or to otherwise enforce
this bylaw through noncriminal disposition and fines as provided in
the General Bylaws.20
(2)
F.
Removal of existing signs and abandoned signs.
Conforming signs may remain until and unless they violate this
Bylaw.
(1)
G.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, General Penalty, § 1-2, Enforcement
through noncriminal disposition.
§ 175-57 ABINGTON CODE § 175-57
171:234
§ 175-57.1. Administration and penalties.
§ 175-58. General regulations.
Any existing nonconforming sign legally erected prior to the
adoption of this Bylaw may continue to be used and maintained,
provided, however, that no such sign shall be enlarged or altered
except in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw.
(2)
Any existing or nonconforming sign associated with a nonseasonal
use which has ceased operations for 180 or more days and/or
contains or exhibits panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged
support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise
dilapidated, unsightly or unkempt shall be considered an
abandoned sign. Such signs are prohibited and may be removed in
accordance with this Bylaw.
(3)
Enforcement. The Building Department is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Bylaw. The Building
Department may issue regulations and guidelines as necessary to
implement the provisions of this Bylaw.
A.
Removal of signs. The Building Department shall order the removal
of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this Bylaw. Fourteen
calendar days' notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner of such
sign, or of the building, structure, or premises on which such sign
is located, to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with
the Bylaw. If the owner fails to come into compliance, the Building
Department shall enforce this Bylaw through noncriminal disposition as
provided in the Town of Abington General Bylaws Chapter 1, § 1-2.
B.
Illumination.
Internally illuminated signs are not permitted, with the exception
that the following types of internally illuminated signs are
permitted on properties being used for commercial or business
purposes:
• Directional signs, such as "Enter" or "Exit" or "Parking," which
may also include the business logo and which do not exceed
two square feet.
• "Open" and "Closed" signs which do not exceed two square
feet.
• Barber poles on barbershops.
• Wall signs on buildings which are more than 100 feet from
a street or from a driveway which provides access to said
building.
• Internally illuminated freestanding signs are permitted for
business and commercial purposes.
(1)
A.
§ 175-57 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-58
171:235
Exterior illumination of signs shall be so shaded, shielded or
directed as to create minimum ambient light, and so as not to
directly reflect or shine on or into neighboring premises or into
any public street. Exterior illumination shall be of the "top down"
variety only. All lighting shall comply with the International Dark
Sky Association (IDA) "fixture seal of approval" program
certification standards. Applicant is responsible for providing such
certification to the Building Department.
(2)
Neon "Open" and "Closed" signs not exceeding two square feet are
permitted. All other outdoor neon lighting is prohibited.
(3)
No sign or advertising device shall be illuminated between 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the use associated with said sign is
being operated, such as a business open to customers or where
an institution or place of public assembly is conducting an activity,
illumination shall be allowed during the activity and for not more
than 1/2 hour after the activity ceases. This restriction shall not
apply to any signs or advertising devices required or related to
public properties or public safety such as police and fire
departments, hospitals, or as a sign permit may otherwise
specifically allow.
(4)
Location of signs.
A parallel sign shall project no more than 12 inches from the
building facade or surface.
(1)
No awning, canopy or projecting sign shall project more than five
feet from the building face or come within two feet of a curbline.
(2)
The bottom of a sign on any awning or canopy shall not be lower
than the awning or canopy to which it is attached. The bottom of a
projecting sign shall be at least 10 feet above ground level.
(3)
The top of a freestanding sign shall extend no higher than 20
feet above ground level, and the bottom shall not interfere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No portion of a freestanding sign
shall be located within 10 feet of a lot line.
(4)
On any building with more than three stories, no sign or any
portion thereof shall be allowed above the bottom of the sills of
third story windows of the building on which it is mounted. On all
other buildings, no sign or support for a sign may extend above
the cornice line or higher than six feet on any parapet wall of the
building to which the sign is attached.
(5)
B.
Exempted signs. The provisions of this Bylaw shall not apply to the
following signs and no sign permit shall be required:
Nonconforming signs which existed prior to the adoption of this
Bylaw.
(1)
C.
§ 175-58 ABINGTON CODE § 175-58
171:236
Any sign which is required or authorized by any law, rule,
regulation or permit of the federal or state government or any
agency thereof or any public authority created thereby.
(2)
Any sign erected or placed on Town land or on public ways under
the provisions of any Town Bylaw, building or safety code, or by
direction or approval of the Town Manager or board or committee
having lawful jurisdiction or control over such premises.
(3)
Signs containing the street name and/or number of the building as
assigned by the Assessor's office, to be located on the building and/
or property in accordance with Chapter 25 of the General Bylaws.
Said sign shall not exceed two square feet in residential zones.
(4)
A memorial sign or tablet denoting a historical event or place,
or the name of a structure and/or date of its construction, not to
exceed four square feet on residential properties or six square feet
in other districts, provided that nothing shall limit the authority of
the Historical Commission from further regulating signs on duly
designated historical structures or within duly designated
historical districts.
(5)
Signs containing cautionary messages, such as "Beware of Dog" or
"No Trespassing," provided they do not exceed two square feet.
(6)
Any directional or traffic safety sign not exceeding two square feet
intending to direct traffic or indicate parking areas or restrictions
(such as "Enter," "Exit," "No Parking," etc.), and which may also
include the business logo. Provided these signs are erected in
compliance with Town Bylaws and state regulations, they shall
not be counted in the maximum sign number and sign area
requirements for the lot or business.
(7)
Display or expressions of political, religious, ideological, civic or
charitable ideas shall be exempt from the provisions of this Bylaw,
provided that no such sign shall be affixed to a traffic sign, tree or
utility pole in a public way. Signs of such nature shall not exceed
the maximum dimensional limitations permitted under this Bylaw.
(8)
One flag displaying the word "Open" of no more than 15 square
feet will be allowed per business. Decorative flags are permitted on
residences.
(9)
Signs on gasoline pumps indicating in usual size and form the
name, type of gasoline and price thereof as required by statute.
(10)
One unlighted ground sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises or any part thereof, provided that such sign shall not
exceed six square feet and shall be removed upon completion of the
sale, rental or lease transaction.
(11)
§ 175-58 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-58
171:237
One unlighted ground sign in a subdivision of six or more approved
lots, or in a multi-unit residential or commercial project, which
advertises the sale, rental or lease of individual lots, units or
buildings under construction therein, provided that such sign shall
not exceed 20 square feet and shall be removed no later than one
year after the installation of such sign. A permit may be obtained
for such sign after the expiration of said one-year period.
(12)
One unlighted ground sign on a property which advertises the
name and contact information of a contractor, vendor or service
provider while such project or work continues, provided that such
sign shall not exceed six square feet and shall be removed within
seven days after cessation or completion of such work.
(13)
An A-frame or "sandwich board" style sign which does not exceed
six square feet of signage on each side, provided that one such sign
per business is displayed only during business hours in a location
which shall be located within 10 feet of a business entrance and
does not impede pedestrian safety.
(14)
Prohibited signs. Unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, the
following signs are prohibited:
Signs which contain or consist of banners, inflatables, feather-type
pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, other moving devices, or
other similar devices and string of lights.
(1)
Signs which have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other
illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity,
brightness or color, but not to include digital signs or electronic
signs.
(2)
Signs illuminated by other than a stationary white or off-white
steady light.
(3)
Signs which are attached to utility poles, trees, fences, or
structures such as overpasses and bridges. Signs attached to other
signs are prohibited unless such subsidiary portions are an integral
part of the total sign design and part of the permit received from
the Building Department.
(4)
(5) Mechanically activated signs, other than rotating barberpoles.
Signs mounted on a vehicle or trailer chassis with or without
wheels whose primary function is a sign for commercial advertising
and not for the transport of goods or merchandise.
(6)
Any sign installed at or near an intersection which obstructs free
and clear vision, or which by reason of its position, shape, and color
or otherwise may create confusion or a hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(7)
D.
§ 175-58 ABINGTON CODE § 175-58.1
171:238
§ 175-58.1. Residential districts.
In a residential district which consists of R20, R30, R40 Districts, the
following signs are permitted:
§ 175-58.2. Commercial and industrial districts.
In all other zoning districts, the following signs are permitted:
One sign displaying the street address or name of the occupant on
premises, or both, not exceeding two square feet in area.
A.
One bulletin or announcement board or identification sign for a
permitted nonresidential building or use, not more than 10 square
feet in area. For churches and institutions, membership clubs, funeral
establishments, hospitals, schools, other places of public assembly,
community facilities or public utilities one bulletin or announcement
board or identification sign not more than 10 square feet in area is
permitted on each building.
B.
One professional or home occupation sign (provided such professional
use or home occupation is permitted), or one sign identifying a
nonresidential building or use permitted in a residential district, not
to exceed six square feet. When more than one business exists on a
residential district site, the total area of signs on that site shall not
exceed six square feet.
C.
In R-20, R-30 and R-40 zoning districts, one sign identifying each
public entrance to a subdivision or multifamily development such as
apartments or townhouses, of not more than six square feet in area. In
addition, each family unit may be identified by a single sign of not more
than one square foot.
D.
For a structure containing a single commercial or industrial business
occupant and which is set back at least 30 feet from a street, a
freestanding sign of an area not exceeding 32 square feet. Multiple
occupancy business buildings may have one freestanding sign not
exceeding 100 total square feet with signboards for tenants provided
no sign/placard advertising a single tenant or the name of the building
or commercial site may exceed 32 square feet. Where two or more
businesses are located in a single building or within attached buildings
or within a cluster of buildings sharing a common driveway, only one
freestanding sign is permitted.
A.
For a structure containing a single commercial or industrial business
occupant, one sign paralleling the street or customer parking area and
attached flat to the facade of the establishment advertised as long as
such sign does not exceed one square foot in area for each horizontal
foot of building frontage.
B.
Multi-occupancy business buildings may also have wall signs per the
following provisions:
C.
§ 175-58.1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-58.2
171:239
Residential-style office or retail buildings. Each unit may have a
wall sign near its exterior building entrance, not to exceed three
square feet. All signs must be of similar size and design.
(1)
Multi-floor/multi-tenant industrial-style building. Each unit may
have one wall sign not exceeding 32 square feet installed on the
portion of the building the business occupies or near its building
entrance. All signs must be of similar size and design.
(2)
Strip mall retail buildings. Each unit may have one wall sign not
to exceed 20 square feet. All signs must be generally consistent
with other signs on the building. Stores or businesses sharing
common private parking facilities such as shopping centers and
strip malls may also cooperatively display one ladder sign in view
of the public way or site driveway not to exceed 100 square feet
in area provided no sign/placard advertising a single tenant or the
name of the building or commercial site may exceed 32 square feet.
Such ladder sign shall be located adjacent to the parking entrance.
One occupant may have a sign on such ladder with dimensions two
times as large as all other occupants' signs. All other occupants'
signs shall be of the same or similar dimensions.
(3)
Where there are three or more businesses on a lot, or there are
businesses without an entrance on the street frontage, a directory sign
may be permitted for the purpose of traffic direction and control. The
size of the directory sign shall not exceed nine square feet plus 1 1/2
square feet per business establishment.
D.
In TOD and CBD zoning districts one sign identifying each public
entrance to a subdivision or multifamily development such as
apartments or townhouses, of not more than 12 square feet in area.
E.
Retractable or fixed awnings projecting from the wall of a building for
the purpose of shielding the doorway or windows from the elements
may include signage on the valance. Any signage on a valance shall
be in one row only and such signage shall not be included in the
calculation of the total permitted sign area for the business, provided
that no lettering or symbol is greater than six inches in height.
F.
Projecting signs may be substituted for wall signs with the following
provisions:
All projecting signs on multi-occupancy buildings must be of similar
size and design.
(1)
(2) No projecting sign shall exceed eight square feet.
For businesses with entrances on more than one side of a building,
a projecting sign shall be allowed to be installed on no more than
two sides of the building.
(3)
G.
§ 175-58.2 ABINGTON CODE § 175-58.2
171:240
§ 175-58.3. Waivers.
Consideration may be given to an application for a sign or sign program
that deviates from the fixed criteria allowed under this Bylaw. In such
cases the merits of the specific application will be considered relative
to the context in which the signage will be located, particular attention
paid to: site distances, visibility, existing and proposed architecture, site
and building entrances, neighborhood character, project scale, lighting and
historic appropriateness.
A waiver of any regulation of this Sign Bylaw shall require a public hearing
before the Zoning Board of Appeals, be thoroughly documented and shall
not constitute precedent for similar signage on the same or any other
property.
Public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing
within 45 days of the receipt of a complete application, and shall issue a
written decision within 14 days from the time of the closing of the hearing,
Window signs may not occupy more than 25% of the total window area
on any building wall.
H.
Digital signs or electronic signs are allowed only by special permit
from the Zoning Board of Appeals, and shall comply with the following
minimum requirements:
(1) Must be part of a nontemporary sign.
Messages may not be changed any less than once every 60 seconds,
unless a longer time is required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2)
Does not incorporate any form of scrolling, fading, or movement of
any kind as part of the change of message.
(3)
Does not incorporate any form of animation, moving letters,
flashing images or flashing lights.
(4)
Does not incorporate any form of chasing borders or animation of
any kind in the sign structure or message.
(5)
(6) Does not incorporate or use live or recorded video feed or sound.
Sign shall utilize auto dimming to external ambient light
conditions.
(7)
I.
When signage is part of site plan review pursuant to the Zoning Bylaw,
the Planning Board shall review the types of signage, size and location
associated with a project under site plan review to determine
compliance with this Bylaw. As part of its review, the Planning Board
may obtain the written opinion of the Building Department as to
whether the proposed signs are in compliance with this Bylaw. Waivers
may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with
§ 175-58.3 of this Bylaw.
J.
§ 175-58.2 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-58.3
171:241
unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the
said Board of Appeals. Notice of the public hearing shall be given at least
seven days prior to the hearing by publication and posting and by first class
mail to abutters and abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property
line of the subject property according to the most recent Assessors' listing.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a waiver by a majority vote if the
applicant sufficiently demonstrates to the Board that:
§ 175-58.4. Temporary signs.
A literal enforcement of the provisions of this Sign Bylaw would involve
hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant and that desirable
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent and
purpose of this Sign Bylaw; and
A.
That at least one of the two following conditions exists:
The proposed signage is designed to be harmonious with, and not
harmful, injurious or objectionable to existing or future uses in the
area; and
(1)
The unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of the
actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of this
Sign Bylaw.
(2)
B.
A sign permit from the Building Department is required for temporary
signs. All temporary signs must be installed with permission of property
owners and must be removed within the time specified by the Building
Department or this Bylaw when the permit is issued. Temporary signs
are not to be attached to a utility pole, traffic signs, fences, trees or
other vegetation. The Building Inspector or his/her designee shall be
authorized to remove and dispose of any signs on public property which
violate this restriction.
A.
B. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
Temporary signs shall be located on the property of the business or use
they serve, except real estate signs, and shall be limited in size to eight
square feet per side.
C.
Temporary signs shall not be located on Town-owned property without
written permission from the Town Manager or his designee.
D.
Temporary signs to identify a new business or use, which comply with
the requirements for permanent signs, shall be allowed for up to one
year while a new business is being established.
E.
A sign permit is required for temporary signs in all cases except for the
following:
F.
§ 175-58.3 ABINGTON CODE § 175-58.4
171:242
§ 175-58.5. Special provisions.
§ 175-58.6. Definitions.
As used in this Bylaw, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
AREA OF SIGN — The area of a sign shall include all lettering and
accompanying symbols or designs, together with the background, whether
Political, ideological, charitable, civic or religious message signs
with the permission of the property owner.
(1)
Yard sale signs being displayed no more than two days prior to the
event and removed within 24 hours following the sale. Yard sale
signs shall not be installed on Town-owned or publicly owned lands,
including commons, parks and open space.
(2)
Contractor or vendor signs (up to six square feet in total area)
being displayed while the specific contractor or vendor is actively
at work, or for no more than seven days following final building
permit inspection, completion or suspension of such work. Business
event signs, such as advertising an intermittent "sale," agricultural
or unique product, when such signs are in compliance with
temporary sign regulations and are attached to or part of an
approved sign framework.
(3)
Freestanding special event signs for institutional, religious or notfor-
profit organizations, which comply with temporary sign
regulations. Such signs are not to be displayed for more than two
weeks prior to the event, and are to be removed within two days
following the event. No more than one such temporary sign shall
be displayed on the same property.
(4)
"Grand Opening," "Open House" or celebratory signs, such as to
welcome a returning soldier, up to 25 square feet, which are
displayed for not more than two weeks.
(5)
A single small window sign, which is less than 1.5 square feet in
size, not illuminated, displayed for not more than two weeks, and
not displayed in conjunction with any other temporary sign posted
in a window at the same address.
(6)
Signs pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building, provided
that such signs do not exceed a total area of six square feet, until
such time as all lots, apartments or buildings have been rented or
sold.
(7)
Off-premises sign. Requires a permit and a waiver from the Zoning
Board of Appeals and must have the property owner's written
permission.
A.
§ 175-58.4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-58.6
171:243
open or enclosed, on which they are displayed. The area shall not include
basic supporting framework and bracing.
The area of a sign painted directly upon a building shall include all lettering
and accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background of a
different color than the finished material of the building face on which the
sign is painted.
The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols painted or
attached to a building, wall, or window shall be the area of the smallest
rectangle or triangle which encompasses all of the letters or symbols.
A double-faced sign with a maximum of two faces shall be deemed to be one
sign having an area equal to the area of one side.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT — The Building Inspector or his/her designee.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — An independent economic unit, in a single
physical location, conducting a business.
DIGITAL OR ELECTRONIC SIGN — A computerized or otherwise
programmable electronic visual communication device used for
advertisement purposes for goods and services, specifically manufactured
for the outside environment.
FRAMEWORK — A decorative and/or functional structure designed to
securely hold a changeable temporary sign panel and constructed of
material(s) and a theme that are compatible with the building, use, or site
which they serve.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which is not attached to a building.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign whose surface is lighted, internally or
externally, and which identifies, advertises or attracts attention to a use or
activity on the premises.
ILLUMINATED SIGN (EXTERNALLY) — Sign where the source of the
illumination is outside the sign and light is reflected off the surface of the
sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN (INTERNALLY) — Signs where the source of the
illumination is inside the sign or from behind the sign and light emanates
through the message of the sign, rather than being reflected off the surface
of the sign from an external source.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign which announces, advertises or gives
directions to a business, commodity, service, activity or person elsewhere
than the lot or building where the sign is located.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign supported by a building wall that is attached
perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, which is
placed outdoors or which is placed indoors but intended to be visible from
the outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. "Sign"
§ 175-58.6 ABINGTON CODE § 175-58.6
171:244
shall include, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, billboards,
pennants, ribbons, streamers, moving devices, marquees, and similar
devices. "Sign" shall not include national, state or municipal flags, athletic
scoreboards, official announcements or signs of the government, or
temporary holiday decorations customarily associated with any national,
local or religious holiday.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or advertisement designed and intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time and not permanently mounted. Some
examples of temporary signs include special event signs and construction
signs.
§ 175-59. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw, or its application
to any sign, shall not invalidate any other section or provision, or the
application of the Bylaw to any other sign.
§ 175-60. Interpretation; conflicts.
This Bylaw is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
bylaw, regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of
this Bylaw imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
regulation, bylaw, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall apply.
§ 175-58.6 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-60
171:245

ARTICLE X
Environmental Performance
§ 175-61. General.
The requirements and regulations set forth in this section apply to all
developments under this bylaw.
§ 175-62. Sewerage.
The disposal of sanitary wastes shall be accomplished in a safe and
adequate manner subject to the rules and regulations of the Abington Board
of Health and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal shall be shown precisely
on plans.
§ 175-63. Surface water drainage.
All surface water drained from roofs, parking lots, streets, and other site
features shall be disposed of in a safe and efficient manner and shall not
create problems of water runoff or erosion on the site in question or on
other sites. Insofar as possible, natural drainage courses, swales properly
stabilized with plant materials or paving when necessary, and drainage
impounding areas shall be utilized to dispose of water on the site through
natural percolation.
§ 175-64. Erosion control.
§ 175-65. Vegetation.
All slopes shall be stabilized by adequate ground cover or other
approved means to prevent erosion and to retard excessive runoff.
Means of preventing erosion during construction shall be provided to
the satisfaction of the Building Inspector.
A.
Natural slopes shall be retained insofar as possible when sitting
structures. Finish contours shall direct surface drainage around
structures rather than directly against them, using swales or other
approved means.
B.
No portion of any lot whose slope equals or exceeds 20% shall have any
structure built on it except by special permit from the Board of Appeals.
C.
Upon completion of grading and replacement of topsoil, slopes shall be
appropriately stabilized according to the following guidelines: slopes
greater than 35% should be avoided in most cases; slopes between 25%
and 35%, riprap or terracing should be used; slopes between 10% and
25%, sod, or established vegetation or seedlings in association with
webbing material placed over the soil; slopes between 4% and 10%,
plant seed in association with webbing placed over the soil, or heavy
mulch or gravel.
D.
§ 175-61 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-65
171:247
§ 175-66. Buffer strips.
In order to protect residential land uses from potential noxious or disruptive
effects of adjacent land uses of different character, the following buffer
areas shall be provided:
Natural tree coverage and other desirable natural foliage shall be
preserved on all lots to the maximum extent possible.
A.
Outside of areas of actual construction activity all trees of greater than
five inches diameter at four feet above the ground should be preserved.
If a lot is covered with mature trees of greater than five inches breast
height diameter, they should not be thinned by more than 50%. In all
residential areas, upon completion of construction, there shall be an
average minimum of four trees per dwelling unit, at least two of which
shall be on each lot or, in the case of multi-family residential, within
50 feet of each dwelling unit. Such trees shall be of a species suited
to the soil and climate of the area, shall be in healthy condition, and
shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height and 2 1/2 inches in diameter 18
inches above ground level. Such trees may be planted by the developer
if existing trees cannot be saved.
B.
Where commercial, multi-unit residential or industrial uses adjoin
existing residential properties or residential districts, whether
developed or undeveloped, adequate buffering shall be provided along
all lot lines adjoining the residential properties in addition to that
required in § 175-29. A buffer strip of at least 20 feet in width shall
be reserved and screening shall be provided in the form of a natural
growth of trees, if existing; or a natural growth of trees and thick
planting; or a double row of evergreen trees not less than eight feet in
height and not more than 20 feet apart, the spacing of one row centered
on the spacing of trees in the other; or a solid screen types fence six
feet in height complemented by suitable plantings.
A.
B. Buffer strips shall be in conformance with the provisions of § 175-27.
The owner of property adjacent to residential properties shall cause
the buffer zones to be provided and constructed at such time as the
property is developed as permitted under this bylaw.
C.
Established business and industrial properties actively engaged in
business at the time of acceptance of this bylaw shall not be required
to provide the buffer zone construction until such time that additions or
alterations are made to such properties.
D.
The owner of said properties shall be required to maintain buffer strips
in a clean and safe manner. Any trees or plantings which die shall be
replaced.
E.
Any fencing or buffering along lot lines intersecting with a street shall
be required to either terminate or be no higher than four feet within
20 feet from the street line, and shall in any event terminate at least
F.
§ 175-65 ABINGTON CODE § 175-66
171:248
§ 175-67. Other site features.
All service areas, loading areas, outdoor storage, utility structures,
mechanical equipment, garbage disposal facilities, or other utility facilities
shall be located or visually screened so as not to create hazards, visual or
other nuisances such as odor or attraction of vermin. Light fixtures, walls,
fences, benches, recreation facilities, and other such site appurtenances
shall be harmoniously designed, constructed, and located in relation to
other site features.
§ 175-67.1. Outdoor lighting. [Added 4-7-2004 ATM, Art. 10]
10 feet in from the street line. Strict compliance with these buffering
requirements of § 175-66 may be waived or adjusted by a majority
vote of the Planning Board during site plan review when good cause is
shown, including, but not limited to, proposed topography and building
locations, aesthetics and sight lines, existing vegetation on the locus
and/or abutting properties which will likely remain, or other
characteristics of the locus property and/or abutting properties.
[Added 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 18]
No residential front yard may be completely enclosed by a solid fence,
unless the portion of the fencing running parallel to any street is no
higher than four feet, and no portion of the solid fence is located within
10 feet of any street line, or take any other action relative thereto.
[Added 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 18]
G.
The purpose of this bylaw provision is to create standards for outdoor
lighting so that its use does not unreasonably interfere with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of property within Abington. It is the
intent of this section to encourage, through the regulation of the types,
construction, installation and uses of outdoor electrically powered
illuminating devices, lighting practices and systems that will:
Reduce light pollution, light trespass and glare in order to preserve
and enhance the natural, scenic, and aesthetic qualities of
Abington;
(1)
Conserve energy and decrease lighting cost without decreasing
nighttime safety, security, and productivity; and
(2)
Preserve the night sky as a natural resource to enhance nighttime
enjoyment of property within Abington.
(3)
A.
The requirements of this section shall apply to all zoning districts, but
shall exclude one- and two-family residential uses.
B.
Definitions. Except as noted hereinafter, all definitions are provided
in the Zoning Bylaw. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
certain words and phrases used in this section shall have the meaning
indicated below. Although set forth here for convenience, the terms
shall have the same effect as if set forth in Article II, Definitions.
C.
§ 175-66 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-67.1
171:249
COLOR RENDERING INDEX (CRI) — A measurement of the amount
of color shift that objects undergo when lighted by a light source as
compared with the color of those same objects when seen under a
reference light source of comparable color temperature. CRI values
generally range from zero to 100, where 100 represents incandescent
light.
COLOR TEMPERATURE — Color temperature or chromaticity refers
to the color appearance of the light that comes from a light source,
also referred to as correlated color temperature (CCT). The apparent
color of a light source is measured in degrees Kelvin or "K." A low
color temperature corresponds to "warm." Incandescent lamps are in
the range of 2,700 degrees K. "Cool" light comes from sources such
as cool white fluorescent lamps operating at 4,100 degrees K. Lights
appear bluer above 4,100 degrees K.
CUTOFF ANGLE — The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction
of the direct light rays at the light source with respect to the vertical,
beyond which no direct light is emitted.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted directly by a lamp, off a reflector, or
through a refractor of an outdoor light fixture or luminaire.
EFFICACY — Efficacy is the rate at which a lamp is able to convert
electrical power (watts) into light (lumens), expressed in terms of
lumens per watt.
FILTERED — When referring to an outdoor light fixture means that the
fixture is to be fitted with a glass, acrylic, or other translucent enclosure
of the light source.
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps, and which may
include a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor, lens, or diffuser lens.
FULLY SHIELDED LUMINAIRE — A lamp and fixture assembly
designed with a cutoff angle of 90 degrees, so that no direct light is
emitted above a horizontal plane.
GLARE — Light emitted from a luminaire with intensity great enough
to produce unreasonable annoyance, discomfort, or a reduction in a
viewer's ability to see.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The vertical distance from the finished
grade of the ground directly below to the lowest direct light emitting
part of the luminaire.
INDIRECT LIGHT — Direct light that has been reflected off other
surfaces.
LAMP — The component of an outdoor light fixture that produces light.
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of direct and/or reflected light
produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on
which the outdoor or indoor light fixture is located.
§ 175-67.1 ABINGTON CODE § 175-67.1
171:250
LUMEN — A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One
footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For purposes of the bylaw, the
lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as rated by the
manufacturer.
LUMNAIRE — Complete lighting unit, consisting of one or more lamps
(bulbs or tubes that emit light), along with the socket and other parts
that hold the lamp in place and protect it, wiring that connects the lamp
to a power source, and a reflector that helps direct and distribute the
light.
SHIELDED — When referring to an outdoor light fixture means that the
fixture allows no up light and/or light trespass.
UP LIGHT — Direct light emitted by an outdoor light fixture above a
horizontal plane through the fixture's lowest light emitting part.
Shielding. All outdoor light fixtures subject to this bylaw shall be
shielded.
D.
Prohibited light sources.
Mercury vapor and quartz lamps. For the purposes of this bylaw,
quartz lamps shall not be considered an incandescent light source.
(1)
Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar highintensity
light for outdoor advertising, when projected above the
horizontal, is prohibited.
(2)
Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising
purposes is prohibited except by special permit.
(3)
E.
Metal halide lighting. All outdoor light fixtures utilizing a metal halide
lamp or lamps shall be shielded and filtered. Filtering using quartz
glass does not meet this requirement.
F.
Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate
an outdoor advertising sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign
structure. Where internally illuminated signs are proposed only cool
temperature lighting may be used.
G.
Outdoor lighting plan.
Wherever outside lighting is proposed, every application for a
building permit, a special permit, a special permit with site plan
review, a variance, or an electrical permit for exterior lighting or
lighted sign shall be accompanied by a lighting plan, which shall
show:
The location and type of any outdoor lighting luminaries,
including the height of the luminaire;
(a)
The luminaire manufacturer's specification data, including
lumen output and photometric data showing cutoff angles;
(b)
(1)
H.
§ 175-67.1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-67.1
171:251
The type of lamp, such as: metal halide, compact fluorescent,
high-pressure sodium with color temperature (Kelvin) and CRI
indicated;
(c)
A photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination at
ground level, expressed in footcandles; and
(d)
That light trespass onto any street or abutting lot will not
occur in excess of 0.5 footcandles within 25 feet beyond the
lot line. This may be demonstrated by manufacturer's data,
cross section drawings, or other means. Minor violations of
this standard may be waived by the SPGA or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer where the objectives of § 175-67.1A will
be achieved. [Amended 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 20]
(e)
The requirement of submission of a photometric plan may
be waived by the applicable permit granting authority if the
proposed location, height, luminaire specifications and other
relevant information demonstrate that no light trespass issues
will occur. [Added 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 20]
(f)
When an existing outdoor lighting installation is being modified,
replaced, extended, expanded, or added to, the entire outdoor
lighting installation on the lot shall be subject to the requirements
of this section.
(2)
Standards:
All outdoor light fixtures subject to this bylaw shall be shielded
and control glare and light trespass.
(a)
All outdoor light fixtures using a metal halide lamp or lamps
shall be shielded and filtered. Filtering using quartz glass does
not meet this requirement.
(b)
Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more
than 2,000 lumens shall be of fully shielded design and shall
not emit any direct light above a horizontal plan passing
through the lowest part of the light emitting luminaire.
(c)
All luminaries, regardless of lumen rating, shall be equipped
with whatever additional shielding, lenses, or cutoff devices
are required to eliminate light trespass onto any street or
abutting lot or parcel and to eliminate glare perceptible to
persons on any street or abutting lot or parcel. This shall
not apply to any luminaire intended solely to illuminate any
freestanding sign and/or the walls of any building, but such
luminaire shall be shielded so that its direct light is confined to
the surface of such sign or building.
(d)
(3)
§ 175-67.1 ABINGTON CODE § 175-67.1
171:252
All lamps subject to this bylaw shall have a minimum color
temperature of 2,000 degrees K and a maximum color
temperature of 3,700 degrees K.
(e)
Lamp types shall be selected within the allowable color
temperature range of 2,000 to 3,700 degrees Kelvin, for
optimum color rendering as measured by their color rendering
index (CRI), as listed by the lamp manufacturer.
(f)
The use of highly efficient lamp sources in conformance with
this bylaw is encouraged.
(g)
Hours of operation. Outdoor lighting and/or outdoor illuminated signs
for commercial and industrial uses shall not be illuminated between
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., with the following exceptions:
If the use is being operated, such as a business open to customers,
or where employees are working or where an institution or place of
public assembly is conducting an activity, normal illumination shall
be allowed during the activity and for not more than 1/2 hour after
the activity ceases;
(1)
Low-level lighting sufficient for the security of persons or property
on the lot may be in operation between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
provided the average illumination on the ground or on any vertical
surface is not greater than 0.5 footcandle.
(2)
I.
Wall pack lighting: shall not be used as direct illumination beyond 25
feet off the face of any building or structure. [Amended 6-8-2015
ATM by Art. 20]
Exception: Decorative lighting fixtures with 70 watt maximum light
fixture and municipal uses.
J.
Special permits. When site plan review is required, the Planning Board
shall act as the special permit granting authority (SPGA) under this
section, and otherwise the Zoning Board shall act as the SPGA. The
SPGA may grant a special permit modifying the requirements of this
section. [Added 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 20]
K.
§ 175-67.1 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-67.1
171:253

ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
§ 175-68. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to nonconforming uses, structures and
lots as created by the initial enactment of this Bylaw or by any subsequent
amendments.
§ 175-69. Continuance and enlargement.
Any lawful use of any structure or land or both may be continued although
not conforming with the provisions of this bylaw, but no such lawfully
nonconforming use or structure shall be changed, extended or enlarged in
any manner except as provided for herein.
§ 175-70. Abandonment.
§ 175-71. Reduction.
§ 175-72. Change of use.
Abandonment. If any nonconforming use of land or of a building is
discontinued for a period of two years or more such land or building
shall thereafter be used or developed only in accordance with the terms
of the Abington Zoning Bylaw for the zoning district(s) in which such
property is located.
A.
Restoration. Any nonconforming building or structure which has been
damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty may be repaired or
rebuilt, provided, however, that the repaired or rebuilt structure shall
be no less conforming than the structure that was so damaged or
destroyed. All such reconstruction must commence within two years
from the date of said damage or destruction. [Amended 4-6-2005
ATM, Art. 27]
B.
Any nonconforming lot or open space on the lot (including but not
limited to yards, setbacks, courts, or building area) if already smaller
than that required shall not be further reduced so as to be in greater
nonconformity. Any conforming lot or conforming setbacks on the lot
shall not be reduced so as to not conform with the requirements of this
bylaw.
A.
Any off-street parking or loading spaces, if already equal to or less than
the number required to serve their intended use, shall not be further
reduced in number.
B.
Any nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided the new use is not a substantially
different use, as provided below and approval for such change is
granted a special permit by the Board of Appeals. For the purpose
A.
§ 175-68 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-72
171:255
§ 175-73. Moving.
Any nonconforming structure shall not be removed to any other location on
the lot or any other lot unless every portion of such structure, and the use
thereof, shall be conforming without the the issuance of a special permit by
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 175-74. Unsafe structure.
Any structure determined to be unsafe may be restored to a safe condition
provided that such work on any nonconforming structure shall not place it
in greater nonconformity.
of this section, a substantially different use is a use which by reason
of its normal operation, would cause readily observable differences in
patronage, service, sight, noise, employment or similar characteristics,
from the existing nonconforming use.
If any nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, it shall not
thereafter be put into any nonconforming use.
B.
§ 175-72 ABINGTON CODE § 175-74
171:256
ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 175-75. Administration officer and duties.
This bylaw shall be administered by the Building Inspector except as
otherwise stipulated in this bylaw or in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts
General Laws. Duties of the Building Inspector under this bylaw shall
include the receiving of applications, issuing building and use permits,
inspection of premises, issuing certificates of occupancy, action on
violations, and any other lawful actions necessary to assure conformance
with this bylaw.
§ 175-76. Permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reconstruct, or
alter a structure without applying for and receiving from the Building
Inspector a building permit.
A.
Such permits shall be applied for in writing to the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall not issue any such permits unless
the plans for the buildings, and the intended use thereof in all
respects fulfill the provisions of this bylaw, except as may have
been specifically permitted otherwise by action of the Board of
Appeals, provided a written copy of the terms governing any such
permission be attached to the application and to the resulting
permit issued.
(1)
No building permit shall be issued without the approval and
endorsement of the Water Dept. Sewer Department and/or the
Board of Health, except those permits for which the Water Dept.
Sewer Department and/or the Board of Health have previously
notified the Building Inspector that their approval is not necessary.
(2)
One copy of each such permit issued, including any conditions or
exceptions attached thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Inspector; one copy sent to the applicant.
(3)
B.
Each application for a permit to build, alter, or move a building shall
be accompanied by three copies of a plot plan of the proposed
development. This plot plan shall be drawn to a usable scale, normally
not smaller than one inch equals 10 feet for small proposals, or one inch
equals 40 feet for large proposals.
Such plan shall include:
(a) Location map;
Actual size and shape of lot and structures, including
foundation elevations;
(b)
(c) Dimensions, areas and location of sewage disposal systems;
(1)
C.
§ 175-75 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-76
171:257
§ 175-77. Site plan review.
(d) Abutting streets and ways, including approved street grades;
Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains and water pipes in any
street shown;
(e)
(f) Location of existing buildings on adjacent lots;
Existing conditions and features of the proposed lot including
contours at two-foot intervals;
(g)
Parking, screening, landscaping and other site elements
required under this bylaw;
(h)
Proposed finish grading at two-foot contour intervals, and all
provisions for drainage affecting the site or adjacent
properties; Such other information as the Building Inspector
may reasonably require, including a plan of the entire
subdivision in the case of single-family homes.
(i)
For additions to existing single-family homes, or for additions to
other uses which would be less than 750 square feet in area, which
would not be in any required yard, the Building Inspector may
require only the size and shape of the lot, the existing structure,
and the proposed addition be shown on the plan submitted.
(2)
General provisions.
Except as provided herein, no building construction, renovation or
alteration; excavation or foundation activities; or change in use
shall be initiated unless a site plan is first submitted and approved
by the Planning Board acting as the reviewing authority and a
building permit is issued by the Building Inspector; and no
certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
conditions conform to the approved site plan.
(1)
The following activities shall not require a site plan review or
approval:
The construction of or addition to single- and two-family
detached residences and accessory uses to single- and twofamily
detached residences, such as: private garage, tool
house, garden greenhouse, swimming pool or other similar
use;
(a)
Repairs or improvements to the interior of a building that do
not involve a structural change or enlargement of the building
as determined by the Building Inspector;
(b)
Renovations or alterations to a building exterior which may
include a vertical structural change and/or an extension or
enlargement of the building of not more than 20% of the
(c)
(2)
A.
§ 175-76 ABINGTON CODE § 175-77
171:258
existing footprint's gross square area, so long as said change,
extension or enlargement does not violate any height or
setback requirements or encroach into any wetland areas.
[Amended 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 25]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(2) above, the
Building Inspector shall require a site plan review and approval
by the Planning Board if, in his/her judgment, the proposed
construction, alteration or change of use will negatively and
substantially affect existing traffic circulation, drainage,
landscaping, lighting, off-street parking or other elements of the
environment. [Amended 6-8-2015 ATM by Art. 25]
(3)
Where a small addition (an addition to a principal building less
than 2,000 square feet) to an existing structure is proposed, the
standards established by the bylaw shall be applicable only to the
new addition.
(4)
A public hearing with notification to abutters per Chapter 40A
Section 11 shall be required for all commercial or industrial site
plans that meet or exceed one or more of the following thresholds:
[Amended 4-2-2007 ATM by Art. 11]
(a) Total floor area on the lot is equal to or greater than 20,000 SF.
Total parking spaces required by Article VIII, § 175-52 of this
Bylaw is 50 or greater.
(b)
Total vehicle trips per day generated by the proposed use or
uses exceeds 400 vehicle trips per day as determined by the
Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) manual (current edition).
(c)
Projects which encroach into a residential zoning district per
§ 175-13.
(d)
(5)
Site plan submission requirements are set forth as follows:
The plan submitted shall be drawn to a scale of at least one inch
equals 40 feet, and shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer and/or registered professional land surveyor as
appropriate.
(1)
There shall be submitted at the same scale as the site plan a
professionally surveyed plan of existing site features including the
size of the property; the existing and proposed topography at two
foot contour intervals; general soil types as indicated on soil maps
available from the U.S. Soil Conservation Service; vegetation cover
including accurate locations of wooded areas and major trees, as
well as roads, structures, or other significant features.
(2)
A locus map shall be included to indicate the location of the
property within the Town. This map shall include the zoning
district(s) for the area.
(3)
B.
§ 175-77 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-77
171:259
In order to allow adequate consideration of the surroundings, a
plan of adjacent properties shall be presented at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 100 feet or at the same scale as the site plan
if practical. This plan shall show the general characteristics of all
lands within 300 feet of the proposed site, including structures,
parking areas, driveways, pedestrian ways, and significant natural
features.
(4)
The site plan and any other drawings necessary shall precisely
indicate at least, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
(a) Area of the site.
(b) Proposed uses of the land.
Vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including
pavement widths and rights of way.
(c)
(d) Parking.
(e) Buffers and all landscaping.
All proposed structures, including their exact location, relation
to topography, height and bulk.
(f)
(g) Number and type of dwelling units, if any.
Service access and facilities for all structures or uses including
garbage and trash disposal facilities.
(h)
Location of all existing and proposed utilities for water supply
and sewerage.
(i)
All site drainage including natural courses and storm drains
including drainage calculations.
(j)
The location of all open space including its intended use,
natural trees and foliage to be maintained, specific new
planting by size and location, and the organization or owner
intended to own and maintain same.
(k)
Finish contours of the topography, measures and structures to
minimize soil erosion during construction.
(l)
Significant site appurtenances such as walls, light poles, and
recreation areas.
(m)
Date, true North point, and the name of the owner and
applicant.
(n)
Complete property dimensions, area, setbacks, zoning,
including overlay zoning, and assessors reference.
(o)
(5)
§ 175-77 ABINGTON CODE § 175-77
171:260
Location of property on flood plain maps as well as the location
of all waterbodies, or wetlands on or within 100 feet of the
property, if applicable.
(p)
A design for the storm drainage systems prepared by a
registered professional engineer demonstrating that post
development rates do not exceed that pre-development rates.
(q)
(r) Location of all existing and proposed easements.
Location of all outdoor refuse disposal areas, which shall be
screened.
(s)
Lighting plan showing location, direction, and intensity of all
existing and proposed lighting.
(t)
(u) Location, size, and type of signs.
Elevation sketches or photographs indicating the proposed
exterior architectural appearance of the building(s). [Added
5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 18]
(v)
Site plan review and approval.
The Planning Board, acting as reviewing authority shall adopt and
from time to time amend rules relative to the form, content, style,
number of copies of plans and specifications, and the procedure for
submissions and approval of such application. A copy of said rules
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
(1)
The reviewing authority shall evaluate each application on the
basis of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the prospective
occupants, the occupants of neighboring properties, the provision
of adequate services, and to preserve and enhance amenities of the
Town. In addition to compliance with land space and building space
requirements, each application shall provide for:
Traffic safety and ease of access at street and highway
entrances and exits of driveways, including proper grades,
sight distances, and distances between driveway entrances,
exits and the nearest existing street or highway intersections;
(a)
Safety and adequacy of driveway layout, off-street loading
areas for materials and products, off-street loading sites for
customers, and sufficiency of access for service vehicles and
emergency vehicles;
(b)
Adequacy of pedestrian walks to include maximum safety and
separation from vehicular traffic and to provide access to
nearby open spaces or other pedestrian destinations when
possible;
(c)
(2)
C.
§ 175-77 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-77
171:261
§ 175-78. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 175-79. Permit and certificate fees.
Fees shall be as established by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 175-80. Enforcement.
The Board of Selectmen shall enforce the provisions of this bylaw through
the Building Inspector, as provided in this section, but nothing in the bylaw
shall authorize the Board of Selectmen to issue a permit to any person
for the constructing, reconstructing, extending or repairing a building or
structure or for using a building, structure or lot.
Safe and adequate means of disposal of sewerage, garbage and
rubbish with visual screening of these facilities when needed,
and safety and adequacy of water supply and distribution;
(d)
Assurance of proper means to handle storm-water drainage
and snow melt runoff from all areas on the site;
(e)
Adequacy of night lighting as appropriate for safe use of
streets, parking areas, and walks.
(f)
Appropriateness of the proposed exterior architectural
appearance, specifically that it generally conforms to the
Historical New England character of the Town or the general
character of existing surrounding structures. [Added
5-22-2017 ATM by Art. 18]
(g)
It shall be unlawful to occupy any structure or lot for which a building
or use permit is required herein without the owner applying for and
receiving from the Building Inspector a certificate of occupancy.
A.
The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building and use
comply with the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw and of the Building
Code in effect at the time of issuance. The Building Inspector shall
consult with the Board of Health or its designated agent prior to
issuing said certificate and, in the case of structures in a subdivision
undergoing development, with the Planning Board.
B.
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following in
conformity with the Building Code and this bylaw:
Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally
altered.
(1)
Change in use of an existing building or the use of land to a use of
a different classification.
(2)
(3) Any change in use of a nonconformation structure or use.
C.
§ 175-77 ABINGTON CODE § 175-80
171:262
§ 175-81. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of any provision of this bylaw may upon conviction
be affixed in an amount not to exceed $300 for each offense. Each day, or
portion of a day, that any violation is continued shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 175-82. Board of Appeals.
If a written complaint is made to the Selectmen or the Selectmen have
reason to believe that any provision of this bylaw is being or is about to
be violated, they shall make or cause an investigation to be made of the
facts. Where complaint is made to the Selectmen, they shall take action
upon such complaint within 14 days of receipt thereof and shall report
such action in writing to the complainant.
A.
If the Selectmen find no violation or prospective violation, any person
aggrieved by their decision, or any officer or Board of the Town, may
within 10 days appeal to the Board of Appeals.
B.
If the Selectmen find a violation or prospective violation they shall
give immediate notice in writing to the owner and to the occupant of
the premises and shall order him to cease and desist and refrain from
such violation. Any person aggrieved by their decision, or any officer or
Board of the Town, may within 10 days appeal to the Board of Appeals.
C.
If, after such order, such violation continues and no appeal to the Board
of Appeals is taken within 10 days, the Selectmen shall forthwith make
application to the Superior Court for an injunction order restraining the
violation and shall take such other action as is necessary to enforce the
provisions of the bylaw.
D.
If after action by the Selectmen, appeal is taken to the Board of
Appeals, and after a public hearing, the Board of Appeals find that there
has been a violation or prospective violation, the Selectmen shall issue
an order to cease and desist and refrain from such violation unless such
order has been previously issued under § 175-80C.
E.
If such violation then continues, the Selectmen shall forthwith make
application to Superior Court for an injunction or order restraining
the violation and shall take such other action as may be necessary to
enforce this bylaw.
F.
Membership. There shall be a Board of Appeals of three members and
two associate members.
A.
Appointment. Members of the Board in office at the effective date
of this bylaw shall continue in office. Hereafter, as terms expire or
vacancies occur, the Board of Selectmen shall make appointments
pursuant to the Zoning Enabling Act. All members of said Board shall
be residents of the Town.
B.
§ 175-80 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-82
171:263
Rules. The Board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings pursuant
to Chapter 40A and 40B. Such rules shall be public and a copy of same
shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
C.
Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
To hear and decide upon an appeal by any officer or Board of
the Town, or by any person aggrieved by any order or decision
of the Building Inspector, or Selectmen, in violation of any of the
provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any amendments thereto, or
any provisions of this bylaw.
(1)
To hear and decide applications for special permits as provided by
sections of this bylaw.
Any special permit granted by the Board of Appeals shall lapse
if substantial use or construction has not commenced within two
years of the expiration date of the appeal period, or such time
required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal
whichever is later unless otherwise stated elsewhere in this
Zoning Bylaw.
In case of conflict Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975 as amended of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall govern.
(2)
To authorize a variance for a particular use of a parcel of land or for
an existing building thereon after public hearing for which notice
has been given by publication and posting as provided in Article
XII, § 175-82E of this bylaw and by mailing to all interested parties.
To grant upon appeal or upon petition with respect to particular
land or structures a variance from the terms of this bylaw where
the Board specifically finds that owing to circumstances relating
to soil conditions, shape, or topography of such land or structures
and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting
generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the bylaw would involve
substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or
appellant, and the desirable relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or
substantially deviating from the intent of this bylaw. The Board
may impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations both of time
and for use, including the continued existence of any particular
structures but excluding any condition, safeguards or limitation
based upon the continued ownership of the land or structures to
which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any
owner. If rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within
one year of the date of grant of such variance, they shall lapse and
may be reestablished only after new notice and public hearing.
(3)
D.
Public hearings. The Board of Appeals or the special permit granting
authority as the case may be shall hold a public hearing within 65 days
E.
§ 175-82 ABINGTON CODE § 175-82
171:264
from the receipt of an appeal or a petition, or a request for a special
permit, give notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication
being not less than 14 days before the hearing, and by mailing postage
prepaid a copy of such advertisement to the applicant and to each
owner as appearing on the most recent tax list of land abutting and
to the abutter of the abutters of within 300 feet of the lot of land
in question, whichever distance is greater. All fees for required
advertising shall be assumed and paid by the applicant directly to the
newspaper in which the advertisement is carried. Legal notice is to
be composed according to the requirements of Chapter 40A, and shall
be constructed by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the special permit
granting authority. All postage for required abutter notification will
be provided by the applicant to the secretary of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or SPGA , as the case may be.
Decision. The Board of Appeals shall make a decision on the appeal,
application or petition within 100 days after the date of filing except in
regard to special permits. For a special permit, the Board or the special
permit granting authority shall act within 90 days following the date of
the public hearing. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be filed
with the Town Clerk along with detailed reasons therefore and all plans
as finally approved. Copies shall be sent to the Building Inspector, the
Planning Board, and to the applicant.
F.
Other requirements. The granting of any appeal by the Board of
Appeals shall not exempt the applicant from any provision of this bylaw
which has not specifically been ruled upon by the Board of Appeals
or specifically set forth as expected in this particular case from a
provision of this bylaw. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to
reconstruct, convert or alter a structure or change the use, or extend
or displace the use of any building, other structure or lot, or change
any required limitations or special conditions imposed by the Board in
authorizing a special permit or variance without appealing to the Board
as a new case over which the Board shall have complete administrative
power to deny, approve or modify.
G.
Appeal to District or Superior Courts. All appeals are to conform to
the provisions stated in the Zoning Enabling Act, Chapter 40A, General
Laws of the Commonwealth. A copy of the Zoning Enabling Act is on file
with the Board of Appeals.
H.
In case of conflict, Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, as amended, of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, shall govern.
I.
§ 175-82 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 175-82
171:265
Part II, Rules and Regulations
Chapter 200
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetland protection — See Ch. 171. Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 175-82 ABINGTON CODE § 175-82
200:266
ARTICLE I
Scope
§ 200-1. Authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Abington
by Section 81Q of Chapter 41 of the Massachusetts General Laws said
Planning Board hereby adopts these "Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land in the Town of Abington, MA."
§ 200-2. Purpose.
These Rules and Regulations have been enacted for the purpose of
protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town of Abington by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in
a subdivision providing access to the several lots herein, but which have
not become public ways, and insuring sanitary conditions in a subdivision
and in proper cases parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning
Board and of a Board of Appeal under the Subdivision Control Law shall
be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of
the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel;
for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways;
for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles;
for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies;
for insuring compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances or by-laws;
for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage and other
requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating the
ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in Abington
and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions and towns. It is the intent
of the Subdivision Control Law and these Rules and Regulations that any
subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval
of the Board if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the Board of
Health and to the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board Governing
the Subdivision of Land. The Board may, when appropriate, waive as
provided for in Section 81R of the Subdivision Control Law, such portions of
the Rules and Regulations as is deemed advisable.
§ 200-3. Planning Board procedures.
Regular meetings of the Planning Board are held on the dates and
times as posted with the Town Clerk. Except for executive sessions
as provided for in Section 23A of Chapter 39 of the General Laws as
amended, meetings of the Planning Board shall be open to the public
to attend. Anyone desiring to meet with the Board shall do so by
appointment except as provided for elsewhere in these Regulations. To
secure an appointment, all applicants shall notify the Planning Board
in writing 14 days before a regularly scheduled meeting by delivery to
the secretary to the Board or care of the Town Clerk. In such notice
the applicant shall state their name, address and a brief outline of the
nature of the business to be discussed with the Planning Board.
A.
§ 200-1 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-3
200:267
§ 200-4. Subdivision.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law of any land within the Town of Abington, or proceed with the
improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways or
the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a definitive
plan of such subdivision has been submitted and approved by the Board and
endorsed by the Town Clerk as hereinafter provided.
§ 200-5. Effective date.
Approved as amended January 22, 2001.
§ 200-6. Reference to statutory provisions.
For matters not covered by these Rules and Regulations, reference is made
to Chapter 41, Sections 81K to 81GG, of the Massachusetts General Laws,
as amended.
Any person attending an advertised public hearing may address the
Board at the pleasure of the Chairman without prior notice and in so
doing shall state their name, address and person represented, if any.
B.
All meetings of the Board shall be conducted formally under the
direction of the Chairman of the Board. In the absence of the Chairman,
the Vice Chairman shall act as Chairman. A majority of the members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum but less than a majority may vote
to adjourn, subject to the meeting being rescheduled as hereinafter
provided. All other action of the Board shall require a majority vote of
all the members. In the event that there is less than a quorum present
at any scheduled meeting, the Chairman shall reschedule a meeting as
soon as practicable thereafter.
C.
The Planning Board may require any applicant to produce evidence of
ownership, or authority of an agent.
D.
§ 200-3 ABINGTON CODE § 200-6
200:268
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 200-7. Definitions.
Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts State Building Code shall have the meanings given
therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words not defined
in either place shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary, most recent edition.
A.
For the purpose of these Rules and Regulations, unless a contrary
intention clearly appears, the terms and words defined in the
Subdivision Control Law shall have the meaning given therein. The
following other terms and words shall have the following meanings:
ABUTTER — Owners of land directly adjacent to property lines of
the applicant and owners of land directly opposite on any public or
private street or way, as they appear on the most recent tax list,
notwithstanding that the land is located in another city or town.
ABUTTER'S LIST — A list of abutters as defined by these Rules and
Regulations, and which has been certified by the Board of Assessors.
APPLICANT — All the owners of record of the land stated in the
application for subdivision. An agent, representative or his assigns may
act for an owner, provided written evidence of such fact is submitted to
the Board. Evidence in the form of a list of their officers and designated
authority to sign legal documents shall be required for a corporate
owner.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Abington, Massachusetts
established under Section 81A of Chapter 41 of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
BOARD'S AGENT — A duly authorized consultant retained or appointed
by the Planning Board to review plans, observe construction, and/or
administer these Rules and Regulations.
DEFINITIVE PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision
of land drawn in accordance with Article III, § 200-12 of these Rules
and Regulations that will be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or filed
with the Land Court when approved by the Board.
DESIGNER — Professional engineer and land surveyor registered to
practice in Massachusetts. All public and private utility design and
other engineering practices as defined in Section 81D of Chapter 112
of the General Laws shall be done by or under the direct supervision
of, and shall be endorsed by, a registered professional engineer. All
layout of lands and subdivisions shall be done by or under the direct
supervision of, and shall be endorsed by, a registered land surveyor.
DEVELOPER — An owner or their agent, representative, or assigns.
B.
§ 200-7 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-7
200:269
ENGINEER — A person registered or legally permitted to practice
professional engineering in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
GENERAL LAWS — The General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
MHD — Massachusetts Highway Department.
NAVD — 1988 North American Vertical Datum.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or
resubdivision of land drawn in accordance with these rules and
regulations.
ROADWAY or TRAVELED WAY — The portion of a street intended for
vehicular use.
STREET OR WAY —
A way, street or road open and dedicated to public use, including
a public way or a way certified by the Town Clerk to have been
used and maintained by public authorities as a public way, a way
approved and constructed under the provisions of the Subdivision
Control Law, or a private way in existence prior to said Subdivision
Control Law having become effective in the Town of Abington
and having, in the opinion of the Board, adequate width, grades,
and construction for the vehicular traffic and the installation of
municipal services to serve the land abutting on such way and the
buildings erected or to be erected thereon. The Planning Board
shall not deem a way adequate for the purposes of the Subdivision
Control Law whether approval is required or not required and
these Rules and Regulations unless said way meets the following
minimum standards:
(a) A right of way width of 40 feet.
(b) A traveled way of 16 feet exclusive of berms or curbs.
An all-weather surface of bituminous concrete, which is in
suitable condition to allow access for emergency vehicles.
(c)
The way shall be properly graded so as to allow for drainage of
surface water runoff as determined by the Board or its agent.
(d)
(1)
Streets shall be classified as follows:
Arterial street: existing and proposed streets that are primarily
used, or will be used by through traffic at speeds generally in
excess of 40 miles per hour or as determined by the Planning
Board.
(a)
Collector streets: existing and proposed streets that carry or
will carry traffic from residential or minor streets to the system
of arterial streets at speeds generally between 30 and 40
miles per hour or as determined by the Planning Board. All
(b)
(2)
§ 200-7 ABINGTON CODE § 200-7
200:270
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more
lots and shall include resubdivision, and shall relate to the process
of subdivision on the land or territory subdivided. The division of a
tract of land into two or more lots shall not constitute a subdivision
if, at the time it was made, every lot within said tract has frontage, in
compliance with the Zoning By-Law, on a public way as laid out by the
Selectmen or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and
used as a public way, a way shown on a plan previously approved under
subdivision control, or a way in existence on March 8, 1947, having
in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades,
and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and municipal services in relation to the proposed use
of the land abutting thereon or served. (See definition of "street" or
"way.") Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from,
or changing the size and shape of lots, or the division of a tract of land,
on which two or more buildings were standing on March 8, 1947, into
separate lots, on each of which one such building remains standing,
shall not constitute a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW — The power of regulating the
subdivision of land granted by Section 81K to 81GG, inclusive, of
Chapter 41 of the General Laws and any acts in amendment thereof,
addition thereto or substitution therefor.
SURVEYOR — A person registered or legally permitted to practice land
surveying in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
THESE RULES AND REGULATIONS — The "Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land in Abington, MA" as adopted and
amended by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 81Q of the
Subdivision Control Law.
UTILITIES — Municipal services, including stormwater drainage
system, sewerage systems, water supply piping, fire alarm conduits and
equipment, cable, electric, telephone and other communications wiring,
gas and all appurtenances thereof.
ZONING BY-LAW AND ZONING MAP — Zoning By-Law shall mean
the Abington Zoning By-Law, as amended; Zoning Map shall mean the
Abington Zoning Map, as amended.
commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed as
collector streets.
Minor streets: existing or proposed streets that are used
primarily for access to abutting residential properties for
traffic at speeds of generally less than 30 miles per hour.
(c)
Local streets: existing or proposed streets that are used only
for access to abutting residential properties, are permanently
dead end, and provide access for no more than 12 dwellings.
(d)
Dead-end: any street, group or extension of streets, which has
only one means of access.
(e)
§ 200-7 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-8
200:271
§ 200-8. Plan believed not to require approval.
Submission requirements.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry
of Deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land and
who believes that the plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law shall submit to the Planning Board:
(a) The original plan and three copies.
The required filing fee as set forth in Appendix C of these Rules
and Regulations.
(b)
(c) Two Form A applications, both with original signatures.
Any other evidence to show that the plan does not require
approval under the Subdivision Control Law.
(d)
(1)
Application shall be made at a scheduled meeting of the Planning
Board. The plans shall not be deemed to be submitted until receipt
has been acknowledged by the Planning Board's signature on each
copy of the application form. Said person shall also file, by delivery
or certified mail, a notice with the Town Clerk stating the date of
submission to the Board, accompanied by a copy of said receipted
application.
(2)
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval,
it shall, without a public hearing, endorse forthwith on the plan
the words "Planning Board approval under Subdivision Control
Law not required." Such action shall not be construed to indicate
compliance with the provisions of the Zoning By-Law. Said plan
shall be returned to the applicant, and the Board shall notify the
Town Clerk of its action in writing.
(3)
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under
the Subdivision Control Law, it shall within 21 days of the date
of submission give written notice of its determination to the Town
Clerk and to the applicant by delivery or certified mail.
(4)
An applicant may submit a plan for approval as provided by law and
the Rules and Regulations of the Board, or may appeal from the
determination of the Board in the manner provided in MGL Chapter
41, Section 81BB.
(5)
If the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under this section
within 21 days after its submission, it shall be deemed to have
determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not
required.
(6)
A.
B. Contents.
§ 200-8 ABINGTON CODE § 200-8
200:272
§ 200-9. Basic requirements.
No person shall make a subdivision, within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law, of any land within the Town, or proceed with the improvements
or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways, or the
installation of municipal service therein, unless and until a definitive plan
of such subdivision has been submitted to, approved and endorsed by the
A plan shall be legibly drawn in accordance with the latest rules
and regulations of the Registry of Deeds, pertaining to plan size,
material, lettering and related requirements. The plan scale shall
preferably be 40 feet to the inch or such other scale as the Board
may accept and shall contain the following:
Identification of the plan by name of owner of record and
location of the land in question; Abington Assessors' map(s)
and parcel(s) numbers on which the land is located; the scale,
North point and date; and the name, signature and stamp of
the registered land surveyor.
(a)
Sufficient space for the date and the signature of the Clerk of
the Board shall be provided.
(b)
Zoning classification; the location of any and all zoning district
boundaries including all flood zones established by FEMA
which may lie within the locus of the plan.
(c)
In the case of the creation of a new lot, the new lot area and
remaining land area and frontage of the land in the ownership
of the applicant shall be shown.
(d)
Notice of any decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
including but not limited to special permits and variances,
regarding the land or any buildings thereon.
(e)
The names of abutters adjacent to the land and across
adjoining ways as obtained for the most recent local tax list
unless the applicant has knowledge of any changes subsequent
to the latest available Assessor's records.
(f)
The names and status (private or public) of streets and ways
shown on the plan.
(g)
The location of all existing easements of record as well as
existing buildings and the location of septic systems, if any.
(h)
The location of all brooks as well as all wetland areas as
defined by the Wetlands Protection Act21 shall be shown.
(i)
(1)
(2) A locus map shall be provided at the same scale as the Zoning Map.
21.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 200-8 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-9
200:273
Planning Board as well as endorsed by the Town Clerk, as hereinafter
provided.
§ 200-10. Number of dwellings per lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in
a subdivision, or elsewhere in the Town, without the consent of the Planning
Board. Such consent may be conditioned upon providing of adequate ways
furnishing access to each site for such building in the same manner as
otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
§ 200-9 ABINGTON CODE § 200-10
200:274
ARTICLE III
Procedure for Submission and Approval of Subdivision Plans
§ 200-11. Preliminary subdivision plans.
General. A preliminary plan of a subdivision in a residential zoning
district may be submitted by the subdivider for discussion and action
by the Board. In the case of a nonresidential subdivision the subdivider
shall submit to the Planning Board and the Board of Health a
preliminary plan in accordance with these Rules and Regulations. The
submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the applicant, the
Board, other municipal agencies, and owners of property abutting the
subdivision to discuss and clarify the problems of such subdivision
before a definitive plan is prepared.
A.
Filing procedure.
Any person submitting a preliminary plan shall give written notice
to the Town Clerk, by delivery or registered mail of a Form B;22
such notices shall identify the tract, the date of submission to the
Planning Board, and the name and address of the owner. A plan
shall not be deemed to have been submitted unless it has been
delivered at a scheduled meeting of the Board or when sent by
certified mail to the Board, care of the Town Clerk. If so mailed, the
date of mailing shall not be the date of submission of the plan, but
the date of the next scheduled Board meeting shall be deemed to
be the date of submission.
(1)
In order for an application to be deemed complete the applicant
shall file:
Two copies of a Form B application, each with original
signatures.
(a)
(b) A list of abutters certified by the Board of Assessors.
The required filing fee as set forth in Appendix C of these
Regulations.23
(c)
Eighteen sets of prints filed with the Planning Board and one
print filed with the Board of Health.
(d)
Addressed and stamped envelopes in a quantity sufficient to
deliver a first-class mail notice to each abutter regarding the
scheduling of the Board's meeting to discuss the preliminary
plan.
(e)
(2)
The Planning Board shall file within 14 calendar days copies of
the plan with the Conservation Commission, Water Department,
(3)
B.
22.Editor's Note: Form B is included at the end of this chapter.
23.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-11 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-11
200:275
Sewer Department, Highway Department, Building Inspector, the
Board of Selectmen, the Police Department, and Fire Department,
for their review and written comments.
Contents. A preliminary plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet or larger. The preliminary plan shall identify all easements, rightsof-
way, covenants, or restrictions applying to the proposed subdivision.
In addition, the preliminary plan shall provide the following
information:
The subdivision name, boundaries, magnetic North point, date,
scale, legend, and the title "Preliminary Plan;"
(1)
The name(s) of the owner of record, the applicant; the stamp and
signature of a registered land surveyor if surveying information is
shown and the stamp and signature of a registered professional
engineer if the plan shows the design of road pavements, water
pipes, sewerage or other utilities;
(2)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and
any public areas within and adjacent to the subdivision in a general
manner;
(3)
The proposed system of drainage and utilities, including adjacent
existing natural waterways, showing the approximate locations of
all inlets, outlets, pipes and drains and other appurtenances to the
proposed drainage system;
(4)
The approximate boundary lines of all existing and proposed lots
within and abutting the tract, with approximate areas and
dimensions;
(5)
The names, location, approximate area, and approximate
dimensions of existing and adjacent streets, ways, easements and
public areas;
(6)
The proposed locations and depths of other municipal services and
utility installations where possible;
(7)
The topography of the land in a general way, footprints of existing
buildings and significant structures, site features such as ledge
outcroppings, bodies of water, streams or other waterways, walls,
fences, existing easements, delineated wetlands, and predominant
vegetation;
(8)
Zoning classification(s) of the area and the approximate location of
any zoning district boundaries.
(9)
C.
Key plan. The plan shall also include a copy of the Town Zoning Map at
a scale of one inch equals 600 feet showing the location of the proposed
subdivision drawn to scale.
D.
E. Planning Board action on preliminary subdivision plans.
§ 200-11 ABINGTON CODE § 200-11
200:276
§ 200-12. Definitive plan of subdivision.
The Planning Board will meet with the applicant to discuss the
proposed plan and any modifications or corrections to the
preliminary plan. The Board may also visit and inspect the property
proposed for subdivision under the provisions of Section 81CC of
Chapter 41 of the General Laws as amended. Furthermore, the
Planning Board will notify the applicant as well as all abutters to
the proposed subdivision by regular mail of the date, time and
place at which the Board will discuss the preliminary plan.
(1)
The Board may approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications
in writing such preliminary plan within 45 days after submission
of the plan. In case of disapproval, the Planning Board shall advise
the applicant in writing of the specific reasons for which the plan is
disapproved, thus enabling the applicant to resubmit the plan.
(2)
The rules and regulations of the Planning Board in effect at the
time of submission of the preliminary plan shall govern the
definitive subdivision plan evolved from such preliminary plan
provided such definitive plan is submitted within seven months
of the date of the submission of the preliminary plan. Further,
approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of a
subdivision or waivers of the regulations, but it shall be deemed an
expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary
plan as a guide to the applicant's preparation of a definitive plan.
(3)
Written notice of the Board's actions must be given by the Board
to the applicant, and Town Clerk within 45 days of the date of
submission. Failure to act within that time shall be considered as
an approval of the preliminary plan.
(4)
Preliminary sketch. A preliminary sketch, showing less information
than required for a preliminary plan, may be submitted by an applicant
for an informal review and comments from the Board. Such preliminary
sketch will not have the status of a preliminary plan, and the comments
or the recommendations of the Board shall be conditioned on the extent
of information shown on the sketch. Applicants are urged to submit
such preliminary sketches in order to obtain the Board's comments
regarding the overall layout and the location of proposed streets in a
future subdivision, thus avoiding the expense and delays necessitated
by changes in a definitive plan, if submitted without such preliminary
plan review.
F.
General. The subdivision rules and regulations and the Zoning By-
Law in effect at the time of the submission of the preliminary plan
shall govern the definitive plan if said plan is duly submitted within
seven months of the date of the filing of the preliminary plan. If a
preliminary plan has not been submitted, the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations and the Zoning By-Law in effect at the time of submission
of the definitive plan to the Planning Board shall govern the definitive
A.
§ 200-11 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-12
200:277
plan until final action has been taken by the Planning Board or the time
for such action has elapsed.
Filing procedure.
In order to be deemed complete, applicants submitting a definitive
plan of a subdivision for approval, or for approval of a street profile,
or for approval of improvements to so-called "paper streets," or
for a revision of a subdivision previously approved, where such
revision requires a public hearing shall submit to the Planning
Board the following:
Two copies of a properly executed Form C application,24
provided by the Planning Board, each with original signatures.
(a)
(b) A list of abutters certified by the Board of Assessors.
Addressed and stamped envelopes in a quantity sufficient to
deliver first-class mail notice to each abutter regarding the
scheduling of the Board's meeting to discuss the definitive
plan.
(c)
(d) The required filing fee as set forth in Appendix C.25
Eighteen sets of prints filed with the Planning Board and one
print filed with the Board of Health.
(e)
Three copies of any supplemental materials relating to the
definitive plan, including but not limited to drainage
calculations, traffic studies, etc.
(f)
(1)
The definitive plan shall not be deemed to have been submitted
unless it has been delivered to the Planning Board at a scheduled
meeting or has been sent via registered mail to the Planning Board
care of the Town Clerk. If so mailed, the date of mailing shall
not be the date of submission of the plan, but the date of the
next scheduled Board meeting shall be deemed to be the date of
submission.
(2)
Simultaneously, a complete set of prints of such definitive plans will
be submitted to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission,
the Sewer Commissioners, the Water Commissioners, Highway
Department, Building Inspector, Selectmen, Police Department,
and Fire Department by the Planning Board. The applicant shall
also by delivery or registered mail file written notice to the Town
Clerk stating the date of submission of the definitive plan
accompanied by a copy of the receipted completed application
(Form C)26.
(3)
B.
24.Editor's Note: Form C is included at the end of this chapter.
25.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
26.Editor's Note: Form C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-12 ABINGTON CODE § 200-12
200:278
Contents.
All sheets of the definitive plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn
in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the
Registry of Deeds. The plans shall be drawn in waterproof ink
(or an ink with equivalent cohesiveness) on polyester film, single
matte with a thickness of 0.004 mils, and must have an opacity
so as to allow consistent diazo and microfilm reproduction or any
other material as required by the Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
Plan sizes shall be 24 inches by 36 inches with three-fourths-inch
border. The minimum letter size on plans presented for recording
shall be 1/8 inch.
(1)
Drafting standards shall include the following: dimensions shall
be in feet and decimals to the nearest hundredth; bearings in
degree, minutes, and seconds; the boundary of the subdivision to
be indicated in a solid heavy line; existing topography in dashed
lines; proposed topography in solid lines; and if multiple sheets are
used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the
entire subdivision with match lines and with a key plan on each
sheet properly orientated and a title block on each sheet properly
labeled.
(2)
A list of abutters certified by the Board of Assessors shall
accompany the definitive plan and shall include the name and
mailing address of all the abutters as they appear on the most
recent tax list.
(3)
A vicinity map shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 600
feet to show on one sheet all of the proposed subdivision, all of
other adjacent land of the applicant and other adjacent properties
to the nearest existing street in every direction. Important ground
features such as brooks, public areas, lot lines, easements and
streets only need be shown in a general manner and labeled. No
dimensions need be given except where of specific importance in
evaluating the subdivision. The limits of the proposed subdivision
shall be indicated by a heavy line or by use of color. Existing
and proposed features should be distinguished by different lines,
labeling or other methods.
(4)
Each sheet of the definitive plans shall contain the following
information:
Subdivision name, boundaries, magnetic North, date of
submission (and revision dates), legend and scales, suitable
space to record the action of the members of the Planning
Board. A three-and-one-half-inch square reserved for Registry
of Deed use and a certification clause signed by the preparer
stating that he/she has conformed with the rules and
regulations of the Registry of Deeds in preparing the plan shall
be provided on all sheets to be recorded.
(a)
(5)
C.
§ 200-12 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-12
200:279
Name and address of the record owner(s) and applicant; the
stamp and signature of a registered land surveyor and
registered professional engineer.
(b)
Suitable space to record the notice of the Planning Board
covenant and the date thereof as well as the Town Clerk
certificate of no appeal shall be provided on each of the lotting
sheets.
(c)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements,
waterways and public or common areas within the subdivision.
The purpose of all easements shall be clearly indicated.
(d)
Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed. All benchmarks shall be tied to
and employ the NAVD datum system if possible.
(e)
Location, names and present width of streets, bounding,
approaching or within 300 feet of the subdivision.
(f)
Existing and proposed topography at one-foot contour
intervals; existing contours to be shown by dashed lines and
proposed contours to be shown by continuous solid lines,
properly labeled.
(g)
Lengths, radii, bearings, and central angles to determine the
exact location, direction, and length of every street and way
line, lot line, easement line and boundary line.
(h)
Zoning classifications, including FEMA floodplain zones.
Wetlands as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act shall also
be shown along with the name of the firm responsible for the
delineation and the date of the delineation.
(i)
Watercourses, marshes, ledge outcrops, walls, fences, and
trees over 10 inches in diameter at six feet above grade and
other significant natural features.
(j)
Size and location of existing and proposed storm drainage,
sanitary sewerage, and water supply systems. Existing and
proposed electric/telephone/gas/CATV and other utilities shall
also be shown.
The following items shall be submitted and must be prepared
and/or certified by a registered professional civil engineer.
(k)
Soil conditions in a general way, using if desired, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Study for
Plymouth County, latest edition, to describe the relationship of
soils to seasonal high-water table, soil limitations for roads and
soil limitations for house sites, and hydrologic soils group.
(l)
§ 200-12 ABINGTON CODE § 200-12
200:280
Storm drainage system including invert and rim elevations of
all catch basins and manholes together with surface elevations
of all waterways within the subdivision at one-hundred-foot
intervals and approximate depth of water at these points.
Surface elevation and approximate depth of water shall be
shown at each point where a drainage pipe ends at a waterway.
(m)
Location of all the following improvements unless specifically
waived in writing by the Board: street paving, sidewalks, and
street signs, including but not limited to stop, warning,
directional, and speed limit signs, streetlighting standards, all
utilities above and below ground, curbs, gutters, street trees,
storm drainage, public sewerage if appropriate, all easements,
and the fire alarm boxes.
(n)
Profiles of the proposed streets and drainage/sewer lines
outside of the street layout indicating the following
information:
[1] A horizontal scale of one inch to 40 feet.
[2] A vertical scale of one inch to 4 feet.
Existing center line in fine dashed line with elevations
shown at fifty-foot stations.
[3]
Proposed center-line grades and elevations, with
elevations shown at twenty-five-foot stations, except that
in vertical curves elevations shall be shown at fifty-foot
stations, and at all high and low points.
[4]
All existing intersecting walks and driveways shown on
both sides.
[5]
Rates of gradient along with vertical curve data shall be
shown.
[6]
Size and location of existing and proposed water mains
and their appurtenances and surface drains and their
appurtenances.
[7]
Profiles shall show vertical location of waterlines, drainage
lines, sewer lines and other utilities as well as required
new waterways. Sizes of all pipes shall be shown as well
as inverts of all pipes at each manhole or catch basin,
together with center-line stations, rim and invert
elevations of all catch basins, and manholes; and invert
elevations of all cross drains, sanitary sewers, or culverts.
Complete profiles shall be included for each proposed
main water line, all proposed sewerage system lines, all
proposed drainage lines, whether or not within the
subdivision or in the roadways.
[8]
(o)
§ 200-12 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-12
200:281
Cross section of typical catch basins and sewer and drainage
manholes.
(p)
Three copies of all computations and worksheets originally
sealed and endorsed by a registered civil engineer, used in
designing the storm drainage system.
(q)
Any special construction details or detailed drawings or other
pertinent information that the Planning Board may request as
is necessary to evaluate the feasibility of the proposed design
of the subdivision.
(r)
Detail drawings: Any special construction features, deviating
from or not covered by standard specifications, shall be shown
on detail drawings. Such detail drawings may be incorporated
as part of a utility plan or profile or may be executed on
separate sheet or sheets and shall provide information as to
dimensions, locations, inverts, rim elevations, elevations,
materials, etc., of the construction details involved. The
requirement for detail drawings shall be applicable, but not
limited to, bridges, culverts, structurally stabilized slopes,
utility piping encased in concrete, ditches and brooks shaped
or constructed to a definite cross section, dams and spillways,
stormwater management devices, detention basins, steps
within the exterior lines of the street and similar construction
features.
(s)
The applicant shall provide base flood elevation (level of onehundred-
year flood) data for any land being developed within
the federal flood insurance district, as shown on the latest
FEMA mapping. For subdivisions in an unnumbered "A" Zone,
the applicant shall be responsible for establishing the base
flood elevation as required by the latest FEMA regulations.
(t)
Earth removal. The approval of a subdivision by the Planning Board
does not constitute an authority to remove earth materials from the
site. The developer shall be required to comply with the provisions of all
by-laws, and with any other laws and regulations relative to the removal
of soil, loam, sand, gravel, rock, and other earth materials.
D.
Review by the Board of Health as to suitability of the land. The Board
of Health shall report to the Planning Board, in writing, its approval
or disapproval of said plan. The Board of Health shall make its report
to the Planning Board within 45 days after the filing of the definitive
plan. In case of disapproval, it shall make specific findings, the reasons
for them, and, where possible, make recommendations for adjustments.
Any special conditions imposed by the Board of Health, such as lots
which cannot be used for building sites, shall be either inscribed on the
plan or contained in a separate document. The applicant shall abide by
the Board of Health regulations pertaining to subdivisions and should
consult with the Board of Health for a copy of its current rules and
E.
§ 200-12 ABINGTON CODE § 200-12
200:282
regulations and for other requirements necessary for Board of Health
review prior to drafting definitive plans.
Public hearing. Before approval, modification and approval, or
disapproval of the definitive plan is given, a public hearing shall be
held by the Planning Board. Notice of such hearing shall be given by
the Board at the expense of the applicant in each of two successive
weeks by advertisement in The Enterprise and The Patriot Ledger or
any other newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Abington
as determined by the Planning Board. The first notice being not less
than 14 days before such hearing; the second notice being not less
than seven days before such hearing. The Planning Board shall notify
by first-class mail the abutters (as provided by the developer in the
submission of the definitive plan) to the proposed development. If
the proposed definitive subdivision plan contains or abuts land in an
adjacent community, the Board shall also notify the Planning Board of
that community.
F.
Certificate of approval.
The action of the Board in respect to such plan shall be by vote,
copies of which shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and
sent by delivery or registered mail to the applicant. If the Board
modifies or disapproves such plan, it shall state in its vote the
reasons for its actions. Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed
on the original drawing(s) of all of the sheets that constitute the
definitive plan by the signature of a majority of the Board but not
until the statutory twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following
the filing of the certificate of the action of the Board with the Town
Clerk, and said Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has
been filed. Final approval of the definitive plan does not constitute
the laying out or acceptance by the Town of streets within a
subdivision.
(1)
The Board may, as a condition of granting approval impose
reasonable requirements designed to promote the health,
convenience, safety, and general welfare of the community and
to benefit the Town. In such event, the Board shall endorse such
conditions on the plan to which they relate, or set forth a separate
instrument attached thereto, to which reference is made on such
plan and which shall for the purpose of the Subdivision Control Law
be deemed to be a part of the plan.
(2)
The following shall constitute standard conditions applicable to all
approvals. Additional specific conditions may also be included by
the Board as part of its approval of a definitive subdivision plan.
(3)
G.
§ 200-12 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-12
200:283
Prior to endorsement of the plan by the Planning Board, the
applicant must sign a covenant (see Form F27) and reference to
the covenant shall be clearly shown on the definitive plan;
(a)
Prior to endorsement of the plan by the Planning Board,
notification of the expiration of the statutory twenty-day appeal
period must be received from the Town Clerk's office;
(b)
Prior to endorsement of the plan by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall provide the Planning Board with a copy of
any and all "Order of Conditions" relative to the subdivision
construction as issued by the appropriate agency, and recorded
by the applicant, pursuant to the Wetlands Protection Act.
Proof of recording shall be provided to the Planning Board.
Any changes to the definitive plan, required under the "Order
of Conditions," shall be presented to the Planning Board, by
the applicant, for review and approval as a modification to the
definitive plan. Except for very minor changes to the approved
plan, a public hearing will be held on the modification plan.
The Planning Board reserves the right to negotiate with the
issuing authority any mutually acceptable modifications to the
"Order of Conditions" that may be deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board and the Planning Board's consulting engineer.
After the public hearing and acceptance of the modifications
to the plan, the Planning Board shall take action on the plan,
reporting said action to the Town Clerk. The notification of the
expiration of the statutory twenty-day appeal must be received
from the Town Clerk's office for the modification.
(c)
The waivers, as voted by the Planning Board, shall be listed in
detail on the plans being recorded at the Registry of Deeds;
(d)
Prior to the endorsement of the plan by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall provide the final revised plans that incorporate
the items as presented in the conditions of approval voted
by the Planning Board and all required documentation to the
Board and it consultant for review; and
(e)
The applicant shall provide a copy of the receipt from the
Registry of Deeds indicating that the endorsed plan and
covenant if applicable have been duly recorded.
(f)
Performance guarantee. Before endorsement of approval of a definitive
plan of a subdivision the subdivider shall either file a performance bond
or deposit money or negotiable securities in an amount determined by
the Board or its agent to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part
of the improvements shown on the definitive plans, the maintenance
of such improvements for two years, and include a percentage
H.
27.Editor's Note: Form F is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-12 ABINGTON CODE § 200-12
200:284
contingency factor per year, at the discretion of the Planning Board, or
follow the procedure outlined in § 200-14 below.
Final approval with bonds or surety. Such bond or security if filed
or deposited shall be approved as to form and manner of execution
by the Town Counsel and as to sureties by the Town Treasurer
and shall be contingent upon the completion of such improvements
within two years of the date of the bond. The Board may decide at
any time during the term of the performance bond that:
The improvements have been installed in a satisfactory manner
in sufficient amount to warrant reduction in the face amount of
such bond, or
(a)
The costs of the improvements have risen substantially and
the performance guarantee is no longer sufficient to cover the
costs, then the Board may modify its requirements for any or
all such improvements and the face value of such performance
bond shall thereupon be increased by an appropriate amount.
(b)
(1)
Final approval with a covenant.
Instead of filing a bond or depositing surety, the subdivider
may request approval of his definitive plan on condition that
a covenant running with the land has been duly executed and
recorded and inscribed on the plan, or a separate document
referred to, on the plan, in accordance with Section 81U of
Chapter 41 of the General Laws. Such covenant shall provide
in part that no lot may be built upon or sold until all of the
improvements as required in this regulation have been
completed and approved as provided hereafter. The Board may
set a two-year or other approximate time limit within which all
construction must be completed. An applicant may request a
time extension subject to Planning Board review and approval.
(a)
Upon completion of such required improvements and as shown
on a submitted as-built plan (described in § 200-13K) the
subdivider shall so notify the Planning Board and the Town
Clerk, by delivery or registered mail, requesting release from
such covenant, but will post a maintenance bond to be in effect
until the roadways have been accepted by the Town as public
ways or for two years from the date of final release of covenant
for the completed improvements, whichever is earlier. The
amount of said maintenance bond will be determined by the
Planning Board. The Board shall act on such request within 45
days of receipt of such request.
(b)
(2)
§ 200-12 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-12
200:285

ARTICLE IV
General Requirements and Design Standards
§ 200-13. General.
Basic requirement. The subdivider shall observe all design standards
for land subdivision as hereinafter provided. These standards shall be
considered minimum standards and shall be varied from or waived, only
as provided in Section 81R of the Subdivision Control Law.
A.
Conformance with Master Plan. Any proposed subdivision should
conform, as far as practicable, to the proposals and intentions of the
Abington Master Plan as adopted in whole or in part by the Planning
Board, unless substitute proposals may be shown to the satisfaction of
the Board to better serve the general area of the subdivision and the
Town.
B.
Compliance with zoning. The proposed plan shall be in compliance with
the existing Zoning By-Law, as amended, particularly relating to shape,
width, frontage, and use of lots within a subdivision before the Board
will grant approval.
C.
Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown for all natural
features, such as large trees, watercourses, scenic points, historic
spots, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision. The Board may exercise its
right, in accordance with the provisions of Section 81CC of Chapter
41 of the General Laws as amended, to visit the applicants property to
determine which natural features might be preserved.
D.
Design objectives. The subdivision design, including consideration of
the resulting building sites, shall reduce to the extent reasonably
possible, the following:
(1) The volume of the cut and fill;
The area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed,
especially if within 200 feet of a river, pond, wetland or stream, or
on land having steep slopes.
(2)
The number of trees greater than 10 inches in diameter (at six feet
above ground) removed;
(3)
(4) The increase in peak rates of stormwater runoff;
The number of building site frontages or driveway egresses onto
collector streets;
(5)
The disturbance of important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features, and/or scenic or historic environments;
(6)
(7) Soil loss or instability during and after construction;
E.
§ 200-13 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-13
200:287
Access through another municipality. In case access to a subdivision
crosses land in another municipality the Board may require
certification, from appropriate authorities, that such access is in
accordance with the Master Plan and subdivision requirements of such
municipality and that a legally adequate performance bond has been
duly posted or that such access is adequately improved to handle
prospective traffic.
F.
Lot frontage at cul-de-sac. The allowable street frontage for a lot
fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be measured along the side line of the
street approaching the cul-de-sac as though the street line continued
through the cul-de-sac uninterrupted, and not along the outside radius
of the cul-de-sac. For lots across the end of a cul-de-sac in a
permanently dead-end way the frontage shall be measured along the
arc of the street line intersection with the side lot lines.
G.
Reserve strips. Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining
property shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the
Board, such strips shall be in the public interest.
H.
Further subdivision. In the event a tract is subdivided into larger
parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged
so as to allow the logical and economic extension of streets, utility
easements, drainageways, and public areas into such parcels. Adjacent
parcels shall also be considered for logical, economical extensions of
streets, sidewalks and utilities, etc.
I.
Resubdivision. The resubdivison of all or part of land covered by an
existing plan shall be governed by these regulations. Such
resubdivision plans shall show clearly that area or areas which are
being replated and shall show all previous plans of these same areas
with dates of recording information. All land last subdivided more than
eight years previous to the date of application shall be resubdivided
in accordance with the the Rules and Regulations and Zoning By-Laws
currently in effect.
J.
As-built plan. The developer shall provide the Board with an original
and six copies of a final as-built plan drawn to the required standards
of these Rules and Regulations after the completion of a subdivision
or a portion of a subdivision, showing the precise location of streets,
easements, storm drainage facilities, public sewerage facilities if
appropriate, all other utilities and bounds. The plan shall clearly
identify where the as-built conditions differ from the approved plan.
The as-built plan shall bear the stamp and signature of a registered
land surveyor and a registered professional engineer. A digital copy in
AutoCad format (current release) on a CD-ROM shall also be provided.
K.
Street acceptance plan.
At the time the street or way or portion thereof is ready for
acceptance and to facilitate acceptance by the Town of Abington,
the developer shall have prepared and certified by a registered
(1)
L.
§ 200-13 ABINGTON CODE § 200-13
200:288
§ 200-14. Streets.
land surveyor a plan of acceptance drawn to Registry of Deeds
standards showing widths, lengths, and bearings of all boundary
lines of streets and easements and radii, tangents and central
angles of all curves in street lines. It shall show and certify that all
permanent monuments have been set.
The surveyor shall place a certification on the plan stating: "The
street (or way or portion thereof) is laid out and the bounds have
been set as shown on the plan" and shall be dated, signed and the
surveyor's stamp affixed thereon. The plan shall be submitted to
the Board of Selectmen upon final review approval as to form by
the Planning Board.
(2)
Conveyance of utilities and easements to the Town. Prior to the final
release the Planning Board of a surety bond or deposit, or, in the case
of a covenant, the issuance of a certificate of completion, the applicant
shall execute an instrument transferring to the Town, without cost,
valid unencumbered title to all common sewers, storm drains and water
mains, and appurtenances thereto, constructed and installed in the
subdivision or portion thereof to be approved. Such instrument will
convey to the Town without cost and free of all liens and encumbrances,
perpetual right and easements to construct, inspect, repair, renew,
replace, operate and forever maintain the aforesaid underground
utilities, with any manholes, pipes, conduits and other appurtenances,
and to do all acts incidental thereto, in the subdivision or portion
thereof to be approved. If any such utilities have been constructed and
installed in land not within such streets, then said transfer shall be in,
through and under an easement as shown on the definitive plan.
M.
Arrangement. The proposed streets shall be considered in their relation
to existing and planned streets, to topographic and geologic conditions
and to public convenience and safety. They shall provide for:
The appropriate continuation and interconnection of arterial,
collector and residential streets,
(1)
(2) The extension of arterial and collector streets into adjoining land,
The maximum attractiveness, livability and amenity of the
subdivision.
(3)
A.
Access to arterial street. Intersections of collector and residential
streets with arterial streets will not normally be allowed at intervals of
less than 400 feet. Subdivisions of 50 or more lots will be required to
have more than one access to an existing arterial or collector street or
to a proposed collector street which is to be built in conjunction with
the proposed subdivision.
B.
Street jogs. Street jogs are herein defined as offset crossing
intersections. Street jogs in arterial and collector streets with center-
C.
§ 200-13 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-14
200:289
line offsets of less than 250 feet shall not be allowed. Street jogs in
minor and local streets with center-line offsets less than 125 feet shall
not be allowed.
Right-of-way width and alignments. On all classification of streets the
following characteristics shall be the minimum acceptable:
Street Class
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Minimum
Radius
of Curve
(feet)
Sight
Distance
(feet)
Maximum
Grad.
Minimum
Grad.
Arterial 80 500 300 6% 1%
Collector 62 300 200 8% 1%
Minor 52 150 200 10% 1%
Local 40 100 100 10% 1%
D.
Intersection. Rights-of-way (ROW) shall be laid out so as to intersect
as nearly as possible at right angles. No ROW shall intersect any other
ROW at less than 60º. Property lines at ROW intersections shall be cut
back to provide for a curb radius on the roadway of not less than 20
feet except where the angle of intersection varies more than 10º from a
right angle in which case the radius of the curve connecting the acute
angle may be less, and the opposite radius must be correspondingly
greater. Where street grade at the approach to an intersection exceeds
3%, a leveling area shall be provided having grades not exceeding 1%
for a distance of 50 feet from the nearer exterior line of the intersecting
street.
E.
Dead-end streets.
Dead-end streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length, as measured
to the center of the turnaround and shall be provided with a
turnaround having a property line diameter of at least 120 feet.
The turnaround centers shall be crowned, loamed, seeded and
planted with trees and shrubs. A landscaping plan for the island
area shall be included as part of the submission of a definitive
plan. Any easement obtained for turnaround purposes at the end
of a temporary dead-end street shall provide for termination upon
construction of an extension.
(1)
A twenty-foot-wide minimum easement shall be required at the end
of culs-de-sac to provide for continuation of pedestrian traffic and/
or utilities to the next street, unless waived by the Board in writing.
(2)
F.
Driveway cuts. Driveway cuts shall not be allowed within 55 feet of an
intersecting street.
G.
§ 200-14 ABINGTON CODE § 200-14
200:290
Street names. Proposed streets shall be named after servicemen from
Abington who were killed in action. A listing of available names may
be obtained from the Veterans Service Agent. If such names are not
available, proposed street names shall reflect the history of the Town of
Abington or the history of the parcel being subdivided. Names similar
to existing street names shall not be allowed. All proposed names of
streets shall be approved by the Abington Fire Department.
H.
Reduced density subdivisions of land.
In accordance with MGL Chapter 41, Section 81Q, the Planning
Board has determined that within subdivisions of land where the
number of dwellings is reduced to less than the maximum allowed
by the Zoning By-Law the prospective amount of travel upon the
various ways within a subdivision will be less and therefore design
and construction standards may be adjusted accordingly.
Furthermore, the Planning Board has determined that a reduction
in development density and road construction will assist the Town
in growth management by minimizing impacts on public services,
and therefore is in the public interest. For the purpose of this
section, density shall be defined as the number of single-family
residential dwelling units divided by the total land area available
for development and the total land area shall not include any area
contained within any existing or proposed roadways, rights-of-way,
travel/access easements and furthermore, each lot must contain at
least 30,000 square feet of contiguous upland area. (For example,
in the R-40 Zoning District, density is equal to one dwelling unit per
40,000 square feet. A development at 1/2 density would be equal
to one dwelling unit per 80,000 square feet while a 1/3 density
development is equal to one dwelling unit per 120,000 square feet.)
(1)
The following road design and construction standards shall apply
to reduced density residential subdivisions:
Where the density of a subdivision is equal to 1/2 the density
allowed under the Zoning By-law the following standards shall
apply.
[1] Minimum horizontal center-line radius: 100 feet.
[2] Property line radius at street intersection: 20 feet.
[3] Cape Cod berm curbing.
[4] Layout width: 40 feet.
[5] Maximum center-line grade: 10%.
Pavement width: 22 feet traveled way plus 1.0 Cape Cod
berm each side.
[6]
[7] Sidewalks: one five-foot walk.
(a)
(2)
I.
§ 200-14 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-14
200:291
§ 200-15. Easements.
[8] Design storm: ten-year for pipe size (Rational Method).
Alternative turnaround area designs are encouraged.
Where the density of a subdivision is equal to or less
than 1/3 the allowed density the following standards shall
apply:
[9]
[10]Minimum horizontal center-line radius: 75 feet.
[11]Property line radius at street intersection: 20 feet.
Cape Cod berm curbing/no curbing as required by the
Planning Board.
[12]
[13]Layout width: 40 feet.
[14]Maximum center-line grade: 12%.
Pavement width: 18 feet traveled way plus 1.0 Cape Cod
berm each side.
[15]
[16]Sidewalks: none required.
[17]Design storm: ten-year for pipe size (Rational Method).
[18]Alternative turnaround area designs are encouraged.
Reduced-density preliminary subdivision submissions must
include accurately located, field determined, wetland/upland
areas; and calculations supporting the number of lots within
the subdivision.
(b)
Reduced-density definitive subdivision submission packages
that were not presented as a preliminary reduced-density
subdivision shall include accurately located, field determined
wetland/upland areas; and calculations supporting the number
of lots within the subdivision. The definitive plan lotting sheet
shall clearly indicate that the plan is a reduced-density
subdivision and any further development or creation of
additional lots will require the roadway to be upgraded to full
design and construction standards including the submission of
a definitive plan modification to the Planning Board.
(c)
Layout. Easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and the limit
located by bearing and dimension. Greater widths may be required by
the Planning Board where additional area is required to adequately
access the easement area. All easements (except for tree planting) shall
be bounded by the placement of granite monuments in accordance with
§ 200-19Y.
A.
§ 200-14 ABINGTON CODE § 200-15
200:292
§ 200-16. Pedestrianways.
Pedestrianways or footpaths will normally be required to provide
convenient circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping,
churches, transportation, parks, conservation areas, adjacent subdivisions,
and/or other facilities. Such ways shall consist of a right-of-way of at least
20 feet.
§ 200-17. Open space, parks and playgrounds.
Watercourses. Streams or watercourses shall be provided with a
drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of its course,
but not less than 20 feet in width. The relocation of streams or
watercourses into open channels or covered culverts shall be kept
to a minimum. Any stream diversion or relocation shall be done in
accordance with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and the
developer shall be required to submit such proposals to the Abington
Conservation Commission prior to the approval of a plan.
B.
Utilities. Utility easements shall generally follow lot lines and shall be
not less than 20 feet in width.
C.
Areas for open space, parks, and/or playgrounds may be required to be
set aside in accordance with the proposals and intents of the Master
Plan and Chapter 41, Section 81U of the General Laws as amended.
Such areas shall be of reasonable size but generally not less than 5% of
the total area of the proposed subdivision. No building may be erected
or placed on such an area for a period of three years without the
approval of the Board.
A.
Any open space, park or playground shall provide at least 50 feet of
continuous frontage on a street, and pedestrianways will normally be
required to provide access from each of the surrounding streets, if any,
to which the open space, park or playground has no frontage.
B.
Further, such parks and/or playgrounds may be required to have
maintenance provided for by covenants and agreements acceptable to
the Board, until public acquisition by the Town of Abington.
C.
§ 200-15 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-17
200:293

ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
§ 200-18. Basic requirements.
§ 200-19. Improvements specifications.
The subdivider shall install all of the improvements itemized herein
unless waived in writing by the Board. All work done under this article
shall be done under the direction of the Planning Board, or the Board's
agent.
A.
No aforementioned bond or covenant shall be released until full
approval in writing of all work done under this article is received by the
Planning Board from the Board's agent. Such approval shall include a
completed checklist. (See Appendix.)
B.
Typical cross section. Street construction shall conform to the Typical
Cross Section of streets included in Appendix D of these Rules and
Regulations.28 Grass strips and driveway entrances shall be so graded
as to prevent surface water on the street from running onto private
land.
A.
Minimum width requirements (in feet).
Street Class
Pavement
Width
(feet)
Planting
Strips
(feet)
Sidewalks
(feet)
Arterial (with 10 foot center
strips)
2 @ 22 2 @ 7.5 2 @ 5
Arterial (without center
strip)
50 2 @ 9.5 2 @ 5
Collector 36 2 @ 7.5 2 @ 5
Minor 26 2 @ 7.5 2 @ 5
Local 22 4.5 and 9.5 1 @ 5
B.
Minimum compacted pavement depth requirements (in inches).
Street Class
Binder Course
(inches)
Finish Course
(inches)
Arterial 4 2
Collector 3 1 1/2
Minor and local 2 1/2 1 1/2
C.
D. Street grading.
28.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-18 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-19
200:295
The entire area of each street or way shall be cleared of all stumps,
brush, roots, boulders, like material and all trees not designated for
preservation.
(1)
The full length and width of the proposed paved surface area
shall be excavated or filled, as necessary, to a depth of at least
16 inches below the finished surface for minor and local streets;
at least 18 inches for collector streets; and at least 24 inches
for arterial streets. However, if the soil is soft and spongy, or
contains undesirable material, such as clay, sand pockets, peat,
loam or topsoil or stones over six inches in diameter, or any other
material detrimental to subgrade, such material shall be removed
and replaced with suitable well-compacted material. In no case
shall wood of any form be used as fill material within the street
right-of-way.
(2)
The subbase shall be observed by the Planning Board agent prior
to the placement of any gravel base course. (Seventy-two hours'
written notice prior to the placement of gravel is requested.)
Sufficient grade stakes shall be available to the agent so that the
profile can be checked.
(3)
Finished base course.
Roadway gravel base course shall be provided with a least 12
inches of compacted thickness. No base course material shall be
placed on frozen material. Base course material shall be placed
in layers not exceeding eight inches in thickness, and compacted
to 95% maximum density at optimum moisture content. This
composition shall be certified in writing to the Planning Board
agent by a licensed testing firm, at the expense of the developer.
(1)
Base course material shall consist of hard durable stone and coarse
sand in conformance with MHD standards, having the following
gradation:
Sieve Percent Passing
1/2 50 - 85
No. 4 40 - 75
No. 40 10 - 35
No. 200 0 - 10
(2)
(3) Maximum size of stone in gravel shall be three inches.
Base course material shall be compacted with no less than a tenton
roller. The base course shall be placed to the lines and grades
indicated on the approved drawing. Any depressions that occur
shall be filled with additional gravel and rerolled until the surface
is true and even. The base course shall be observed by the Planning
Board agent during its placement and just prior to placing the
(4)
E.
§ 200-19 ABINGTON CODE § 200-19
200:296
bituminous binder course. A written request for inspection shall
be provided to the Planning Board and its agent. The Planning
Board agent shall be provided with a testing report noting its
acceptability, prior to the placement of pavement. The Board's
agent, upon review of the testing report demonstrating acceptable
material, will authorize the placement of pavement. Authorization
is not a guarantee by the Planning Board that the base course has
no defects or deficiencies.
Paved surface.
Paved surfaces shall be constructed for the full length of all streets
within the subdivision shown on the plan. The center line of such
paved surfaces shall coincide with center line of street rights-ofway
unless a minor variance is specifically approved by the Board.
(1)
The minimum width of the paved surface shall coincide with the
requirements of § 200-19B of these Rules and Regulations or as
determined by the Board.
(2)
F.
Pavement. Upon receipt of the Planning Board agent's report for the
base course, a binder course of bituminous concrete Type I-1 as
specified by the Massachusetts Highway Department shall be placed,
compacted and rolled to the thickness conforming to the lines and
grades indicated on the approved plans. The Planning Board and its
agent shall be notified in writing in sufficient time to allow the agent
to inspect the placing of the binder course. (Seventy-two hours' written
notice prior to the placement of pavement is requested.)
G.
Curbing. Each and every street proposed to be built shall be required
to have straight-faced granite (V-4) curbing, (See Appendix D), on both
sides of the street for its entire length including all radii regardless of
grades. Driveway entrance curbing shall be two-foot minimum length
transition granite curbing. All granite curbing shall be installed to the
lines and grades as shown on the drawings with a six-inch curb reveal.
Transitions for ADA compliant ramps shall be provided as required. All
curbing is to be supported on both sides with concrete.
H.
Sidewalk construction. All materials shall be removed for the full width
of the sidewalk to a subgrade 12 inches below the finished grade
as shown on cross-section; and all soft spots and other undesirable
material below such subgrade shall be replaced with good binding
gravel material and rolled. This excavated area then shall be filled with
eight inches of good quality gravel as specified for finished base course
(§ 200-19E), and rolled with a pitch toward the curb of not less than 3/
8 inches nor greater than 1/2 inch to the foot. Wood forms shall be set
to grade filled with three inches of compacted bituminous concrete to
be applied in two courses (two-inch base course compacted and oneinch
finish course compacted); provided, however, that if a granolithic
surface is desired and/or specified by the Board, specification of the
Massachusetts Highway Department shall be complied with. At
I.
§ 200-19 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-19
200:297
intersections and elsewhere as necessary sidewalks shall be ramped in
accordance with current ADA requirements.
Storm drains and appurtenances.
Storm drains, culverts and related installations, including catch
basins, gutters and manholes, shall be installed within the
subdivision as necessary to permit unimpeded flow of all natural
watercourses, to insure adequate drainage of all low points along
streets, to control erosion, and to intercept stormwater runoff
along streets at intervals reasonably related to the extent and
grade of the area drained. Catch basins shall be required on both
sides of the roadway on continuous grade at intervals of not more
than 300 feet. Storm drains and culverts shall be no less than 12
inches inside diameter and shall be of greater size when required
by design conditions. The type of pipe used shall be reinforced
concrete pipe conforming to AASHO-M17O Standard for Class III
Pipe Wall B. All pipe 24 inches in diameter or smaller shall be
bell and spigot type. Pipe larger than 24 inches in diameter shall
be tongue and groove or bell and spigot. Pipe joints shall be
thoroughly wet before filling them with cement mortar. The mortar
shall be placed around the entire circumference of the pipe. Catch
basins shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
portions of Paragraph 201.61 of Section 201, Basins, Manholes
and Inlets, of the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges.
(1)
In addition, the following specific requirements shall be met:
(a) Catch basins shall be placed before intersections.
(b) Distances between manholes should not exceed 300 feet.
Scour protection in the form of riprap and riprap paving shall
be placed at the outfalls of all drain pipes. The riprap apron
for all pipes flowing at velocities greater than two feet per
second shall extend at least 10 times the nominal diameter of
the discharge pipe.
(c)
Velocities in grassed channels shall not exceed four feet per
second. Man-made channels flowing at velocities greater than
four feet per second and radically curved channel sections
shall be paved with stone riprap.
(d)
Manholes with paved inverts will be required for any change in
the line or grade of a drain pipe.
(e)
Headwalls or flared end sections shall be required at both ends
of culverts and at the discharge ends of storm drains.
(f)
(2)
J.
§ 200-19 ABINGTON CODE § 200-19
200:298
Security bars shall be provided at the entrance to, and exit
from, all culverts or open pipe drains over 18 inches in
diameter.
(g)
The Rational Method shall be used to determine the runoff
flowing to each catch basin and to determine the design flow
and velocity of each drain line. Storm drainage calculations
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer (civil).
(h)
Design analysis: A design analysis shall be submitted with each
definitive plan submitted for approval. The design analysis
shall include the following information. The data shall include
consideration of the entire watershed and the calculations
used in designing the drainage system including area
calculations, intensity of rainfall, coefficient of runoff, time of
concentration, discharge, pipe coefficients of roughness, and
quantity and velocity of flow under design conditions (not full
pipe conditions).
(i)
Storm drains shall be designed to have two feet six inches
minimum cover over the pipe. All backfill material shall contain
no stone larger than three inches and backfill material shall be
placed in eight-inch lifts and compacted.
(j)
Any drain pipe (but not including perimeter cellar drains)
connected to the proposed drainage system whose purpose is
to drain wet lots must be shown on the definitive subdivision
plans, and manholes shall be provided at all such connections.
Perimeter cellar drains or sump pumps shall not be connected
to an approved street subdrain or drainage system.
(k)
Proper connections shall be made with existing drains. Where,
in the opinion of the Board, after consultation with the
appropriate Town department, the capacity of an existing drain
is inadequate to accommodate the entire subdivision, only that
portion thereof which, in their opinion, can be adequately
accommodated shall be so connected.
(l)
Storm drains shall be designed on a basis of the ten-year storm
event and shall be such as to insure a rate of flow of not
less than 2 1/2 feet per second nor more than 10 feet per
second under design conditions (not full pipe). No drains shall
be backfilled until they have been observed by the Planning
Board's agent.
(m)
Where adjacent property is not subdivided, provisions shall
be made for extension of the utility systems by continuing
appropriately sized drains to the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, at such size and grade as will allow for their
proper projection. Such drains shall be capped.
(n)
K. Manholes and catch basins.
§ 200-19 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-19
200:299
Manholes and catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements detailed in Appendix D.29
(1)
Manholes or headwalls for drain lines over 30 inches in diameter
shall be constructed in accordance with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Highway Department book of construction
standards.
(2)
Frames and covers shall conform to the shape and size of castings
as shown in E. L. LeBaron catalog, Item LK 110A, cut with threeinch
letters (Drain), or approved equal.
(3)
Frames and Grates shall conform to the shape and size of castings
as shown in E. L. LeBaron Catalog item LK-120A (three flange) or
LK-120B (four flange), or approved equal.
(4)
No drainage structures shall be backfilled until they have been
observed by the Planning Board's agent. The approval of equals
shall be approved in writing by the Planning Board's agent.
(5)
Setting of manholes, catch basins, and water gates. All manhole, catch
basin and water gate rims shall be set at subgrade elevations flush with
the bituminous concrete binder course until such time as the roadway
is approved for installation of the bituminous concrete wearing course.
At that time the manhole, catch basin and water gate rims shall be
adjusted to finish grade, with concrete collars being placed.
L.
Subdrains. Where side slopes are steep and where soils are poorly
drained (especially in clay or semi-impervious soils) the Board, after
consulting with its agent, may require a subdrain be provided on both
or one side of the roadway depending on site conditions. See the
requirements for subdrain construction detailed in Appendix D.
M.
Water.
NOTE: Developers are directed to contact the Water Department
early in the approval process to insure the availability of water
capacity to service the proposed subdivision.
(1)
Water pipes and related equipment and materials such as hydrants,
main shutoff valves and laterals shall be installed to serve all lots
on each street in the subdivision in conformity with the rules and
regulations set by the Abington Water Department.
(2)
Connection to existing Town water facilities to assure adequate
supply shall be the responsibility of the developer.
(3)
Hydrant locations are to be approved in writing by the Fire
Department. No water service shutoffs are to be allowed in
proposed driveways.
(4)
N.
29.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-19 ABINGTON CODE § 200-19
200:300
Sewerage.
NOTE: Developers are directed to contact the Sewer Department
early in the approval process to insure the availability of sewer
capacity to service the proposed subdivision.
(1)
Unless otherwise determined by the Sewer Department sewer lines
shall be installed and lots connected to the public sewerage system.
Furthermore, unless otherwise determined by the Sewer
Department sewer lines shall be installed for future connection to
the public sewer system where capacity is not currently available.
(2)
If public sewerage connections are not required according to the
above, the applicant shall install private on-lot systems.
(3)
Where public sewers are required, the following design standards
shall apply:
Public sewers shall be designed according to accepted
professional engineering practices and the specific
requirements of the Abington Sewer Department.
(a)
(b) Public sewers shall be not less than eight inches in diameter.
Manholes shall be located at every change in grade of
horizontal alignment but not more thin 300 feet apart. The
use of sewage pumping facilities shall only be allowed in
accordance with Town specifications and at the discretion of
the Sewer Commissioners, the Board of Health, and the Water
Department.
(c)
If the applicant is required to provide other than public
sewerage, the design and construction of private on-lot
sewerage systems shall conform with and be subject to the
approval of the Abington Board of Health.
(d)
Cellar drains or sump pumps shall not be connected to the
public sewerage system or to the in-street drainage system or
subdrains.
(e)
(4)
O.
Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground unless otherwise
approved by the Board. (Sewer, water, drain, gas, electric, telephone,
fire alarm, cable TV).
P.
Retaining walls. Retaining walls should be avoided and shall be
installed only where deemed necessary by the Board and shall comply
with specifications set forth in Massachusetts Highway Department
"Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, "as amended. The
design of retaining walls shall be prepared by a professional structural
engineer and be shown on the approved plans. When allowed adjacent
to a sidewalk, the retaining walls shall be provided with appropriate
fencing and railing in accordance with the latest State Building Code.
Q.
§ 200-19 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-19
200:301
Fire alarm system. There shall be installed within a subdivision
development a sufficient number of fire alarm boxes. The type, number
and location are to be established in writing by the Chief of the
Abington Fire Department, prior to approval. Fire alarm boxes shall be
installed prior to the occupancy of any dwellings within the subdivision.
R.
Shade trees. Such trees as are suitable, in the opinion of the Tree
Warden, for preservation shall be preserved. Where, in the opinion of
the Tree Warden, existing trees are inadequate, shade trees having a
caliper of 3 1/2 inches at 18 inches above the soil line and of a suitable
variety as approved by the Tree Warden shall be planted at the rate of
at least three per house lot. Evidence of the Tree Warden's approval
in writing shall be filed with the Planning Board by the applicant. The
following note shall be placed on the definitive lot sheet: "Shade trees
shall be located in a ten-foot-wide permanent tree planting easement
adjacent and parallel to the street layout line. The tree planting
easement is for the purpose of planting, maintaining or replacing a
minimum of three trees per lot for the benefit of the developer, his
assigns and successors."
S.
Planting strip. There shall be planting strips as required in § 200-19B
and as shown on the typical cross section in Appendix D. Said area shall
be surfaced with not less than six inches of quality loam which shall
be seeded, fertilized, limed and rolled and protected from damage or
erosion until there is a satisfactory stand of grass to the satisfaction of
the Board.
T.
Street signs. Street name signs shall be furnished by the applicant and
erected at all street intersections prior to the occupancy of any building
on the street. Street names, street signs, and their placement shall be
approved by the Fire Department and the Highway Department.
U.
Stop signs. Stop signs shall be installed at all intersections within the
subdivision, and at the intersection of the subdivision streets with Town
ways as required by the Planning Board and approved by the Police
Department. Stop signs shall be installed prior to the occupancy of any
building on the street.
V.
Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed as required by the
Selectmen after consultation with the Police Department and the Fire
Department. If not specified by these Departments the Planning Board
will determine the locations. Streetlighting shall be provided by the
developer before the first house is occupied. The construction and
operating costs of said lights are to be borne by the developer until
acceptance of the street as a public way or two years from the final
completion of the subdivision, whichever is earlier. Streetlighting is
normally required at all intersections.
W.
Guardrails. Guardrails conforming to MHD standards shall be installed
as required by the Planning Board. The type, size and location of
X.
§ 200-19 ABINGTON CODE § 200-19
200:302
guardrails shall be determined by the Planning Board after consultation
with the Highway Department and Police Department.
Monuments.
Granite bounds shall be placed at the beginning and end of all
curves, at all intersections of streets, at easements and at such
other places as may be required by the Board. On any curve with
a tangent distance of over 500 feet, intermediate bounds shall be
set at intervals of 250 feet measured from one end of the curve.
Bounds shall be of sound granite, not less than 36 inches long and
not less than five-inch square. A one-half-inch drill hole shall be
accurately placed at the top of each bound.
(1)
The setting of the bounds shall be supervised and certified as
to their installation by a registered land surveyor. No permanent
bounds shall be installed until all construction which would disturb
or destroy the bounds is completed. If a driveway is installed in an
area of a proposed monument, the monument shall be set and the
driveway patched.
(2)
Upon completion of setting the required number of bounds, a
written certification shall be delivered to the Board from a
registered land surveyor or engineer stating that they have been
placed with drill holes in accordance with the locations shown on
the approved plans.
(3)
Lot markers. Lot markers in the form of capped one-half-inch rebar
shall be installed on all lot lines within a subdivision. Said markers
shall be driven to a point three feet minimum below grade and set
flush to finished grade.
(4)
Y.
Construction details. In the event of any question as to construction
details, specifications for the composition of material, workmanship,
and the method of applying materials the latest standards of the
Massachusetts Highway Department shall apply in each instance.
Z.
Cleaning up. Before sale of a lot, the subdivider shall clean up any
debris within the layout caused by street construction and installation
of utilities. All areas within a street layout destroyed or altered in
construction operations shall be restored as to vegetation or other
finish satisfactory to the Board.
AA.
Safety.
All precautions should be taken by the developer and his
subcontractors to observe common sense safety requirements. The
Board designates the Health Agent, Building Inspector, Police
Chief, Fire Chief, Highway Superintendent and/or the Planning
Board's agent to report all unsafe activities in preparation of the
subdivision to the Board.
(1)
BB.
§ 200-19 SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-19
200:303
The Town of Abington assumes no responsibility for construction
site safety, which shall remain the liability of the developer and
their subcontractors.
(2)
Maintenance of roadways including utilities and easements.
The subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining all roads and
other improvements in a subdivision for a period of two years after
the final release of a performance bond or covenant as required
in Article III herein, or until the roads are accepted by the Town
Meeting, whichever time is shorter. Maintenance shall include the
responsibility for streetlighting, snow plowing and sanding all
streets within the subdivision as well as the cleaning of all drainage
and stormwater management facilities.
(1)
To assure such responsibility the subdivider shall guarantee the
maintenance of the roads in a subdivision to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board and the Highway Department by posting with the
Town adequate surety as determined by the Board.
(2)
At the time lot releases are requested the subdivider shall pay a
subdivision maintenance fee in the amount required in Appendix
C.30 This nonrefundable fee shall be used by the Town of Abington
to partially offset the costs associated with adding the new
roadways(s) to the Town system and maintaining the drainage
easements within the subdivision.
(3)
CC.
30.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-19 ABINGTON CODE § 200-19
200:304
Appendix
Chapter A300
GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES
§ A300-1. General Law acceptances.
The following is a listing of the General Laws accepted by the Town of
Abington:
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 59, § 5K Reduction in property tax
liability for persons over age 60
in exchange for volunteer
services
5-22-2017 ATM, Art.
8
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 10 4-7-2004 Zoning amendment
(outdoor lighting)
Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 11 4-7-2004 Zoning amendment
(phased development)
Not approved by
Attorney General
ATM, Art. 29 4-7-2004 Town Meetings
amendment
Superseded by
4-3-2006 ATM,
Art. 8
ATM April
2004
Referendum
4-10-2004;
approved by
Legislature c.
259, L. 2004
Charter Charter
§ 200-19 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:305
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 17 4-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 18 4-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 20 4-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 21 4-6-2005 Condominium
conversions amendment
Superseded by
4-3-2006 ATM,
Art. 8
ATM, Art. 27 4-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 30 4-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 31 4-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 8 4-3-2006 General Bylaws Chs. 1 through
171
ATM, Art. 13 4-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 14 4-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 11 4-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 15 4-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 10 4-6-2009 Marijuana Ch. 106
ATM, Art. 12 4-6-2009 Fire alarm systems Ch. 69
ATM, Art. 2 4-2-2012 Personnel: classification
and salary plan
amendment
Repealed by
6-16-2016 ATM,
Art. 5
ATM, Art. 14 4-2-2012 Illicit discharges to
municipal separate storm
sewer system
Ch. 128, Art. II
ATM, Art. 15A 4-2-2012 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
ATM, Art. 15B 4-2-2012 Fire alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 69
ATM, Art. 15C 4-2-2012 Town Meetings
amendment
Ch. 152
ATM, Art.
15D
4-2-2012 Town offices amendment Ch. 155
ATM, Art. 15F 4-2-2012 Dumping amendment Ch. 49
ATM, Art.
15G
4-2-2012 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 117
ATM, Art.
15H
4-2-2012 Sale of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 164
ATM, Art. 15I 4-2-2012 Sale of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 ABINGTON CODE § DL-1
DT:306
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 15K 4-2-2012 Boards, committees and
commissions amendment
Ch. 17
ATM, Art. 15L 4-2-2012 Town Meetings
amendment
Ch. 152
ATM, Art.
15M
4-2-2012 Finance Committee
amendment
Ch. 67
ATM, Art.
15N
4-2-2012 Sale of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 164
STM, Art. 1 5-21-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
STM, Art. 6 10-29-2012 Town Meetings
amendment
Ch. 152
Chapter 407,
Acts of 2012
1-4-2013 Charter amendment §§ 2-8, 3-8, 6-5
ATM, Art. 19 6-9-2014 Pawnbrokers Ch. 111
ATM, Art. 20 6-9-2014 Dumping amendment Ch. 49
ATM, Art. 24 6-9-2014 Licensing: failure to pay
taxes
Ch. 102, Art. I
ATM, Art. 25 6-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 17 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 18 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 19 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 20 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 21 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 22 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 23 6-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 25 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 26 6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
Ch. 113, Acts
of 2015
10-30-2015 Charter amendment §§ 4-2-1, 4-2-2,
5-7
ATM, Art. 5 6-6-2016 Personnel administration Ch. 119
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:307
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 9 6-6-2016 Various amendments to
General Bylaws; Saving
Abington With Green
Energy ("S.A.G.E.")
Committee
Ch. 1; Ch. 11;
Ch. 17; Ch. 35;
Ch. 49; Ch. 63;
Ch. 67; Ch. 69;
Ch. 71; Ch. 75;
Ch. 113; Ch.
117; Ch. 122;
Ch. 126; Ch.
138; Ch. 152;
Ch. 155; Ch.
164; Ch. 167
ATM, Art. 4 5-22-2017 Revolving funds Ch. 124
ATM, Art. 8 5-22-2017 General Law acceptances Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 14 5-22-2017 Stretch Energy Code Ch. 145
ATM, Art. 17 5-22-2017 Licensing: failure to pay
taxes amendment
Ch. 102, Art. I
ATM, Art. 18 5-22-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 19 5-22-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 20 5-22-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 21 5-22-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 17 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 18 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 19 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 20 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 21 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 22 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 23 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 27 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 28 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 29 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 31 5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175
§ DL-1 ABINGTON CODE § DL-1
DT:308