Chapter C
CHARTER AND RELATED ACTS
Part I: Bylaws
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. General penalty.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of these bylaws or other bylaws of
the Town whereby an act or thing is enjoined or prohibited shall, unless
other provisions are expressly made by such provision of these bylaws or
other bylaws or by the laws of the commonwealth, forfeit and pay a fine of
$50 for each offense.
§ 1-2. Enforcement.
Criminal complaint. Whoever violates any provision of these bylaws
and/or the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Adams may be penalized by
indictment or on complaint brought in the District Court. Except as may
be otherwise provided in those bylaws, and as the District Court may
see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation, or offense,
brought in such manner shall be $50.
A.
Noncriminal disposition. Whoever violates any provision of these
bylaws and/or the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Adams, the violation of
which is subject to a specific penalty or the general penalty as provided
by § 1-1 of this chapter and/or the Zoning Bylaw, may be penalized
by a noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. The
noncriminal method of disposition may also be used for violations of any
rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or department which
is subject to a specific penalty. In addition to police officers, who shall
in all cases be considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this
section (except where state statute provides otherwise), the municipal
personnel listed as enforcing persons for each section, if any, or by state
statute shall also be enforcing persons for such sections. Each day on
which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
B.
C:1
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemetery Commission — See Ch. 28.
Contracts and purchasing — See Ch. 35.
Finance Committee — See Ch. 46.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 70.
Personnel — See Ch. 80.
Police Department — See Ch. 86.
§ 1-2 ADAMS CODE § 1-2
4:2
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 4-1. Accountant.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Town Accountant in accordance
with applicable provisions of the General Laws. He shall have and perform
for the Town all the duties prescribed by the statutes of the commonwealth
for a town accountant.
§ 4-2. Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances.
The Board of Selectmen shall annually appoint an Inspector of Gas Piping
and Gas Appliances whose duty shall be the enforcement of the rules and
regulations adopted by the Gas Fitting Board established in 1960 under
MGL c. 25, § 12-H.
§ 4-3. Annual reports.
Treasurer-Collector. In his annual report, which shall be printed in
the Annual Town Report, the Town Treasurer-Collector shall state
specifically the objects for which the debt of the Town was increased
during the preceding year and recite the authority under which the
money was borrowed and shall render a classified statement of all
expenditures and receipts of the Town, together with a statement of the
Town debt in such detail as to give a fair and full exhibit of the objects
and methods of all expenditures.
A.
Sealer of Weights and Measures. The Sealer of Weights and Measures
shall annually make a written report to the Board of Selectmen, on or
before the January 15 in each year, to be printed in the Annual Town
Report, containing an account of his work, receipts and expenditures
during the preceding year, together with such other information and
recommendations which he may deem proper.
B.
Assessors. The annual report of the Assessors to the Board of
Selectmen, for inclusion in the Annual Town Report, shall be submitted
on or before January 15 and shall have appended to it a table of the
valuation, real, personal and total, the rate of taxation, and the amount
of money raised.
C.
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall annually make a written
report to the Board of Selectmen, on or before January 15, to be
printed in the Annual Town Report, containing an account of its work
for the preceding year and recommendations for the best interests of
the Town's future growth.
D.
Library Trustees. The Trustees of the free public library shall submit
to the Board of Selectmen, on or before January 15 in each year, a
detailed report of their doings and of the condition of the library, with
E.
§ 4-1 ADMINISTRATION § 4-3
4:3
§ 4-4. Submission of proposed budget by boards and committees.
All boards and committees of the Town shall submit a proposed, detailed
budget for the current year, in requested quantities, on prescribed forms
provided by the Board of Selectmen, on or before December 15 in each year,
unless otherwise provided for by statute, to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 4-5. Hours for Town Hall offices.
All full-time Town departments in the Town Hall, namely, the Board of
Selectmen's office, Town Administrator's office, Town Accountant's office,
Town Treasurer-Collector's office, Community Development Director's
office, Assessors' office, Veterans' Affairs' office, Town Clerk's office,
Director of Public Works' office, and Board of Health's office, shall
hereinafter remain open continuously at a minimum during a period set by
a majority of the members of the Board of Selectmen. The lunch period,
staggered or otherwise, shall not exceed 1/2 hour.
such recommendations that they deem necessary, to be printed in the
Annual Town Report.
Park Commission. The Park Commission shall submit to the Board of
Selectmen, on or before January 15 in each year, a detailed report of its
doings, to be printed in the Annual Town Report.
F.
Regional School Committee. It shall be the duty of the representatives
of the Town serving on the Regional School Committee to provide to the
Board of Selectmen, for inclusion in the Town Report, an annual report
of their doings, to include all details of operation.
G.
Boards and committees. All boards and committees of the Town,
whether elected or appointed, shall make an annual written report to
the Board of Selectmen, to be included in the Annual Town Report,
of their official doings of the preceding year and shall include in such
report their recommendations of the work to be done and an estimate
of the cost thereof for the ensuing year in their several departments.
Such reports are to be filed with the Board of Selectmen on or before
January 15 in each year.
H.
§ 4-3 ADAMS CODE § 4-5
4:4
ARTICLE II
Board of Selectmen
§ 4-6. Execution of deeds and conveyances.
§ 4-7. Furnishing copies of Town warrants.
The Board of Selectmen shall furnish, for the use of the voters, at each Town
Meeting and at any adjournment thereof, printed copies of the warrant for
the Town Meeting, with any recommendations suggested by the Finance
Committee. In lieu of formal printing of such copies, the Board of Selectmen
may use xerography or a similar method of reproduction that would produce
legible pages, such copies to be in the hands of the Town Meeting members
seven days, at least, before such meeting or any adjournment thereof.
§ 4-8. Police Department regulations.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Selectmen to propose and enforce a set
of rules and regulations for the governing of the Police Department in the
guidance of the members thereof, not inconsistent with these bylaws. The
Board of Selectmen shall have copies of the same printed for the use of the
Police Department.
§ 4-9. Report of proceedings; publication of reports.
The Board of Selectmen shall make a full and detailed annual report of its
proceedings relating to the municipal affairs of the Town and shall cause the
reports of the Treasurer-Collector, Accountant, Assessors, Regional School
Committee, Board of Health, Library Trustees, Cemetery Commission,
Director of Public Works, Planning Board and Park Commission, and such
other reports of boards or committees elected or appointed as it may deem
advisable, to be printed in a sufficient number of copies for the use of the
various voters of the Town.
§ 4-10. Taxicab regulations.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized and empowered to impose
such reasonable license fees and make such rules and regulations for the
operation of taxicabs within the Town and impose such penalties for the
violation of such rules and regulations as it deems just and proper.
Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land,
excluding burial lots and burial rights, such deed shall be executed by
the Board of Selectmen in the name and behalf of the Town, unless the
Town shall otherwise vote in any special case.
A.
All conveyances of land or interest in land which may hereafter be
authorized by a vote of the Town or otherwise shall be signed by a
majority of the Board of Selectmen, unless otherwise provided by law
or vote of the Town, and shall be sealed with the Town Seal.
B.
§ 4-6 ADMINISTRATION § 4-11
4:5
§ 4-11. Direction and management of Town property and offices.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the general direction and management
of the property and offices of the Town in all matters not otherwise provided
for by law or these bylaws.
§ 4-12. Appearance before courts or committees to protect Town
interests.
The Board of Selectmen may appear, either personally or by the Town
Counsel or by special counsel duly employed by it, before any court,
committee of the legislature or any state or county board or commission or
other tribunal to protect the interests of the Town.
§ 4-13. Authority to set curfew.
The Board of Selectmen shall, whenever it is deemed necessary, set a
curfew which will be enforced by the police officers of the Town.
§ 4-11 ADAMS CODE § 4-13
4:6
ARTICLE III
Town Meetings
§ 4-14. Election of Town officers; hours for other elections.
The Annual Town Meeting for the election of Town officers shall be held on
the first Monday in May of each year. The hours for the opening and the
closing of such meeting shall be so designated by the Board of Selectmen,
but in no instance shall the polls for the election of Town officers remain
open for a period of less than 12 consecutive hours. For all other elections,
national, state or otherwise, the same hours as Town elections shall prevail,
unless otherwise covered by statute.
§ 4-15. Posting of warrants. [Amended 6-18-2007 ATM by Art. 24]
Every warrant for a Town Meeting or Special Town Meeting shall be served
by posting an attested copy thereof in two or more public places in the Town
as mandated by state law.
§ 4-16. Reports of committees.
All committees chosen by the Town for any purpose and ordered to report
at any designated time shall make such report in writing.
§ 4-17. Submission of motions.
All motions shall be submitted to the Town Meeting in writing when so
requested by the Town Moderator or the Town Clerk.
§ 4-18. Reconsideration of motions.
No motion shall be reconsidered by the Town Meeting unless ordered by
more than 2/3 of the voters present and voting thereon.
§ 4-19. Dissolution or adjournment of meeting.
No motion, the effect of which would be to dissolve a Town Meeting, shall
be in order until every article in the warrant has been duly considered and
acted upon, but this shall not preclude the postponement of action on or
consideration of any article to an adjournment of the meeting to a stated
time.
§ 4-20. Moderator.
A Town Moderator shall be elected annually to serve for a one-year
term. He shall preside at all Town Meetings and shall continue until the
next annual meeting and until a successor is qualified.
A.
In the event of absence or inability of the Town Moderator to serve, the
Town Clerk shall call the Town Meeting to order. The first business of
that meeting shall be the election of a Moderator Pro Tem by the Town
B.
§ 4-14 ADMINISTRATION § 4-20
4:7
Meeting members present at that meeting. The Moderator so elected
must be a qualified legal voter of the Town.
The duties of the Town Moderator, not prescribed by statute, these
bylaws or other bylaws of the Town, shall be determined by the general
rules of parliamentary law, so far as they may be adapted to Town
Meetings.
C.
§ 4-20 ADAMS CODE § 4-20
4:8
ARTICLE IV
Town Clerk
§ 4-21. Duties.
§ 4-22. Custody of Seal.
The Town Clerk shall have custody of the Town Seal.
Notice of election or appointment to committees. The Town Clerk shall
promptly notify in writing each member of every committee who may
be elected or appointed at any Town Meeting or in pursuance of any
vote thereof. Such notice shall contain a copy of the vote creating the
committee and the names of all members of such committee.
A.
Copies of actions affecting duties of Town board, committee or officer.
The Town Clerk, as soon as possible after a vote of the Town has been
passed which relates particularly to or affects the duties of any board,
committee or officer of the Town, shall furnish a copy of such vote to
such board, committee or officer.
B.
Records of bylaws. The Town Clerk shall keep an accurate, up-to-date
record of all Town bylaws, copies of these bylaws and amendments to
the provisions of these bylaws or such other bylaws of the Town, as
approved by the Attorney General of the commonwealth.
C.
Records generally. The Town Clerk shall keep a file of all Town reports,
reports submitted by all committees chosen by the Town and all original
documents relating to the affairs of the Town which come into the Town
Clerk's custody.
D.
Recordation of conveyances. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to
see that every conveyance to the Town of any interest in property shall
be properly recorded in the Registry of Deeds and to keep a true copy of
all deeds or conveyances executed by the Board of Selectmen, pursuant
to the vote of the Town, in a book to be kept for such purpose alone.
E.
§ 4-21 ADMINISTRATION § 4-22
4:9

ARTICLE V
Town Counsel
§ 4-23. Appointment; compensation; special counsel.
The Board of Selectmen shall each year, within 30 days after the annual
election of Town officers, appoint some competent lawyer as Town Counsel,
who shall serve for the term of one year or until his successor is appointed.
He shall receive for his services such compensation as the Town may
determine, and he may be removed for cause, at any time, by the majority
vote of the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen may, whenever
it deems necessary, employ special counsel to assist or act in place of the
Town Counsel.
§ 4-24. Holding of additional office.
The Town Counsel shall not, during the term of office, hold any other
appointive or elective office of the Town.
§ 4-25. Duties.
The Town Counsel shall have the following duties:
Legal drafting; opinions. The Town Counsel shall draft all bonds, deeds,
leases, obligations, conveyances and other legal instruments and do
every professional act which may be required of him by vote of the
Town or any board or Town officers. Also, when required by such
boards or any committee of the Town, in writing, he shall furnish a
written opinion on any legal question that may be submitted to him, in
writing, in regard to any matter which concerns the board or committee
requesting the opinion, and he shall at all times furnish legal advice to
any officer of the Town who may require his opinion upon any subject
concerning the duties incumbent upon such officer by virtue of his
office.
A.
Prosecution and defense of suits; appearance before legislature. It
shall be the duty of the Town Counsel to commence and prosecute all
actions and other legal proceedings and suits ordered to be brought
by the Town and to defend all actions and suits brought against the
Town in any court or other tribunal of this commonwealth or of the
United States. He shall also appear as counsel in any other action,
suit or prosecution against the Board of Selectmen for any official
action or the performance of any official duty when any right, privilege,
ordinance, act or direction of the Board of Selectmen may be brought
into question. He shall appear as counsel before the legislature of the
commonwealth, or any committee thereof, whenever the interest and
welfare of the Town may be directly or indirectly affected.
B.
Investigation of injury that may give rise to claim against Town.
Immediately upon being notified by the Board of Selectmen, Chief of
Police or Director of Public Works, or upon the receipt of notice from
C.
§ 4-23 ADMINISTRATION § 4-25
4:11
§ 4-26. Annual report.
The Town Counsel shall annually make a written report to the Board of
Selectmen, to be printed in the Annual Town Report, concerning the
professional services rendered by him during the preceding year. Such
report shall contain a statement of each case which has been settled, tried
or otherwise disposed of by him during the year and a statement of each
case which is still pending and the status of the same, together with such
other information and recommendations as he may deem advisable.
any other source, of injury to persons or property under circumstances
which may give rise to a claim for damages against the Town, the
Town Counsel shall make or cause to be made a careful and complete
investigation of all facts relative thereto. In case of injuries to persons
he shall, if it seems practicable, immediately provide for a physical
examination of the injured person to be made by some competent
physician and provide for such further examinations as he sees fit.
He shall take all steps which he deems necessary and adequate to
defend such claims and protect the interests of the Town. Within 10
days after the claim for damages for any cause has been received by
the Town Counsel, he must make a written report to the Board of
Selectmen of the nature and circumstances of the claim, together with
such recommendations regarding the same as he deems advisable.
Prosecution of bylaw violations. The Town Counsel shall prosecute, in
behalf of the Town, in the local District Court, all cases for the violation
of these bylaws or any bylaws of the Town when requested to do so in
writing by any board or officer of the Town.
D.
§ 4-25 ADAMS CODE § 4-26
4:12
ARTICLE VI
Town Treasurer-Collector
§ 4-27. Powers.
The Treasurer-Collector shall have the same power and shall use all means
and processes provided by law which town treasurers may use when acting
as collectors of taxes.
§ 4-28. Annual report.
The annual report of the Treasurer-Collector shall be submitted to the
Board of Selectmen, for inclusion in the Annual Town Report, on or before
January 15 and shall contain a statement of the amount of taxes and
assessments committed to him for collection and the amount collected
thereon, together with the interest and the amount of uncollected taxes.
§ 4-27 ADMINISTRATION § 4-28
4:13

ARTICLE VII
Board of Health
§ 4-29. Creation; composition; election and term of members.
There is hereby created a Board of Health for the Town consisting of three
persons. One member of the Board of Health shall be elected at each Annual
Town Meeting for a term of three years.
§ 4-30. Annual report.
The Board of Health shall annually make a written report to the Board
of Selectmen, on or before January 15, to be printed in the Annual Town
Report, showing in detail the statistics of the health and sanitary condition
of the Town, with recommendations for its improvement, together with a full
and comprehensive statement of its work and that of its appointees during
the previous year. Such report shall also contain a detailed statement of the
amounts expended by the Board of Health during the fiscal year.
§ 4-29 ADMINISTRATION § 4-30
4:15
Chapter 10
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 76.
§ 10-1. Consumption and possession in public areas.
No person shall consume any beer, wine, malt or alcoholic beverages, nor
have in his possession any open containers thereof, upon any public way,
sidewalk or Town-owned land.
§ 10-2. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-1.
Chapter 11
MARIHUANA OR TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 10.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 76.
§ 11-1. Public consumption of marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol.
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marihuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in G.L. c. 94C, § 1, as amended) while in or
upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge,
park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public building,
schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area owned by
or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any bus or other passenger
conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any place accessible to the
public.
§ 11-2. Violations and penalties.
This chapter may be enforced through any lawful means in law by
noncriminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 21D, by the Board of
Selectmen, the Town Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any
police officer. The fine for violation of this chapter shall be $300 for each
offense. Any penalty imposed under this chapter shall be in addition to any
civil penalty imposed under G.L. c. 94C, § 32L.
§ 4-30 ADAMS CODE § 11-2
10:16
Chapter 12
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 12-1. Definitions.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — As used in this chapter shall mean the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Adams.
PAWNBROKER — As used in this chapter shall mean a person who takes
articles or things in pawn in exchange for money subject to a right of
redemption whether subject to interest or not.
PERSON — As used in this chapter shall mean and include one or more
persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, joint-stock companies and all other entities of any kind capable
of being used.
SECONDHAND DEALERS — As used in this chapter shall mean and include
any person dealing in the purchase or sale of secondhand electronic
devices, or in the purchase or sale of secondhand manufactured articles
composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, or platinum, or dealing in the
purchase or sale of old gold, silver or platinum, or dealing in the purchase
of articles or things comprised of gold, silver or platinum for the purpose of
melting or refining, or engaged in melting precious metals for the purpose
of selling, or in the purchase or sale of pawnbrokers' tickets or other
evidence of pledged articles, or, not being a pawnbroker, who deals in
the redemption or sale of pledged articles. Secondhand dealers shall also
include junk dealers, a collector of, dealer in or keeper of a shop for the
purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles as
defined by MGL c.140, §§ 54 through 56.
STATE LAW — As used in this chapter shall mean MGL c.140, §§ 54 through
56, §§ 70 to 85 and §§ 202 to 205.
TOWN — As used in this chapter shall mean the Town of Adams.
§ 12-2. License required.
No person, either as principal, agent or employee, shall, within the limits
of the Town, establish, engage in, or carry on the business of secondhand
dealer or pawnbroker, or both, either separately or in connection with some
other business, without first having obtained and paid for and having in full
force and effect a license as herein provided.
§ 12-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the Town Clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared
and furnished by the Town. Such application shall contain the names
and residences of the applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or
the names and residences of the principal officers if the applicant is an
association or corporation. Such applicant shall also describe in detail
A.
§ 11-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 12-3
10:17
§ 12-4. Bond.
Such application shall be accompanied by a bond to the Town of Adams,
approved as to form by the Town Counsel, in the penal sum of $300 with
sufficient surety or sureties or sufficient collateral security, conditioned for
the due observances during the term of the license of any and all ordinances
which are now in force or may hereafter be adopted by the Town respecting
the business of secondhand dealing and pawnbroking, as defined in § 12-1.
§ 12-5. Investigation.
When an application is filed, the Town Clerk shall cause an investigation
to be made by the police to ascertain whether the applicant or applicants
is or are of good character and repute, and the police shall furnish to the
Town Clerk the information derived from their investigation accompanied
by a recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused.
§ 12-6. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of the application, bond and information as provided in
§ 12-5, the Town Clerk shall, upon his/her approval of such application and
bond as to the sufficiency of surety or sureties or collateral security, submit
the matter to the licensing authority at its next regular meeting, at which
time it shall hold a public hearing on the application, and after which it shall
either approve or reject said application. The Town Clerk shall, upon the
approval by the licensing authority, issue a license after the payment of the
license fee hereinafter provided. All licenses shall be numbered in the order
in which they are issued and shall state clearly the location of the place
of business in which the person receiving such license shall be authorized
to establish, engage in or carry on the business, the kind of business, the
the character of the business in which he, they, or it desire to engage.
The application shall also state the following:
The length of time such applicant or applicants, if an individual,
firm or partnership, or the manager or person in charge, if the
applicant is a firm, partnership, corporation or association, has
or have resided in the Town, his or their place of previous
employment, whether he or they or any of them have been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, what offense, when
and what court.
(1)
The premises where such business is to be located or carried on,
giving street and number.
(2)
Whether the applicant or applicants or manager had either alone
or with someone else previously been a secondhand dealer or
pawnbroker.
(3)
Such application shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary
public or other official authorized to administer oaths in the Town.
B.
§ 12-3 ADAMS CODE § 12-6
10:18
dates of issuance and expiration of the license and the name and address of
the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make
further application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed
since the last previous rejection unless he can show that the reason for such
rejection no longer exists.
§ 12-7. License fees.
Every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker as defined in § 12-1 shall pay
an annual license fee of $150 for each established place of business. All
licenses shall be issued as of May 1 and shall continue in force until April 30
next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked by the
licensing authority. No license shall be used by any person other than the
original licensee, and any holder of such license or badge who permits it to
be used by any other person, and any person who uses such license granted
to any other person, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 12-8. Revocation of license.
§ 12-9. Changing place of business.
In case any licensee shall move his place of business from the place
designated in the license, he shall immediately thereupon give notice to the
Town Clerk and have the same endorsed on the license.
§ 12-10. Record of purchases and sales.
The licensing authority may, at any time for such cause as it, upon
investigation, deems sufficient, revoke any license granted under the
provisions of this chapter.
A.
Whenever any license shall be so revoked, no refund of any unearned
portion thereof shall be made, and no license shall be granted to any
person whose license has been revoked within a period of two years
from the date of such revocation.
B.
Notice of such revocation shall be served by the Town Clerk upon the
person named in the application by mailing the same to the address
given in the application.
C.
Every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall keep in a substantial
bound book in which shall be legibly written in ink and in English at
the time of every purchase, sale or transaction a description of every
article so purchased, sold, or received, the number or numbers and
any monograms, inscriptions or other marks of identification that may
appear on the article, a description of the articles or pieces comprising
old gold, silver, platinum or other metal, and any monograms,
inscriptions or marks of identification thereon, the name, residence and
general description of the person from whom such purchase was made
or to whom sold, and the day and hour of the purchase or sale, including
articles or things purchased or received for the purpose of refining or
A.
§ 12-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 12-10
10:19
§ 12-11. Report to police.
smelting by persons principally engaged in such business. In the case
of the purchase or sale of a pawnbroker ticket or other evidence of
a pledged article, or a redemption or sale of a pledged article, there
shall be written in such book at the time of such purchases, sale or
redemption:
The name and address of the person who issued such ticket or
other evidence;
(1)
Positive identification, of who issued such ticket or other evidence,
will be provided and photocopied;
(2)
(3) The pledge number of such pawn ticket or other evidence;
The name and address of the pledger as it appears on such pawn
ticket or other evidence;
(4)
The amount loaned or advanced as it appears on such pawn ticket
or other evidence;
(5)
The day and hour of such purchase, sale or redemption, as the case
may be;
(6)
The name, residence and general description of the person from
whom or to whom the redeemed article is purchased or sold, as the
case may be;
(7)
The sum paid or received from such pawn ticket or other evidence,
or the sum paid or received for the redeemed article or pledge;
(8)
Such description of a pledged article as appears on such pawn
ticket or other evidence and an accurate description of every
redeemed pledged article.
(9)
Such book shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any
police officer, to the Town Clerk, the Police Chief, or to any magistrate
of the Town or to any person duly authorized in writing for such purpose
by the Town Clerk. No entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated,
altered or defaced. This chapter shall not in any way reduce any duties
required by state law.
B.
All records will be documented into the NESPIN secondhand dealer
pawnshop database through the computer networking system. Training
for the licensee will be provided at no cost on an annual basis.
C.
It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker to
make or cause to be made to the Chief of Police or his representative
every day, except Sunday, before the hour of 12:00 noon, a copy of
the records required to be kept in the preceding section, of all goods,
articles or things or any part thereof, purchased, received or sold in the
course of the business of the dealer on the preceding day, or, if that day
A.
§ 12-10 ADAMS CODE § 12-11
10:20
§ 12-12. Restrictions.
be Sunday, on the two next preceding days. All reports required in this
section shall be made on a blank form prepared and furnished by the
Chief of Police and shall contain such information as the Chief of Police
may require.
Each report shall be signed by the licensee or his representative and by
the person from whom the purchase was made. The Chief of Police shall
cause a record to be kept of all such reports, showing the date and time
of receipt of each report, the name of the licensee making the report
and his address. The contents of such report shall not be communicated
to any person for the purpose of publication, but shall be used by the
Chief of Police and others in authority to protect the public interest and
detect crimes.
B.
No licensee shall carry on business at any other place than the one
designed in his license.
A.
No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall continue to carry on
business after his license is revoked or shall have expired.
B.
No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall purchase any secondhand
goods, articles or things whatsoever from or make any loans to any
person under the age of 18 years, any person who is intoxicated,
apprentice or servant, knowing or having reason to believe the person
to be such. No such dealer shall purchase from or sell, to any person
whatsoever, any secondhand goods, articles or things, between the
hours of 9:00 in the evening and 8:00 in the morning, except Saturdays
when such sales and/or purchases, except as herein provided, may be
made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday hours
of operation for the sales and/or purchases may be made between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m.
C.
No article or thing, except articles or things that have been received
from persons known to be jewelers, dealers, banking institutions,
executors or administrators, shall be sold or disposed of by any dealer
in secondhand articles until the expiration of 15 days after such
purchase or redemption, except that all secondhand articles or things
purchased for the purpose of melting or refining by persons principally
engaged in such business from persons not jewelers or dealers, shall
not be sold, refined, melted or disposed of until the expiration of 15
business days after such purchase; and no such dealer shall receive
any article by way of pledge or pawn; or employ any subterfuge for
receiving goods as security for the advancement of money.
D.
A licensee shall allow his place of business and all secondhand articles
therein to be at all reasonable times examined by any member of the
Police Department.
E.
§ 12-11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 12-12
10:21
§ 12-13. Offer to sell by suspicious characters to be reported.
In case any suspicious or known dishonest person shall offer for sale to
any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, his employee, agent or servant, any
articles of value, and he has reason to believe from any circumstances that
the same has been stolen or acquired by dishonest means, it shall be his
duty to report the same at once to the police.
§ 12-14. Lost or stolen property.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to furnish from time to time
to every secondhand dealer or pawnbroker a list of all articles reported
to the Police Department as lost or stolen. If the Police Department shall
notify a licensed dealer that any goods, articles or things have been lost or
stolen, and if such goods, articles or things, or any such or part of such,
answering to the description of the notice shall then be, or shall thereafter
come into the possession of, any person licensed under the terms hereof, he
shall, upon receiving notice thereof, immediately thereafter as a supplement
to his daily report for that day to the Chief of Police, give information in
writing that certain goods, articles or things listed by the police are in his
possession, and shall not thereafter dispose of the same except upon written
authority so to do from the Chief of Police. Every dealer in secondhand
articles who shall have or receive any goods, articles or things lost or stolen,
or alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall exhibit the same on
demand to any police officer or any magistrate of the Town or any person
duly authorized by the Chief of Police in writing for such purpose who shall
exhibit such written authority to the dealer.
§ 12-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This chapter may be enforced through any lawful means by noncriminal
disposition pursuant to MGL c.40, § 21D, by the Board of Selectmen, the
Town Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any police officer.
The fine for violation of this chapter shall be $300 for each offense. Each
day in which any violation exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate
Every secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall at the time of making
any purchase or transaction attach a properly numbered tag to, or
otherwise legibly number each article bought, and shall make entry of
such number in the book provided for in § 12-10.
F.
Every licensee shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business
a copy of this chapter to be furnished by the Police Department.
G.
No licensee shall buy any secondhand article of any kind, which is
distinctly and plainly marked as being the property of any firm or
corporation other than the person offering to sell the same unless the
person offering to sell the same shall show satisfactory evidence in
writing that he is the legal and lawful owner of such property. Such
written evidence shall be pasted in the book provided for in § 12-10.
H.
§ 12-12 ADAMS CODE § 12-15
10:22
offense. Any penalty imposed under this chapter shall be in addition to any
civil penalty imposed under MGL c.140.
Chapter 14
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 76.
§ 14-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any officer appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to enforce the laws relating to animals.
ANIMALS — All animals of any species, both male and female, including but
not limited to dogs and cats.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — A kennel maintained as a business for or to
include the boarding of dogs.
LICENSE PERIOD — The time between April 1 and March 31, both dates
inclusive.
LIVESTOCK or FOWL — Animals or fowl kept or propagated by the owner
for food or as a means of livelihood, kept in proper houses or suitably
enclosed yards. Such phrase shall not include dogs, cats or other pets.
MULTIPLE PET LICENSE — A license issued for the keeping of several dogs
over the age of six months in a single private residence.
OWNER or KEEPER — Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning or keeping, or who or which has in his or its possession,
for 11 consecutive days in any calendar year, a dog or any other animal,
licensed or unlicensed, and cannot show to the satisfaction of the Animal
Control Officer that such animal was sold, has died, or has been given away
or otherwise disposed of. Further, if the owner or keeper of a dog or other
animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be held liable
for any violation of this chapter.
RUN AT LARGE — Free of restraint and permitted to wander on private or
public ways at will.
§ 14-2. License requirements; fees; inspections.
Any owner or keeper of a dog six months of age or older in the Town of
Adams shall cause that dog to be licensed as required by MGL c. 140,
§§ 137 and 139, commencing on April 1 of each year.
A.
§ 12-15 ANIMALS § 14-2
14:23
§ 14-3. Dogs required to be leashed; exceptions.
§ 14-4. Order to muzzle dogs.
B. Any owner or keeper of several dogs may acquire a multiple pet license.
Commercial kennels must be fully licensed pursuant to the provisions
of MGL c. 140, § 137A, and subject to the Town of Adams Zoning Bylaw.
C.
Any owner or keeper who renews his respective dog license(s) after
June 15 will be charged a late fee as established by the Board of
Selectmen.
D.
Each pet household and commercial kennel shall be available to
inspection by the Animal Control Officer, a natural resources officer,
fish and game warden, police officer, or building inspector or the Board
of Health.
E.
All dogs and cats six months of age or older must be currently
vaccinated against rabies as per MGL c. 140, § 145B.
F.
The annual fee for every animal license, multiple pet license, and
commercial kennel license shall be established by the Board of
Selectmen. No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog specifically
trained to lead or serve a blind or deaf person, provided that the
Massachusetts Division of the Blind and Deaf certifies that such dog is
so trained and actually in the service of a blind or deaf person.
G.
The registering, numbering, describing and licensing of animals shall
be performed in the office of the Town Clerk on a form prescribed and
supplied by the Town and shall be subject to the condition expressed
herein that the dog so licensed shall be controlled and restrained from
killing, chasing or harassing livestock or fowl.
H.
I. No license fee shall be refunded, in whole or in part, for any reason.
The owner or keeper of a licensed animal shall cause it to wear around
its neck or body a collar or harness to which shall be securely attached
a tag issued by the Town Clerk at the time of licensing.
J.
Dog owners, keepers and persons otherwise in charge are required to
physically restrain their dogs by leash when they are not on the owner's
property. Hunting dogs when being used for hunting or training shall
be exempt.
A.
This section shall not apply to property owned and/or controlled by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts where a separate set of rules and
regulations applies.
B.
Whoever being the owner, keeper or person in charge of said dog(s)
fails to keep his dog(s) physically restrained by leash shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in § 14-8 for each individual dog in
each individual offense.
C.
§ 14-2 ADAMS CODE § 14-4
14:24
§ 14-5. Removal of animal feces.
§ 14-6. Impoundment, release and disposition of dogs.
Any owner, keeper or person in charge of a dog may be ordered to
muzzle said dog by a duly appointed animal control officer and, in his/
her absence, by a police officer for either of the following reasons:
(1) For having bitten, injured or physically molested any person; or
(2) For having physically injured any domestic animal.
A.
This order shall remain in effect until removed by the officer after
having been satisfied that the dog is unlikely to repeat its offense. Such
decision by the officer to remove said order shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
B.
If any animal shall defecate upon any property or area, as hereinafter
defined, then the owner, keeper and person then walking or otherwise
in charge of said animal shall immediately remove or cause to be
removed from said property or area all feces so deposited by said
animal. Unless said feces are removed, the owner, keeper and the
person then walking or otherwise in charge of said animal (or if the
owner, keeper or person shall be under the age of 18, then the parent
or guardian) shall be deemed to have committed a punishable offense.
A.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PROPERTY or AREA — Any public property or the common areas of any
privately owned property or any private property owned or occupied by
any person or persons who are not members of the family of the owner
or keeper of or the person then walking or otherwise in charge of the
animal.
B.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide animal, hearing
animal or service animal while actually engaged in the performance of
its trained duties with a disabled person.
C.
The commission of any offense punishable under this section shall be
punishable by a fine of as provided in § 14-8..
D.
Animal control officers or, in their absence, police officers may cause a
dog to be impounded for any of the following causes:
(1) If found without a license when a license is required;
(2) If found unrestrained as set forth in § 14-3 of this chapter;
For violation of a muzzling order as provided for in § 14-4 of this
chapter or as provided under MGL c. 140, § 167, as amended;
(3)
(4) For having bitten, injured or physically molested any person;
A.
§ 14-4 ANIMALS § 14-6
14:25
§ 14-7. Dog known to have killed livestock or fowl.
The Board of Selectmen or its agents may, after written notice to the owner
or keeper, enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper of any dog known
to it to have killed livestock or fowl and then and there kill such dog, unless
such owner or keeper whose premises are thus entered for said purposes
shall give a bond in the sum of $200, with sufficient sureties approved by
the Board of Selectmen, conditioned that the dog is continually restrained.
If the owner or keeper of the dog declares his intention to give such a bond,
said Selectmen or their agents shall allow the owner or keeper seven days,
exclusive of Sundays and holidays, in which to procure and prepare the
same and to present it to them.
(5) For having physically injured any domestic animal;
To restore peace when the owner or keeper of a dog is otherwise
unavailable, unwilling, or physically unable to restrain his/her dog
from causing a nuisance by continuous barking or howling; or
(6)
(7) To ensure the safety and well-being of the particular dog.
No later than two days after the impounding of any dog the owner or
keeper shall be notified, or if the owner or keeper of the dog is unknown
or, after reasonable efforts, is not contacted, written notice shall then
be posted for 10 consecutive days in the location for posting notices in
the Town Hall, which notice shall describe the dog and the place and
time of taking. Dogs impounded and unclaimed by the owner or keeper
after such ten-day period shall be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 140, § 151A.
Prior to the end of said ten-day period, the owner or keeper may
obtain the release of any dog impounded hereunder as follows:
In the case of a violation of Subsection A(1) of this section,
upon obtaining a license as required by law and after paying
all pound fees, fines, and notifications costs, if any.
(a)
(1)
B.
A person who owns or keeps a dog and who has received such notice
that the dog has been impounded and is eligible for immediate release
and does not within 10 days claim said dog at the pound shall be
punished by a fine as provided in § 14-8 to cover the board and disposal
of such dog. The owner or keeper shall be described as provided in the
definition of “owner or keeper” in § 14-1.
C.
Any person who violates the provisions of § 14-4 or this section shall be
punished by a fine as provided in § 14-8.
D.
The owner or keeper of any dog who intentionally allows said dog to
cause a nuisance by barking or howling shall be punished by a fine as
provided in § 14-8.
E.
§ 14-6 ADAMS CODE § 14-8
14:26
§ 14-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-21-2005 ATM by Art.
24]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
noncriminal disposition of the violation pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D,
punishable by a fine of $50 for a first offense, $100 for a second offense
and $300 for a third or subsequent offense occurring in any twelve-month
period. This penalty shall be assessed notwithstanding any other penalty
or fine set forth elsewhere in the Town Code. Each day that any violation
exists shall constitute separate violation under this provision. All fines and
penalties shall be paid into the Treasury of the Town of Adams.
Chapter 22
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 93.
Numbering of buildings — See § 105-1.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 109.
Zoning — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 201.
§ 14-8 ANIMALS § 14-8
14:27

ARTICLE I
General Provisions1
§ 22-1. through § 22-2. (Reserved)
§ 22-3. Appointment of Building Inspector.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Building Inspector, who shall be
a voter in the Town, shall have at least five years' experience as a building
foreman, architect or engineer and shall serve until removed for cause by
the Board of Selectmen.
§ 22-4. Powers and duties of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall be charged with the inspection of buildings,
the enforcement of this chapter and such other duties as are imposed by the
general laws of the commonwealth. He shall keep a record of the business of
his office and shall submit to the Board of Selectmen a yearly report of such
business and such other reports as it may call for. Subject to the provisions
of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall grant permits for the erection,
alteration or moving of buildings, and no building, structure or foundation
shall be built, altered or moved without such permit. He shall have the right
of entry at any reasonable time in the performance of his duty to examine
and inspect any premises, buildings or other structures.
§ 22-5. through § 22-6. (Reserved)
§ 22-7. Garbage disposals required in new building units.
Every dwelling unit constructed after the date of enactment of this section2
which discharges into a municipal sewage system shall have installed and
maintained in the kitchen sink, in accordance with acceptable plumbing
standards, a disposal unit for the grinding of food wastes into water-carried
pulp.
§ 22-8. through § 22-9. (Reserved)
§ 22-10. Building permit application; plans and specifications; fees.
[Amended 6-20-2016 ATM by Art. 24]
Every person intending to build, construct, reconstruct or alter any
building, structure or foundation, including temporary structures,
platforms or stands for assembly purposes, shall, before commencing
A.
1. Editor's Note: The following sections of Article I of this chapter were disapproved by the
Attorney General on October 18, 2004 and have been deleted and reserved for future use:
§§ 22-1, Definitions; 22-2, Compliance required; 22-5, Materials and methods of
construction; 22-6, Waiver of requirements for certain small structures; 22-8, Certificates
of occupancy required for dwellings; 22-9, Inspections; 22-11, Term of permits; records
open to public inspection; 22-12, Exemptions; and 22-13, Violations and penalties; notice
of violation
2. Editor's Note: The bylaw from which this section is derived was adopted 3-23-1970.
§ 22-1 ANIMALS § 22-10
14:29
§ 22-11. through § 22-13. (Reserved)
the same, file with the Building Inspector an application for a building
permit on a form provided therefor and shall, if required by the Building
Inspector or the Board of Appeal, file the plans, specifications and
details or other full and accurate description of the intended building,
construction or reconstruction or alteration. This permit shall be in
addition to such permits as may be required by the laws of the
commonwealth for specific classes of buildings. The Board of Selectmen
shall determine the fees for any and all permits issued under this
section. Any fees currently or previously established by this chapter
shall remain in effect until such a time as the Board of Selectmen has
adopted a fee schedule otherwise.
§ 22-10 ADAMS CODE § 22-11
14:30
ARTICLE II
Board of Appeal3
§ 22-14. Establishment; membership; terms of office.
A Board of Appeal is hereby established to consist of three members to be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. All members of the Board of Appeal
shall be residents of the Town. The appointments first made shall be for
one, two and three years, respectively, so that the term of one member shall
expire each year. All subsequent appointments shall be made for a term of
three years to begin on the first day of April.
§ 22-15. Vacancies; conflicts of interest; compensation.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Selectmen for any
unexpired term. No member of the Board of Appeal shall sit on a case in
which he is interested. If any member is so disqualified or absent, the other
two members may appoint a substitute. The members shall serve without
pay, but the reasonable expenses of the Board of Appeal, when approved by
the Board of Selectmen, shall be paid.
§ 22-16. through § 22-18. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: The following sections of Article II of this chapter were disapproved by the
Attorney General on October 18, 2004 and have been deleted and reserved for future use:
§§ 22-16, Right to appeal; 22-17, Rules of procedure; decisions; and 22-18, Revocation of
permits; variance.
§ 22-14 ANIMALS § 22-16
14:31

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)4
§ 22-19. through § 22-25. (Reserved)
4. Editor's Note: Article III, General Construction Standards, §§ 22-19 to 22-25, was
disapproved by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted and
reserved for future use.
§ 22-19 ANIMALS § 22-19
14:33

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)5
§ 22-26. through § 22-32. (Reserved)
5. Editor's Note: Article IV, Foundations and Supports, §§ 22-26 to 22-32, was disapproved by
the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted and reserved for future
use.
§ 22-26 ANIMALS § 22-26
14:35

ARTICLE V
Stretch Energy Code
[Added 6-23-2015 ATM by Art. 28]
§ 22-33. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) — The
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code
created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted
by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the
establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy
efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy
conservation requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code are
the IECC with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of
Building Regulations and Standards.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of Building Regulations
and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the 8th edition
Massachusetts Building Code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix
to the August 2013 Massachusetts Building Code, based on further
amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) to
improve the energy efficiency of buildings built to this code.
§ 22-34. Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA is to provide a more energyefficient
alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant
sections of the Building Code for both new construction and existing
buildings.
§ 22-35. Applicability.
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not
included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, and 51, as
applicable.
§ 22-36. Stretch Code.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions,
amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into
the Town of Adams General Bylaws, Chapter 22.
A.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the Inspector of Buildings or
Building Commissioner.
B.
§ 22-33 ANIMALS § 22-36
14:37

ARTICLE VI
Chimneys, Fireplaces and Smoke Pipes
§ 22-37. Chimneys.
All chimneys shall be built of brick, cinder blocks, stone or reinforced
concrete, the walls of which shall not be less than 3 3/4 inches thick and
shall have terra cotta flue linings. Chimneys shall extend at least two feet
above the highest ridge. Chimneys shall be built upon concrete or solid
masonry foundations. The footing for an exterior chimney shall start below
the frost line. Listed factory-built chimneys shall be installed in accordance
with the term of their listings and the manufacturer's instructions.
§ 22-38. Fireplaces
§ 22-39. Smoke pipes
The back and sides of fireplaces hereafter erected shall be of approved
masonry or reinforced concrete of not less than four inches total
thickness and shall include a lining of fire brick or other approved
material of not less than two inches in thickness.
A.
Wooden centers, used in the construction of that part of the supporting
arch which is below the hearth of the fireplace inside of the chimney
breast, shall be removed when the construction of the arch is completed
and before plastering is started on the underside.
B.
Every smoke pipe shall connect with a chimney or other approved flue
and shall enter a chimney through a fireclay or metal thimble or flue
ring of masonry. No smoke pipe shall pass through a floor nor through
a roof.
A.
Smoke pipes shall not pass through combustible partitions, provided
that smoke pipes from ordinary ranges and stoves may pass through
combustible partitions if they are guarded by double metal ventilating
thimbles two inches larger in diameter than the pipe or by steel tubes
built in brickwork or other approved fireproofing materials extending
not less than eight inches beyond all sides of the tube.
B.
§ 22-37 ANIMALS § 22-39
14:39
Chapter 28
CEMETERIES
§ 28-1. Cemetery Commission officers; records and reports.
The Cemetery Commission shall meet annually and organize by the choice
of a Chairman and a Secretary. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to
keep a record of the doings, receipts and expenditures of the Cemetery
Commission and render a specific report thereof to the Board of Selectmen
on or before January 15, to be printed in the Annual Town Report.
§ 28-2. Duties of Cemetery Commission.
§ 28-3. Funds for perpetual care.
The Cemetery Commission shall have full charge of all of the public
cemeteries of the Town, to lay out the same into lots, to execute
and deliver deeds therefor, and to erect all necessary signs, fences,
buildings and other structures in or about the same, at an expense not
to exceed, in any case, the amount of the funds at its disposal.
A.
The Cemetery Commission shall direct the expenditures of all general
cemetery funds in the cemetery account and of all specific
appropriations, unless otherwise ordered by the Town, and the income
of all trust funds held by the Town for cemetery purposes, conforming
to the directions of the depositor.
B.
The Cemetery Commission shall keep a complete record of all sales
of lots in the public cemeteries of the Town and the deeds thereof,
together with the names of the deceased and the location of the graves.
C.
All sums of money for perpetual care hereafter deposited with the Town
Treasurer-Collector shall be credited to the account of the cemetery
fund. The Town Treasurer-Collector shall keep in his office a book which
shall contain a record of all funds deposited, the date of such deposit,
the name of the depositor, the name of the cemetery containing the
lot in connection with which the deposit is made and the location and
number of the lot. Every person who may hereafter deposit any money
for such purpose shall receive a certificate therefor from the Town
Treasurer-Collector.
A.
The whole sum thus deposited shall forever bear interest, and annually,
on the first day of July, the interest shall be computed and entered
to the credit of each deposit in the book provided for in this section.
Annually, on or before the first day of October, the Town Treasurer-
Collector shall return to the Cemetery Commission a statement of the
amount of interest to the credit of each deposit, with the name of the
depositor, and the Cemetery Commission shall cause the whole of such
interest to be expended on such lot.
B.
§ 22-39 ADAMS CODE § 28-4
28:40
§ 28-4. Authority to make rules and regulations.
The Cemetery Commissioners, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
are hereby authorized and empowered to make rules and regulations not
contrary to law with regard to the use of the Town cemeteries, and said
rules and regulations shall be on file with the Town Clerk.
Chapter 32
CONTAMINATED PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 109. Zoning — See Ch. 125.
§ 32-1. Agreements to facilitate cleanup and redevelopment.
This bylaw is hereby established upon acceptance by the Town of Adams
of MGL c. 59, § 59A. The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to
negotiate agreements regarding the payment of outstanding real-estate
taxes, interest and penalties, including abatement of those amounts needed
to make a cleanup and redevelopment project economically feasible. Said
agreement may also contain additional incentives, financial and otherwise,
as may be deemed appropriate. Agreements may be entered into only with
new, innocent purchasers who did not own the site at the time the oil or
hazardous material was released and did not cause or contribute to its
release. Agreements must specify the details agreed to regarding payment
of any outstanding obligations, including the amount owed, rate of interest
to accrue if any, amount of monthly payments, payment schedule, large
penalties and other terms. These obligations may consist of outstanding
real-estate taxes or other financing packages negotiated with the Town.
Agreements must be signed by the Board of Selectmen, property owner,
and must be notarized and attested to by the Town Clerk. Copies must be
provided to the Massachusetts Commissioner of Revenue, Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection, United States Environmental
Protection Agency. Additionally, the property owner and the Town Meeting
must receive copies. The Town Meeting must approve, by majority vote, any
agreements that reduce outstanding property taxes, penalties and interest.
Chapter 35
CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING
§ 35-1. Contracts by Town officers.
Generally. No department or officer having charge of any office,
department or undertaking of the Town shall recommend the award of
any contract or the purchase of any equipment, supplies or services
A.
§ 28-4 CONTAMINATED PROPERTIES § 35-1
32:41
unless the Chief Procurement Officer has first certified that that person
has complied with the provisions of MGL c. 30B, c. 30, § 39M, and/or c.
149.
Proposals
Notice. A notice involving formal proposals therefor shall have
been posted, in the office of the Chief Procurement Officer, not
later than two weeks prior to the time so specified, and such notice
shall also have been published at least once, not less than two
weeks prior to the time so specified, in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the Town, as the Chief Procurement Officer
may direct. A notice involving informal proposals therefor shall
have been posted in the office of the Chief Procurement Officer not
later than three days prior to the time so specified.
(1)
Form. Formal proposals for any contract subject to this section
shall be sealed and in writing. Informal proposals for any contract
subject to this section may be either oral or written quotations.
In the event of an oral quotation, the Chief Procurement Officer
shall record said quotation in writing and shall require written
confirmation of quotation from offerers prior to the awarding of the
contract.
(2)
Opening; inspection. Such formal proposals shall be opened and
read in public at a time and place specified in the posted and
published notice and, after being so opened, shall be open for
public inspection. Such informal proposals shall be received by a
time specified in the posted notice and shall be maintained by the
Chief Procurement Officer and shall be open for public inspection
upon the awarding of the contract. The Chief Procurement Officer
shall maintain a list of all persons requesting and/or receiving
formal and informal proposal notices.
(3)
B.
Awards generally. The department or officer shall award the contract to
the lowest responsible bidder. No contract shall be awarded for a sum
in excess of the appropriation available, unless it is on a unit bid price
basis, in which event the quantities may be adjusted in order to make
the final total payment not exceed the appropriation.
C.
Avoidance of section. No contract or preliminary plans or specifications
pertaining thereto shall be split, altered, changed or divided for the
purpose of evading the provisions of this section.
D.
Rejection of bids. The right shall be reserved to reject any or all bids, if
such rejection is in the public interest.
E.
Suspension of section where interests of Town would be served. It
is further provided that in the event of unusual opportunity for the
purchase of materials, supplies and equipment in the best interest of
the Town, not in excess of $1,000, which opportunity for the purchase
of the particular materials, supplies and equipment would ordinarily
F.
§ 35-1 ADAMS CODE § 35-1
35:42
§ 35-2. Capital expenditures.
All Town departments may make capital expenditures whose aggregate
total may not exceed $2,000 per fiscal year from their operating expense
accounts.
Chapter 46
FINANCE COMMITTEE
§ 46-1. Composition; appointment; term; retired members.
§ 46-2. Vacancies.
In the event of a vacancy on the Finance Committee, the Town Moderator
shall forthwith make an appointment to fill the vacancy for the unexpired
term.
be lost or rendered impractical or impossible by the operation of this
section, this section may be avoided and dispensed with upon the
unanimous vote of the Board of Selectmen, provided that necessary
funds are available and have been properly appropriated in advance.
There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of 15 members who
shall reside in the Town and shall be registered voters therein. Of this
Committee no person holding an elective position or any other position
in Town, other than that of Town Meeting member, shall be eligible to
serve on the Finance Committee. The Town Moderator shall appoint
all members of the Finance Committee, each of whom shall serve a
term of three years. It is recommended that at least two members from
each precinct be appointed by the Town Moderator, to ensure equitable
representation. The term of office of each such member will expire on
May 1 unless the annual business meeting of the Town is not held and
dissolved by May 1, in which case such appointments to the Finance
Committee shall not be made until such annual business meeting has
been held and dissolved.
A.
When any member who has served on the Finance Committee for not
less than three consecutive terms shall reach 70 years of age, the Town
Moderator, at the completion of such member's term, may notify him
that thereafter he shall be on the retired list of Finance Committee
members. A member so retired shall attend Finance Committee
meetings only when so requested by its Chairman, to give his advice or
suggestions on matters pending before the Committee. The members so
retired shall have no vote at such meetings as they may attend. Every
such retired member shall have the status of and be referred to as
an “honorary member.” The honorary members are exclusive of the 15
members permitted by law.
B.
§ 35-1 FINANCE COMMITTEE § 46-3
46:43
§ 46-3. Officers.
The Finance Committee shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary.
§ 46-4. Powers and duties.
The Finance Committee shall consider all municipal questions relating to
appropriations and may consider any municipal questions. It shall hear
members of Town departments and citizens of the Town relative to any
matter before the Committee and shall make such recommendations as
the Committee deems advisable upon all subjects considered by it. It shall
submit its recommendations and report to each Town Meeting. See also
§ 4-7.
Chapter 50
REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 50-1. Funds established. [Amended 6-18-2018 ATM by Art. 19]
There are hereby established in the Town of Adams pursuant to the
provision of Massachusetts General Laws c. 44, § 53E 1/2, the following
revolving funds:
Revolving Fund
Spending
Authority Revenue Source
Allowed
Expenses
Bid Specification
Revolving Fund
Town
Administrator
Fees from
vendors
requesting bid
and proposal
specifications
Contractual
services for
preparation and
issuance of bid
and proposal
packets
Sanitary Sewer
Revolving Fund
DPW Director Charges from
persons
requesting
connection to the
sewer system
Expenses and
contractual
services required
for individual
sewer
connections
Promotional
Revolving Fund
Town
Administrator
Fees from the
sale of
promotional
items
Expenses related
to the promotion
of the Town and
replacement of
stock
Library Revolving
Fund
Library Director
or Board of
Library Trustees
Fines and fees
from damaged or
late return of
borrowed
material
Replacement of
library materials
§ 46-3 ADAMS CODE § 50-1
46:44
Revolving Fund
Spending
Authority Revenue Source
Allowed
Expenses
Transfer Station
Revolving Fund
DPW Director or
Town
Administrator
Income and fees
received from the
operation of the
Adams Transfer
Station
Expenses related
to the operation
of the Adams
Transfer Station
Inspection
Services Fund
Building
Commissioner or
Town
Administrator
Income and fees
received from
plumbing,
electrical, wiring
and out of town
building permits
Inspector
stipends,
substitute
inspector
stipends,
inspection
computer
programs and
related expenses
Tax Title
Revolving Fund
Treasurer or
Town
Administrator
Fees from tax
takings
Costs associated
with tax title
takings, tax
delinquencies
and tax acquired
properties
Adams Visitor
Center Revolving
Fund
Town
Administrator
Rental Fees Maintenance and
upkeep of the
Adams Visitor
Center
Adams Memorial
Building
Revolving Fund
Town
Administrator
Rental Fees Maintenance and
upkeep of the
Adams Visitor
Center
Chapter 57
INVENTORIES
§ 57-1. Annual inventories of furniture, fixtures and capital
equipment.
An inventory of all furniture, fixtures and capital equipment shall be
submitted by all Town departments to the Town Accountant
semiannually on October 31 and April 30.
A.
Such inventory shall be made in duplicate, one copy of which shall be
filed with the Town Accountant.
B.
The outgoing department head shall submit for signing to the incoming
department head an inventory of all assets, including furniture, fixtures
and capital equipment, in his particular department.
C.
§ 50-1 INVENTORIES § 57-1
57:45
Chapter 60
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDOR'S PERMIT
§ 60-1. Purpose.
The Massachusetts Department of Public Safety requires, pursuant to 520
CMR 15.00, each municipality to issue permits to person engaging in ice
cream vending.
§ 60-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ICE CREAM — Any frozen dairy or frozen water-based food product.
ICE CREAM TRUCK — Any motor vehicle used for selling, displaying, or
offering to sell ice cream.
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDING — The selling, displaying, or offering to sell
ice cream or any prepackaged food product from an ice cream truck.
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDOR/OPERATOR — Any person who owns, sells,
displays, or offers to sell ice cream from an ice cream truck or any person
who drives or operates such a vehicle.
§ 60-3. Permit required.
No person shall engage in ice cream truck vending within the Town of
Adams unless the applicant has been issued a valid permit to do so by the
Chief of Police or his designee. Said permit shall only be valid for use within
the Town limits. A separate permit is required for every person who engages
in ice cream truck vending/operation.
§ 60-4. Application for permit.
Any discrepancy in the inventory shall be brought to the attention of
the Board of Selectmen.
D.
Only the Department of Public Safety's uniform application and permit
form will be utilized. The permit shall include a current color
photograph of the applicant, encased in plastic. Permits shall be
numbered, sequentially, as granted and will also be encased in plastic.
A.
In order to obtain an initial permit, or to renew a permit, each applicant
shall submit the following to the permitting authority:
(1) A completed uniform application;
(2) A copy of his/her fingerprints;
(3) Two current color photographs (1.5 inches by two inches); and
(4) A valid driver's license.
B.
§ 57-1 ADAMS CODE § 60-4
57:46
§ 60-5. Administrative fee.
The Police Department shall collect an administrative fee upon issuance of
each permit.
§ 60-6. Term of permit.
Both initial and renewal permits shall expire annually on January 1.
§ 60-7. Display of permit; revocation; violations and penalties.
Chapter 62
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Upon receipt of the permit application or application for renewal, the
Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct an investigation into
the criminal history of the applicant to determine eligibility. The
investigation shall include performing a state and national criminal
history records check as authorized by MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2. As part of
this investigation, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall ensure
that the identity of the applicant is true and accurate and, in the case
of a renewal, that the applicant is linked to the original permit number.
C.
All permits issued shall be conspicuously displayed and clearly visible
on the windshield dash of any ice cream truck operated or from which
ice cream or any prepackaged food product is sold.
A.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee may deny issuance of a permit or
revoke a permit for just cause. Pursuant to 520 CMR 15.05, no permit
shall be issued to any person who is a sex offender, as defined by MGL
c. 6, § 178C. Upon denial of the issuance or revocation of a permit, an
applicant shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen. All
such appeals must be made in writing and addressed to the Board of
Selectmen. Appeals may be heard in accordance with the scheduling of
the Board. The decision of the Board of Selectmen shall be final and
binding. No such right of appeal shall attach to the denial of a permit of
an applicant who is a sex offender.
B.
Whoever conducts himself/herself as an ice cream vendor/operator with
a valid Town of Adams issued permit or with an expired permit, or
whoever improperly displays a permit, shall be subject to a fine of no
more than $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second offense, and
$300 for a third or subsequent offense.
C.
Every ice cream vendor/operator shall comply with all state motor
vehicle laws, regulations specific to the operation of ice cream trucks,
Town Bylaws, and health codes, as well as any zoning or Department
of Public Works regulations that may restrict or prohibit vending in
certain areas. Violation of any such law, regulation, bylaw, or health
code shall be grounds for the revocation of the vendor's permit.
D.
§ 60-4 INVENTORIES § 60-7
57:47

ARTICLE I
Delinquent Taxpayers
[Amended 6-21-2005 ATM by Art. 25; 3-5-2018 STM by Art. 3]
§ 62-1. List of delinquent parties.
The Treasurer-Collector shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each
department, board, commission or division which has the authority to issue
licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of any person,
corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party,
that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges, and that such party has not filed in
good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending
petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 62-2. Denial, revocation or suspension of license or permit.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said
list furnished to the licensing authority from the Treasurer-Collector or
with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of
such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out
or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate
owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority from the Treasurer-Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Treasurer-Collector, as required
by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held
not earlier than fourteen (14) days after said notice. Said list shall be prima
facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit
to any party. The Treasurer-Collector shall have the right to intervene in
any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or
suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purposes of such proceedings and shall not be relevant to or introduced
in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license
denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended
or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the
license authority receives a certificate issued by the Treasurer-Collector
that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the
municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate.
§ 62-3. Payment agreements.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
§ 62-1 INVENTORIES § 62-3
57:49
or revocation of said license or permit: provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 62-4. Waiver.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on
said property.
§ 62-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the following licenses or permits:
A. Open burning.
B. Bicycle permits.
C. Sale of articles for charitable purposes.
D. Children's work permits.
E. Dog licenses.
F. Fishing, hunting and trapping licenses.
G. Marriage licenses.
H. Theatrical events.
I. Public exhibition permits.
Clubs and associations dispensing food or beverages licensed under the
provisions of MGL c. 140, § 21E.
J.
§ 62-3 ADAMS CODE § 62-5
57:50
Chapter 70
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 4.
Contracts and purchasing — See Ch. 35.
Inventories — See Ch. 57.
Personnel — See Ch. 80.
§ 62-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 62-5
70:51

ARTICLE I
List of Moneys and Emoluments Received
§ 70-1. Submission by officers.
All elected and appointed officers of the Town who receive fees, emoluments
or moneys of any kind, either for their own use or for the Town, county or
commonwealth, shall submit to the Board of Selectmen annually a true list
setting forth in detail all of such fees, emoluments and moneys received
during the year.
§ 70-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 70-1
70:53
Chapter 76
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 10.
Animals — See Ch. 14.
Police Department — See Ch. 86.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 121.
§ 76-1. Disorderly conduct, indecent language and threats.
No person shall:
§ 76-2. Filing of false reports.
No person shall knowingly file a false report, traffic or otherwise, with the
Police Department.
§ 76-3. Defacing fences, buildings or sidewalks.
No person shall make any indecent figures or write any obscene words upon
or deface by marks, in any manner, any fence, building, sidewalk, crosswalk,
or ledge.
§ 76-4. (Reserved)6
§ 76-5. Loitering.
No person shall be or remain upon any sidewalk or upon any doorstep,
portico or other projection of any house or building not owned by such
person, to the annoyance or disturbance of any person, after having been
duly warned by any person having authority to give such warning, nor shall
persons so congregate and loaf upon any such sidewalk or in any public way
or other public place in the Town.
A. Behave in a rude, disorderly, insolent or insulting manner.
B. Make any indecent noise, sound or gesture.
C. Use indecent, profane or insulting language.
Make any threats or use any other language tending to create a breach
of the peace in any public way or other public place in the Town, or
within an audible distance of any dwelling house or other building
therein.
D.
6. Editor's Note: Section 76-4, Distributing handbills or advertisements, was disapproved by
the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted and reserved for future
use.
§ 70-1 ADAMS CODE § 76-6
76:54
§ 76-6. Escaping or attempting to escape custody.
No person shall escape or attempt to escape from the Town jail or from
custody of a police officer after a legal arrest has been made.
§ 76-7. Destroying or defacing public property.
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any street sign, guideboard,
lamppost, lamp or lantern thereon, nor any tree, public lawn, grass plot,
building, fence, post or other thing set, erected or made for the use or
enhancement of the Town.
§ 76-8. Soliciting money.
§ 76-9. Parks; hours of operation. [Added 6-21-2005 ATM by Art.
26]
No person shall go from house to house for the purpose of soliciting
money, or sell any tag, badge or other article of any intrinsic value
for the purpose of obtaining money without first having obtained
permission to do so from the Chief of Police. 7
A.
Whenever it is deemed advisable, the Chief of Police shall obtain
pertinent information of identification from solicitors or the companies
they represent; and he shall issue a written permit, to which is to be
attached a photograph identifying the person to whom such permit is
granted. A copy of such permit, together with an attached photograph,
shall be retained for the records by the Chief of Police.
B.
No person shall enter or remain in any public park owned or operated
by the Town of Adams outside of those hours established for the
operation of said park set forth in Subsection B.
A.
Bowe Field shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. or such other
hours as may be established by the Adams Agricultural Fair. Quality
Street Park shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. Reid Field shall
be open from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. Renfrew Field shall be open from
7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. Russell Field shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until
9:00 p.m. Siara Street Park shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m.
Valley Street Field shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m.
B.
The Board of Selectmen may extend the hours of operation of any public
park for the holding of an organized special event for which the Board
has granted a permit.
C.
7. Editor's Note: A portion of Subsection A prohibiting solicitation of money on public ways
and in public places was disapproved by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and
has been deleted.
§ 76-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 76-9
76:55
Chapter 80
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 4.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 70.
Personnel rules and regulations — See Ch.
200.
§ 80-1. Purpose and authority.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPOINTMENT — The placement of a person in a position in the service of
the Town.
CIVIL SERVICE — Classified civil service provided for by MGL c. 31 and the
rules made thereunder.
CLASS — A group of positions sufficiently similar with respect to general
nature of duties, authority and responsibility.
POSITION — An officer or post of employment in Town service with
assigned duties and responsibilities calling for full-time or part-time
employment of one person in performance thereof.
TOWN — The Town of Adams.
§ 80-3. Applicability.
All Town departments and positions shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter except elected positions and the Town Administrator. Employees
subject to the civil service laws or a collective bargaining agreement are
subject only to those provisions which are not specifically regulated by civil
service law or contract. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit
any rights of employees pursuant to MGL c. 150E.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish fair and equitable personnel
policies and a system of personnel administration that ensures uniform,
fair and efficient application of the personnel policies.
A.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Article
LXXXIX of the Constitution of the commonwealth and MGL c. 41,
§§ 108A and 108C.
B.
§ 76-9 ADAMS CODE § 80-4
76:56
§ 80-4. Administration.
In conjunction with Sections 10 and 11 of An Act Establishing a Selectmen-
Administrator Form of Government in the Town of Adams, the Town
Administrator shall be responsible for administration of this chapter and
regulations as approved by the Board of Selectmen. The Town Administrator
may delegate responsibility to such staff assistant or assistants as deemed
necessary. The Town Administrator shall:
§ 80-5. Classification plan.
§ 80-6. Compensation plan.
Act to ensure that the Town acts affirmatively in providing maximum
opportunities to all persons regardless of sex, color, creed, race or
national origin for entry-level and promotional positions and provides
equal treatment in all other aspects of personnel management.
A.
Establish written rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the
Board of Selectmen, consistent with the purposes and provisions of this
chapter.
B.
Be responsible for the recruitment, selection, appointment and removal
of all employees subject to this chapter.
C.
D. Maintain a centralized personnel recordkeeping system.
A position classification plan for all employees subject to this chapter
shall be established, based on similarity of duties performed and
responsibilities assumed, so that the same qualifications may be
reasonably required for, and the same schedule of pay may be equitably
applied to, all positions in the same class. No employee may be
appointed to a position not included in the classification plan.
A.
Section 80-5A shall not apply to members of a collective bargaining
unit. [Added 6-16-2009 ATM by Art. 26]
B.
A compensation plan for all positions subject to this chapter shall be
established and amended by action of the Town Administrator with
approval of the Board of Selectmen and Town Meeting. The
compensation plan shall consist of:
A schedule of pay grades, including minimum, maximum and
intermediate rates of each grade.
(1)
An official list indicating the assignment of each class of position to
specific pay grades.
(2)
A.
Section 80-6A shall not apply to members of a collective bargaining
unit. [Added 6-16-2009 ATM by Art. 26]
B.
§ 80-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 80-7
76:57
§ 80-7. Grievance procedure.
Employees are entitled to have grievances and concerns regarding their
employment heard in a fair, equitable and timely manner. The increase or
decrease of general wage rates or salaries shall not be the subject of a
grievance. A grievance procedure shall be established for all employees
subject to this chapter.
§ 80-8. Adoption and amendment of regulations.
§ 80-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter and any administrative regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter are severable. If any chapter provisions or
administrative regulations are held invalid, the remaining provisions of this
chapter or administrative regulations shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter 86
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 86-1. Composition.
The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, captains and such
number of police officers as the Board of Selectmen shall deem necessary.
§ 86-2. Powers and duties of Chief of Police; presence of officer at
station.
Promulgation. The Town Administrator shall promulgate regulations,
subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, further defining the
personnel policies and procedures of the Town.8
A.
Adoption of regulations. The personnel regulations shall be adopted or
amended as follows:
(1) The Town Administrator or designee shall prepare the regulations.
These regulations shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen,
which shall have 30 days to act thereon. Said regulations shall
become effective after 30 days if the Board of Selectmen fails to act
thereon.
(2)
B.
Maintenance and annual review. The Town Administrator shall annually
review the personnel regulations and recommend amendments to the
Board of Selectmen. The Town Administrator shall compile and
maintain a compilation of all regulations adopted by the Board of
Selectmen. Copies of the compiled regulations shall be provided to all
department heads and be available for inspection by employees.
C.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Personnel Rules and Regulations.
§ 80-7 ADAMS CODE § 86-2
86:58
§ 86-3. Care of police station and property; reports.
The Chief of Police shall have the care of the police station and of all
property of the Town used by the Department and shall keep a full and
complete record of the Police Department's business. He shall make reports
at such time as may be required by the Board of Selectmen regarding
the doings of his Department. He shall annually make a written report
to the Board of Selectmen, to be printed in the Annual Town Report, of
the organization and condition of the Police Department, with a resume
of the business and expenses of the Department for the preceding year,
together with such recommendations as he may think advisable for the
future conduct of the Department.
§ 86-4. Temporary suspension of police officers.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to relieve temporarily from duty
any of his subordinates for neglect or nonperformance of duty, for any act
contrary to good order and discipline or for the violation of any of the rules
and regulations of the Police Department. In such case he shall, within 48
hours, furnish the Board of Selectmen, in writing, a statement of his reasons
for relieving such subordinates from duty.
§ 86-5. Special officers.
The Board of Selectmen, at its pleasure or upon written request, may
appoint citizens of the Town of good moral character and habits and 21
years of age or over as special police officers for specific duties.
Appointments shall be for a period of one year, unless terminated sooner by
resignation or revocation by the Board of Selectmen on recommendation of
the Chief of Police. All special police officers shall be subject to the authority
of the Chief of Police and shall not carry firearms except by his express
authorization. Badges and instructions as to their duties shall be furnished
by the Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department, subject
to the general supervision and control of the Board of Selectmen.
He shall have control of the Department, its officers and members
and constables and special police officers when in the service of the
Department. He shall be responsible for the discipline and efficiency of
his Department and shall enforce the rules and regulations thereof.
A.
The Chief of Police shall keep an account of all duties performed and of
all absences from duty, with the causes thereof. He shall take notice of
all nuisances, defects and obstructions in the streets and other public
places in the Town and shall take over all proper measures relative
thereto. He shall devote his whole time to the duties of his office and
shall have his office at the police station.
B.
There shall be an officer assigned to duty at the police station during
all 24 hours of the day.
C.
§ 86-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 86-6
86:59
§ 86-6. Engaging in outside activities while on duty.
The Chief of Police and each regular member of the Police Department shall
devote his entire time to the business of the Police Department. Any other
activities must have the approval of the Chief of Police.
§ 86-7. Accident reports.
It shall be the duty of each police officer patrolling a regular beat to
report immediately all accidents happening on the public way involving
injury to persons or property for which the Town may be liable, and he
shall make a careful investigation, securing the names and addresses of all
persons involved and witnesses thereto. He shall incorporate the same in
his report to the Chief of Police, who in turn shall make a full written report
immediately thereof to the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 87
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 22.
Contaminated properties — See Ch. 32.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Zoning — See Ch. 125.
§ 86-6 ADAMS CODE § 86-7
86:60
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§ 87-1. through § 87-17. (Reserved)
§ 87-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 87-1
86:61

ARTICLE II
Abandoned and Foreclosing Properties
[Adopted 6-16-2008 by Art. 29]
§ 87-18. Purpose; enforcement authority.
§ 87-19. Definitions.
When used in this article, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
ABANDONED — Any property that is vacant.
COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the Town of Adams.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
"EVIDENCE OF VACANCY" — Any condition that would lead a reasonable
person to believe that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSING — The process by which a property, placed as security for
a real estate loan is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
"INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS" — Taking any of the
following actions:
LOCAL — Within 20 driving miles distance of the property in question.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including, but not limited to, service
companies and lenders in a mortgage agreement.
Purpose. It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve public
safety, security, and quiet enjoyment of occupants, abutters, and
neighborhoods by:
Requiring all residential property owners, including lenders,
trustees and service companies, to properly maintain abandoned
and/or foreclosing properties.
(1)
Regulating the maintenance of abandoned and/or foreclosing
residential properties to prevent blighted and unsecured buildings.
(2)
A.
The Building Commissioner of the Town of Adams has enforcement
authority pursuant to inter alia MGL c. 143, § 3, the State Building
Code, and the Town Zoning.9
B.
A. Taking possession of a residential property pursuant to MGL c. 244, § 1;
Publishing the first foreclosure notice of a residential property pursuant
to MGL c. 244, § 14; or
B.
Commencing a foreclosure action on a residential property in either the
Land Court or Superior Court.
C.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Zoning.
§ 87-18 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 87-19
86:63
MORTGAGEE IN POSSESSION — A mortgagee that has taken over control
and/or occupancy of a property upon default of the borrower to collect
income from the property and/or prepare for foreclosure.
OWNER —
PROPERTY — Any real property, or portion thereof, located in the Town
of Adams, including but not limited to buildings or structures occupied for
living purposes.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more
dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be occupied for living
purposes.
SECURING — Measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons.
TOWN — Town of Adams.
VACANT — A structure or building not legally occupied.
§ 87-20. Registration of affected properties required; contents of
registration; term; fees.
Means:
Every person, entity, service company, property manager or realtor,
who alone or severally with others:
Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit,
mobile dwelling unit, building or parcel of land, vacant or
otherwise, including a mobile home park; or
(a)
Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit,
mobile dwelling unit, building or parcel of land, vacant or
otherwise, including a mobile home park, in any capacity,
including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate
of the holder of legal title; or
(b)
(c) Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; or
Is an agent, trustee, or other person appointed by the courts
and vested with possession or control of any such property; or
(d)
Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a
condominium.
(e)
(1)
Each such person is bound to comply with the provisions of these
minimum standards as if he were the owner.
(2)
A.
"Owner" also means every person who operates a rooming house; or is
a trustee who holds, owns, or controls mortgage loans for mortgagebacked
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
B.
§ 87-19 ADAMS CODE § 87-20
86:64
§ 87-21. Maintenance requirements; securing of vacant property.
All owners must register abandoned and/or foreclosing residential
properties with the Commissioner on forms provided by the
Commissioner. All registrations must state the individual owner's or
agent's phone number and mailing address located within the
commonwealth as required by MGL c. 59, § 57D, MGL c. 156D, § 5.05,
and 950 CMR 113.230. The mailing address may not be a post office
box. This registration must also certify that the property was inspected
and identify whether the property is abandoned. If the property is
abandoned, the registration must designate a local individual or local
property management company responsible for the securing and
maintenance of the property. This designation must state the individual
or company's name, phone number, and local mailing address. The
mailing address may not be a post office box. This registration must be
received within seven days of abandonment or within seven days of the
initiation of the foreclosure process as defined in Subsection B.
A.
All property registrations are valid for one year. An annual registration
fee of $100 must accompany the registration form. The fee and
registration are valid for one calendar year, or remaining portion of
the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required.
Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year
and must certify whether the foreclosing and/or foreclosed property
remains abandoned or not.
B.
Once the property is no longer abandoned, or is sold, the owner must
provide proof of sale or written notice of occupancy to the
Commissioner.
C.
Maintenance requirements. Properties subject to this article must be
maintained in accordance with all the applicable sanitary codes,
building codes, and local regulations. The local owner or local property
management company must inspect and maintain the property on a
monthly basis for the duration of the abandonment.
A.
Vacant property must be boarded and secured in the following manner:
Securing of means of ingress and egress required. All buildings
or structures, regardless of use or height, shall be maintained by
the owner so as to prevent ingress or egress into the building. All
doors, windows and other means of ingress or egress into such a
building or structure shall be kept locked and secured.
(1)
Repair or boarding up of broken doors and windows. Where any
door, window or other means of ingress or egress from a vacant
building or structure has become broken or open, the Building
Inspector may order the building or structure repaired so as to
comply with this article or boarded up as provided herein.
(2)
B.
§ 87-20 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 87-21
86:65
§ 87-22. Inspections.
The Commissioner or his designee shall have the authority and the duty
to inspect properties subject to this article for compliance and to issue
citations for any violations. The Commissioner shall have the discretion
to determine when and how such inspections are to be made, provided
that their policies are reasonably calculated to ensure that this article is
enforced.
§ 87-23. Violations and penalties.
Boarding-up method. The method used in boarding up any building
or structure, regardless of use or height, shall be as follows:
All broken glass shall be removed from the doors or windows
of said building or structure.
(a)
All openings shall be entirely boarded up with either plywood
or pressboard having a minimum thickness of 3/8 inch.
(b)
All plywood or pressboard used in boarding up shall be painted
with a blue gray exterior paint. The color and quality of the
paint is subject to the approval of the Commissioner.
(c)
All openings which are not within 10 feet of ground level at
their lowest point and which are not readily accessible from
ground level or from neighboring buildings or structures shall
have a one-square-foot opening on the top of the enclosure
which shall be covered by a one-fourth-inch wire mesh screen.
Louvers may be used in place of the wire mesh screen,
provided that they do not inhibit the ventilation.
(d)
(3)
The property must contain a posting with the name and twenty-fourhour
contact phone number of the local individual or property
management company responsible for the maintenance.
C.
Adherence to this article does not relieve the property owner of any
applicable obligations set forth in code regulations, covenant conditions
and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations.
D.
Failure to initially register with the Commissioner is punishable by a
fine of $300.
A.
If applicable, failure to properly identify the name of the local individual
or property management company is punishable by a fine of $300, for
each violation, and to a like fine for each day's continuance of such
violation.
B.
Failure to maintain the property is punishable by a fine of $300 for each
month the property is not maintained.
C.
§ 87-21 ADAMS CODE § 87-24
86:66
§ 87-24. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the requirements of this article, or by a decision
issued under this article by the Commissioner, may seek relief in any court
of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the commonwealth.
§ 87-25. More stringent restrictions to apply.
If any provision of this article imposes greater restrictions or obligations
that those imposed by any other general law, special law, regulation, rule,
ordinance, bylaw, order, or policy, then the provisions of this article control.
§ 87-26. Severability.
If any provision of this article is held to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and apart
from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 87-24 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 87-26
86:67
Chapter 89
RIGHT TO FARM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 109. Zoning — See Ch. 125.
§ 89-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
§ 89-2. Definitions.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to state with emphasis the
right to farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under
Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations
thereunder, including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph 1;
c. 90, § 9; c. 111, § 125A; and c. 128 § 1A. We the citizens of the Town
of Adams restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's
authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of Adams by allowing agricultural uses and related
activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town
agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the
Town of Adams.
B.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of
land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, or accessory thereto.
A.
The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include,
but not be limited to the following:
Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil;
(1)
(2) Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural,
aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural
commodities;
(3)
(4) Growing and harvesting of Christmas trees;
Cultivation of sugar maple trees for the production of maple
products;
(5)
Growing and harvesting of forest products and any other forestry
or lumbering operations; raising of livestock, including horses;
(6)
B.
§ 87-26 ADAMS CODE § 89-2
89:68
§ 89-3. Right to farm declaration.
(7) Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise;
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, sheep, goats, rabbits,
ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas), camelids (such as
llamas, alpacas, and camels) and other domesticated animals for
food and other agricultural purposes, including fiber and furbearing
animals (not to include exotic animals);
(8)
(9) Keeping of honey bees;
(10)Fish hatcheries.
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
(1)
Control of pests including, but not limited to, insects, weeds,
predators, and disease organisms of plants and animals;
(2)
(3) Application of manure, fertilizers, and pesticides;
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural output or services of the farm;
(4)
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm
and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand, including
signage thereto;
(5)
Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used
expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management,
or sale of the agricultural products;
(6)
On-farm relocation of the earth and the clearing of ground for
farming operation;
(7)
Construction and use of farm structures and facilities for the
storage of animal wastes, farm equipment, pesticides, fertilizers,
agricultural products and livestock, for the processing of animal
wastes and agricultural products, for the sale of agricultural
products, and for the use of farm labor, as permitted by local and
state building codes and regulations; including construction and
maintenance of fences.
(8)
C.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of
Adams. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on
holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include
the accompanying incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated
A.
§ 89-2 RIGHT TO FARM § 89-3
89:69
§ 89-4. Disclosure notification.
§ 89-5. Resolution of disputes.
with normally accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined
that whatever impact may be caused to others through the normal
practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming
to the neighborhood, community, and society in general. The benefits
and protections of this bylaw are intended to apply exclusively to
those agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted in
accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover,
nothing in this Right to Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any
interest in land, or imposing any land use regulation, which is properly
the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning bylaw. This bylaw
does not supersede local, state or federal laws or regulations or private
covenants.
The Town will provide a copy of the following notice by posting a copy
of the notice at the Adams Town Hall and at the Adams Public Library,
and will include the notice and copy of the bylaw on the Town's official
website: "It is the policy of the Town of Adams to conserve, protect and
encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for
the production of food, and other agricultural products, and also for its
natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform
buyers or occupants that the property they are about to acquire or
occupy lies within a town where farming activities occur. Such farming
activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause
noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the
location of property within the Town may be impacted by commercial
agricultural operations, including the ability to access water services
for such property under certain circumstances."
A.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance
with the Select Board, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Board
of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of
the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any
other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Select Board may forward a copy of the
grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall
review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its
recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreedupon
time frame with all involved parties.
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution
of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Board of
Health within an agreed-upon time frame with all involved parties.
B.
§ 89-3 ADAMS CODE § 89-6
89:70
§ 89-6. Severability clause.
Chapter 93
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 22.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 201.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid, such decision(s) shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw.
The Town of Adams hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be
severable.
A.
§ 89-6 RIGHT TO FARM § 89-6
89:71

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 93-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency Region I.[Added 6-16-2008ATM by Art.
26]
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW — The total volume of sewage in gallons measured
at a metering station or other point during a continuous period of 365 days
divided by 365.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet, 1.5 meters, outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Pollutant discharge
limitations for specific industrial user categories promulgated under federal
law by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
DPW DIRECTOR — Department of Public Works Director and/or his
designee.[Added 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER (IU) — A source of indirect discharge.[Added
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — An inhibition or disruption of the Town's wastewater
works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal which is a cause of, or significantly contributes to, a violation of
any requirement of the Town's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal.[Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
LOCAL LIMITS — Specific prohibitions or limits on pollutants developed by
the POTW and approved by the Approval Authority. Such local limits shall
be deemed pretreatment standards.[Added 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
§ 93-1 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-1
89:73
MAXIMUM DAILY FLOW — The highest volume in gallons measured at
a metering station or other point during any continuous twenty-four-hour
period.
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the CWA, which applies to industrial users, including
the general and specific prohibitions found in 40 CFR 403.5.[Added
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be discharge of pollutants, construction of which
commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards
pursuant to Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will apply to the
facility if the standards are promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that certain location and construction criteria are met.[Added
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
PASS-THROUGH — Quantities or concentrations of pollutants that cause
a violation of the Town's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation caused by another source).[Amended
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
pretreatment requirement, other than a National Pretreatment Standard,
applicable to industrial users.[Added 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch, 1.27
centimeters, in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works
owned by the Town including any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other
conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.[Added
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer owned or maintained by the Town and any
sewer situated outside the Town that is owned or maintained by a city, town,
or district that discharges into the Town's wastewater treatment works.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
§ 93-1 ADAMS CODE § 93-1
89:74
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industry discharging wastewater
to a public sewer with:
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries stormwater
and surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the wastewater treatment
plant of the Town or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 93-2. Connection to public sewer; permit required for sewage
disposal facilities; building permits.
A. An average daily flow greater than 5,000 gallons per day;
B. A maximum daily flow greater than 10,000 gallons per day;
Pollutants that may interfere with or pass through the Town's
wastewater works;
C.
D. Toxic amounts of pollutants;
Pollutants from an industrial process regulated by categorical
pretreatment standards;
E.
Wastewater that makes up 5% or more of the dry weather hydraulic
or organic capacity of the Town’s sewage treatment plant; or [Added
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
F.
Wastewater that has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
treatment plant's operation. [Added 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
G.
§ 93-1 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-2
89:75
§ 93-3. Right of entry. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
The owner or other person having control of any existing building or
buildings hereafter erected or converted into a dwelling to be occupied
by one or more families and from which a public sewer is accessible
shall, in a manner and within a period of time satisfactory to the Board
of Health, cause such building to be connected with such public sewer.
A.
No septic tank, permanent vault, privy or other means of sewage
disposal shall hereafter be constructed or installed in this Town until a
permit has first been obtained from the Board of Health. 10
B.
No building permit for a dwelling house or other inhabited building
shall be issued until the Board of Health has approved the proposed
lot as suitable from a sanitary point of view for human habitation. No
building permit shall be issued for a dwelling house on an unsewered
street until a permit for a sewage disposal installation has been
obtained from the Board of Health.
C.
The DPW Director, Superintendent and other duly authorized
employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The Town will have the authority to
inspect all areas of an industrial user's facility, including process areas,
areas with floor drains, chemical storage areas, hazardous waste
generation and storage areas, pretreatment systems, connections to
the sewer, areas where waste hauling and production take place, and
areas where effluent monitoring records are kept. The Town will have
authority to obtain information on all raw products used within the
facility, both in the industrial process and for other uses.
A.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A of this section, the DPW Director, Superintendent or
duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company. The company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Town employees, and
the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property by Town employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in § 93-24.
B.
The DPW Director, Superintendent and other duly authorized
employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties for the purposes of, but
C.
10.Editor's Note: A portion of Subsection B requiring a permit for cesspool construction was
disapproved by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted.
§ 93-2 ADAMS CODE § 93-3
89:76
§ 93-4. Damaging sewage works prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 93-5. Discharge of surface or roof water to sanitary sewer system.
No owner or person in control of premises shall knowingly cause or permit
surface or roof water from such premises to enter the sanitary sewer system
of the Town.
§ 93-6. Violations and penalties.
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, except
§ 93-4, shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. Violations are immediately actionable
and, if the industrial user continues to violate during the period it is
supposed to be correcting its violation, the Town can take enforcement
action against it. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations. [Amended
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
A.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the Town
by reason of such violation.
C.
Any person or legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable for a civil or criminal penalty not to exceed $5,000 for
each day of violation of any such rule or regulation under authority
granted by MGL c. 83, § 10, as amended. The Town has the authority
to issue administrative penalties if allowed under state law. [Amended
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
D.
§ 93-3 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-6
89:77

ARTICLE II
Installation and Connection of Sewers
§ 93-7. Permit required. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the DPW Director.
§ 93-8. Classes of permits; application; fees. [Amended
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
§ 93-9. Agreement to construct sewer; costs.
§ 93-10. Separate connection for each building required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) Residential;
(2) Commercial;
(3) Industrial (domestic waste only); and
(4) Industrial (other than above).
A.
The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent
in the judgment of the DPW Director. Permit fees for each class shall be
set by the Board of Selectmen.
B.
The Board of Selectmen may enter into an agreement with a developer
or other person to construct and install a sewer in a public way in
accordance with Town standards at no cost to the Town, upon such
terms and conditions as it deems to be in the best interest of the Town,
said sewer to become Town property upon its completion.
A.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
sewers within a public way (from an existing sewer line to the point of
entry upon said private property) shall be borne by the person making
application for connection according to a fee schedule set by the Board
of Selectmen.
B.
§ 93-7 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-11
89:79
§ 93-11. Use of old building sewers in connection with new
buildings. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and/or test by the DPW Director, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 93-12. Construction methods and materials.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations
of the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 93-13. Elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 93-14. Roof downspouts and foundation drains.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 93-15. Specifications for connections.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Town or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
§ 93-16. Notice of readiness for inspection and connection;
supervision of connection. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
An applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the DPW Director
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the DPW
Director or his representative.
§ 93-11 ADAMS CODE § 93-17
89:80
§ 93-17. Barricading and lighting of excavations; restoration of
property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 93-17 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-17
89:81

ARTICLE III
Use of Sewers
§ 93-18. Discharge of stormwater, drainage and unpolluted water.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 93-19. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art.
26]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm
sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the DPW Director and/or the
Superintendent. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
A.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer or natural outlet.
B.
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard
in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed
cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
A.
Any waters or wastes containing any pollutant as solids, liquids or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
B.
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 Standard Units (SU)
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
C.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, and entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D.
Any pollutant including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the POTW.
E.
§ 93-18 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-19
89:83
§ 93-20. Conditional discharges. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art.
26]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment having an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or can constitute
a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes
in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. In no case
will a federally mandated prohibition be altered to be less stringent. The
substances prohibited are:
Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the POTW.
F.
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F., 65° C.,
or, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, that causes the POTW
influent to exceed a temperature higher than 104° F., 40° C.
A.
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils, petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 150° F., 0° and 65° C.
B.
Any garbage that has not been property shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower, 0.76 hp metric, or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Superintendent.
C.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
D.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.
E.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary after treatment
of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal
or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
F.
§ 93-19 ADAMS CODE § 93-20
89:84
§ 93-21. Actions of Superintendent on determination of hazardous
condition.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
G.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5 Standard Units (SU).
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not
limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate.
(1)
Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(2)
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(3)
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined in this chapter. The POTW has the authority to
require any significant industrial user to develop a slug control plan
which outlines discharge practices (including nonroutine batch
discharges); describes stored chemicals; and contains procedures
both to notify the POTW immediately of slug discharges and to
prevent adverse impacts from accidental spills (such as operation
and maintenance (O & M), general housekeeping, or training).
(4)
I.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. A
water or waste may not introduce into the POTW any pollutants which
cause pass through or interference.
J.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 93-20 and which in the
judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
(2)
A.
§ 93-20 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-21
89:85
§ 93-22. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Amended
6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the DPW Director and/or Superintendent, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or
any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the DPW
Director and/or Superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 93-26.
(4)
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and be subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, provisions of this chapter
or other bylaws of the Town.
B.
The Superintendent may immediately halt or prevent any discharge
of pollutants to a public sewer that reasonably appears to present an
imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or any
such discharge presenting (or which may present) an endangerment
to the environment or which threatens to interfere with operation of
the Town's wastewater works. Actions which may be taken by the
Superintendent include, but are not limited to, seeking ex parte
temporary injunctive relief, entry on private property to halt such
discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such discharge, or demand
of specific action by the discharger.
C.
The Superintendent may seek injunctive relief to enforce the terms of
an industrial discharge permit or this chapter.
D.
The Superintendent may establish pollutant discharge concentrations
or mass loadings as necessary to protect the sewage works as well as
to ensure compliance with federal, state and local regulations.
E.
The Superintendent shall notify industries that are subject to § 93-27 of
applicable federal, state and local pretreatment regulations, including
but not limited to pollutant discharge limitations, compliance deadlines
and any revisions to such regulations.
F.
§ 93-21 ADAMS CODE § 93-23
89:86
§ 93-23. Maintenance of preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing
facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 93-24. Control manholes and related appurtenances.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safety
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 93-25. Testing methods. [Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the methods and procedures in 40 CFR Part 136, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable
samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites
of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
§ 93-26. Special agreements with industrial concerns.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
A.
In no case will a special agreement waive an IU's responsibility for
achieving and maintaining compliance with applicable categorical
standards, local limits, or federally prohibited discharge standards.
[Amended 6-16-2008ATM by Art. 26]
B.
Any agreement with an industrial concern shall require local limits that
once adopted are considered pretreatment standards and are federally
C.
§ 93-23 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-26
89:87
§ 93-27. Industrial pretreatment program requirements. [Amended
6-16-2008 ATM by Art. 26]
enforceable. Local limits may not be waived. [Added 6-16-2008ATM
by Art. 26]
All persons discharging wastewater into a public sewer shall comply
with federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations (as
amended). Industries shall comply with federal and state general
pretreatment standards and with the national categorical standards,
found in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, hereby
incorporated into this bylaw. Compliance with such standards shall be
achieved no later than the date such standard is effective, unless a
shorter compliance time is specified by the Superintendent.
A.
The Superintendent shall have the right to take independent samples
and analyze the discharges of industries connected to a public sewer
and shall conduct surveillance and general inspection activities to
identify, independent of information supplied by such persons,
occasional and continuing noncompliance with this chapter (as
amended). Such activities may be conducted without prior notice and
need not be confined to normal business hours.
B.
Significant industrial users shall apply for an industrial discharge
permit. Such application shall be made by completing a form developed
by the Superintendent. In the case of industrial users identified as
significant under 40 CFR 403.3(t), the POTW must issue control
through a permit containing at a minimum the following six conditions:
(1) A statement of duration.
(2) A statement of nontransferability.
(3) Applicable federal, state and local effluent limits
Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements.
(4)
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties.
Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the
Superintendent to be necessary.
No significant industrial user may discharge wastewater to a
public sewer without an industrial discharge permit duly issued
by the Superintendent.
(6)
C.
The terms of an industrial discharge permit may be modified by the
Superintendent and a reasonable time provided for compliance with
such modified terms. Violations of the terms of such permits are
violations of this chapter. Where a conflict exists between the terms
of a duly issued permit and this chapter, the permit shall govern.
However, under no circumstances can federal and state regulations
D.
§ 93-26 ADAMS CODE § 93-27
89:88
be waived. Permits may be issued for a maximum period of three
years and may not be transferred to a new owner or occupant of
the premises without the Superintendent's written approval. A permit
may be revoked by the Superintendent if its terms are not met. All
industrial users, whether permitted or not, must notify the POTW prior
to changing their discharge.
All new significant industrial users proposing to discharge wastewater
to a public sewer shall apply for an industrial user discharge permit
at least 60 calendar days before connecting to the public sewer. As
part of such application, the Superintendent may require the applicant
to obtain written certification from the appropriate federal and state
regulatory agencies as to whether the applicant falls within particular
industrial categories or subcategories for purposes of industrial
pretreatment standards.
E.
Within 90 calendar days after adoption by a federal or state regulatory
agency of a pretreatment standard, existing industries subject to such
standards shall submit an application to amend the industrial discharge
permit. This application for an amendment shall contain information
required under applicable federal and state industrial pretreatment
reporting regulations in the form required by the Superintendent.
(Such a permit amendment application is in addition to the industrial
user discharge permit application required above.)
Such information, as a minimum, shall include:
The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and the owners;
(a)
(b) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility;
A brief description of the nature, average rate of production,
and Standard Industrial Classification of the operations carried
out at such facility;
(c)
A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with the
categorical standards;
(d)
Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer
from regulated process streams and from other streams;
(e)
An identification of the industrial pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process; and
(f)
An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge.
(g)
(1)
The Superintendent may require that additional information be
included in such application.
(2)
F.
§ 93-27 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-27
89:89
As per 40 CFR 403.12(c), any compliance schedule must contain
milestone dates for implementing pretreatment required to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards for all users. Within 14 days of a
milestone in the compliance schedule and within 14 days of the final
date for compliance, all users, including Industrial Users, must submit
a progress report to the POTW indicating whether or not the final
compliance date was met and, if not, when the compliance with the
increment of progress is expected.
G.
Beginning 180 calendar days after the adoption of federal or state
pretreatment standards, industries or any user subject to such
standards may not discharge industrial wastes from processes
regulated by such pretreatment standards to a public sewer unless
an industrial discharge permit amendment is approved by the
Superintendent and its terms are being met. Such permit amendment
may include a compliance schedule for activities necessary to meet
pretreatment standards or activities such as the installation of spill
prevention and personnel training.
H.
Within 90 days after the date for final compliance by existing industries
with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into a public sewer, such industries shall submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
from the regulated process(es) as governed by categorical
pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for
these process units. Such report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation and maintenance practices or pretreatment
is necessary. Such industrial users shall also submit before June 1
and December 1 of each year, unless required more frequently by the
Superintendent, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge, average and maximum daily flows, and
violations of applicable categorical pretreatment standards. Baseline
monitoring reports and reports on compliance with categorical
standards (compliance reports) must contain a statement reviewed by
an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified by
a qualified professional about the user's compliance with applicable
categorical standards and whether any pretreatment or operation and
maintenance is required to attain compliance. Additional requirements
for such periodic reports may be imposed by the Superintendent.
Significant noncategorical IUs shall also be required to submit periodic
compliance reports at least once every six months (unless required
more frequently by the Superintendent) which include the information
as set forth in this section.
I.
All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall immediately
(no later than 24 hours) notify the Superintendent in person or by
telephone followed by written notice (within five days) of any slug
discharged by such user.
J.
§ 93-27 ADAMS CODE § 93-27
89:90
Notice of violation by the industrial user to the POTW written within 24
hours of becoming aware of the violation will be followed by the user
resampling and submitting the results of the resampling to the POTW
within 30 days.
K.
As per 40 CFR 12(j), all industrial users must notify the POTW prior to
any substantial changes in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharges, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for
which the Industrial User has submitted initial notification under 40
CFR 403.12(p).
L.
The Industrial User shall notify the POTW, the State DEP Hazardous
Waste Authorities, and the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director in writing of any discharge into the POTW which would be
considered hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261, if disposed of in a
different manner.
M.
Reports and permit applications submitted by industries under this
chapter shall be signed by an authorized representative. An authorized
representative may be: a principal executive officer of at least a level
of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; a general
partner or the proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or
sole proprietorship; or a duly authorized representative of either of
the individuals designated above, if such representative is responsible
for the overall operation of the subject facility. Baseline monitoring
reports, ninety-day compliance reports and periodic compliance reports
from categorical industrial users shall also contain the certification
statement from 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) as follows:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
N.
Industries subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
maintain records of information resulting from monitoring activities
required to prepare such reports.
Such records shall include, for each sample:
The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the
names of the person or persons taking the sample;
(a)
(b) The dates analyses were performed;
(c) The name(s) of the person(s) performing the analyses;
(1)
O.
§ 93-27 RIGHT TO FARM § 93-27
89:91
(d) The analytical techniques and methods used; and
(e) The results of such analyses.
Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years, or
longer in case of unresolved litigation or when requested by the
approval authority, and shall be made available for inspection and
copying by the Superintendent.
(2)
Information and data submitted to the Superintendent relating to
wastewater discharge characteristics shall be available to the public
and governmental agencies without restriction. Other such information
shall be available to the public and governmental agencies without
restriction, unless the person providing such information specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent that the release of such information would divulge
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets. Trade secrets shall not be made available for inspection by
the public but may be made available upon the written request of
governmental agencies for their use regarding this chapter, the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and
state disposal system permits and/or the pretreatment program.
P.
No person may utilize dilution as a means of complying with federal,
state or local discharge limitations. The Superintendent may impose
mass limitations (in addition to concentration limitations) on the
discharge of any pollutant by any person.
Q.
The Superintendent shall annually publish the names of all industrial
users in significant noncompliance (SNC) of this chapter during the
previous 12 months in the largest daily newspaper published in the
Town. For purposes of this provision, a significant noncompliance
includes:
A violation remaining uncorrected 45 days after notification of
noncompliance;
(1)
(2) A failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
A violation resulting in the Superintendent's exercise of emergency
powers under § 93-21.
(3)
R.
§ 93-27 ADAMS CODE § 93-27
89:92
Chapter 101
SOLID WASTE
§ 101-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GARBAGE — All waste animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter produced
from or resulting from the use or storage of food for human consumption.
REFUSE — All combustible and noncombustible rubbish, ashes and
ordinary commercial wastes, provided that building or construction wastes
and industrial wastes shall not be included in this definition.
SOLID WASTE — Waste, refuse, broken or rejected matter, hence anything
worthless.
§ 101-2. Sanitary landfill areas.
§ 101-3. House offal.
House offal, commonly called “garbage” or “swill,” shall be placed in
suitable watertight receptacles, properly covered and so located that the
house offal may be easily removed by persons authorized by the Board of
Health. Receptacles used for the storing of house offal shall at all times be
kept in a reasonably clean condition. No metal, glass, crockery, poisonous
substance or substances other than house offal shall be placed in such
receptacles.
§ 101-4. Town sanitary landfill.
Permit required. No public or private premises within the limits of the
Town shall be used as a sanitary landfill area without a permit from the
Board of Selectmen.
A.
Rules and regulations for use. The owner, agent or lessee of any land or
enclosure used as a sanitary landfill area, either public or private, shall
cause all offensive matter dumped thereon to be immediately covered
and all other refuse matter dumped thereon to be kept leveled and the
premises kept in such a manner as to cause no nuisance during the
process of filling. No person shall dump any offensive materials upon
any sanitary landfill area unless permitted to do so by the Board of
Selectmen, and all such offensive materials shall be properly disposed
of to the approval of the Board of Selectmen. All possible care shall
be used in preventing the escape of dust and papers from the area
and from the vehicle used in conveying waste materials to the sanitary
landfill area.
B.
§ 93-27 SOLID WASTE § 101-4
101:93
§ 101-5. Mandatory recycling.
In order to implement a program of recycling in conjunction with ordinary
waste disposal, residents of every household shall separate waste materials
into the following categories before depositing the same for disposal:
§ 101-6. Property maintenance; littering.
Authority of Board of Selectmen to make rules and regulations. The
Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized and empowered to make rules
and regulations with regard to the use of the Town sanitary landfill.
A.
Use restricted. The Town sanitary landfill shall be used only by
residents of the Town or Town taxpayers. All others will be prosecuted
for trespassing unless they have received written permission to use the
same from the Board of Selectmen.
B.
Permit required to salvage materials. Salvaging of material from the
Town sanitary landfill shall not be allowed, except by permit from the
Board of Selectmen.
C.
Dumping to be supervised. No dumping of any material shall be
permitted at the Town sanitary landfill, except under the supervision of
the person in charge.
D.
Dumping hours. The hours during which dumping at the Town sanitary
landfill will be permitted shall be established by the Board of
Selectmen.
E.
A. Glass and cans.
B. Newsprint, corrugated cardboard and recyclable paper.
C. Other waste.
Storage of waste. The owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise,
shall be responsible for maintaining such parcel of land in a clean
and sanitary condition, free of nuisances resulting from the storage of
garbage, refuse, and solid waste, as defined in § 101-1 of this chapter.
An owner shall be considered in violation of this section if the storage
of these materials or other debris, junk, litter, trash or waste results in
odors, pollution, or other nuisances affecting the health, safety, or wellbeing
of the neighborhood or general public.
A.
Littering. No person shall place or cause to be placed any garbage,
refuse or solid waste in or on any street, park, common, or other
property of the Town of Adams, except in designated receptacles.
B.
Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the police, Building
Inspector, and/or Board of Health. Violators may be penalized by a
noncriminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D.
The fine for violating this section shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-1 per offense. Each day on which any violation
C.
§ 101-4 ADAMS CODE § 101-6
101:94
§ 101-7. Licensing of haulers.
Chapter 102
PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION
§ 102-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 102-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASTM STANDARD — A testing standard developed by the American Society
for Testing and Materials.
BIODEGRADABLE BAG — A bag that:
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Refer to § 1-2,
Enforcement.
All persons collecting acceptable wastes in the Town of Adams shall
obtain a license from the Board of Health prior to commencing with the
collection of solid wastes.
A.
A license fee shall be paid to the Town in an amount determined by the
Board of Health and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
B.
The license holder shall provide on a semiannual (twice a year) basis
the number of residential, municipal, commercial and industrial
customers for whom they pick up solid waste. This information shall be
recorded on a Town-approved form.
C.
The license holder shall provide on a semiannual (twice a year) basis
the number of tons of solid waste and the number of tons of recyclables
tipped at any licensed disposal facility. This information shall be
recorded on a Town-approved form.
D.
A license cannot be renewed without the previous year's reports being
submitted.
E.
The production and use of thin-film single-use plastic checkout bags
have significant impacts on the environment, including, but not limited
to: contributing to the potential death of marine animals through
ingestion and entanglement; contributing to pollution of the land
environment; creating a burden to solid waste collection and recycling
facilities; clogging storm drainage systems; and requiring the use of
millions of barrels of crude oil nationally for their manufacture.
A.
The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate the usage of thin-film singleuse
plastic bags by all retail establishments in the Town of Adams.
B.
A. Contains no polymers derived from fossil fuels; and
§ 101-6 SOLID WASTE § 102-2
101:95
REUSABLE BAG — A bag, with handles, that is specifically designed for
multiple uses and is made of thick plastic, cloth, fabric or other durable
materials.
THIN-FILM SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS — Typically with plastic handles,
are bags with a thickness of 2.5 mils or less and are intended for single-use
transport of purchased products.
§ 102-3. Use regulations.
§ 102-4. Administration and enforcement.
Is intended for single use and will decompose in a natural setting at
a rate comparable to other biodegradable materials such as paper,
leaves, and food waste.
B.
Thin-film single-use plastic bags shall not be distributed, used, or sold
for checkout or other purposes at any retail establishment within the
Town of Adams.
A.
Customers are encouraged to bring their own reusable or
biodegradable shopping bags to stores. Retail establishments may
provide reusable or recyclable thick plastic, paper, fabric or other types
of bags at no charge, or charge a fee for paper or other bags, as they so
desire. Retail establishments are strongly encouraged to make reusable
bags available for sale to customers at a reasonable price.
B.
Thin-film plastic bags used to contain dry cleaning, newspapers,
produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items and other similar merchandise,
typically without handles, are still permissible.
C.
The Board of Selectmen shall establish an application process and make
determinations as to the classification of new single-use bag products,
as they come on the market, to determine if they are compostable
or biodegradable and meet, or exceed, ASTM D6400 for compostable
plastic.
A.
The Inspection Services Department will be responsible to enforce this
chapter through the issuance of a violation notice. A violation notice
may be reissued for each day that the activity persists until the violation
is corrected.
B.
For each day the violation is in effect, the following penalties shall
apply:
(1) Fifty dollars per day for each day the violation persists;
One hundred dollars per day for each day that a new violation
occurs after the first violation;
(2)
Two hundred dollars per day for each day of any future violations
that occur after the second violation.
(3)
C.
§ 102-2 ADAMS CODE § 102-5
101:96
§ 102-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall go into effect as of March 30, 2017, or such later date
upon which it is approved by the Attorney General.
Chapter 105
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 93.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 201.
Traffic regulations — See Ch. 202.
§ 105-1. Numbering of buildings.
The Board of Selectmen may order numbers to be affixed to or painted on
the building on any public or private way, in its discretion. The owner of
every house shall comply with such order within 10 days thereafter.
§ 105-2. Snow and ice removal. [Amended 3-5-2018 STM by Art. 4]
§ 105-3. Use of sidewalks.
Removal from sidewalks required on all streets. The tenant and, in
case there is no tenant, the owner or any person having the care or
control of any building or lot land bordering on any street or parts or
portions of streets within the limits of the Town shall not allow any
snow or ice to remain upon any sidewalk in front of such lot or building
for 24 consecutive hours but shall cause the same, within that time,
to be reasonably removed from the entire width of such walks. In the
event that snow and ice on a sidewalk have become so hard that they
cannot be removed without the likelihood of damage to the sidewalk,
the person or entity charged with their removal shall, within the time
mentioned herein, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on the
sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe and shall then, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause said sidewalk to be thoroughly
cleaned.
A.
Throwing or pushing in public way. No person shall shovel, plow, push
or throw snow or ice out into a public way.
B.
Erection and maintenance of gutters and barriers. Every owner of
a building adjoining a street or public way shall erect and maintain
suitable barriers, gutters and conduits or some other suitable measure
to prevent the falling of snow, ice, rainwater and melted snow and ice
from such building upon any person traveling or passing in such street
or way or upon any sidewalk or footway.
C.
§ 102-5 SOLID WASTE § 105-3
101:97
§ 105-4. Street acceptances.
Sledding. No person shall course, coast or slide down, across, in or
along any of the streets, sidewalks or public ways of the Town upon any
sled or any other type of implement that could be put to such a use,
except upon such streets or places as the Board of Selectmen may by
public notice designate.
A.
Driving or drawing vehicles upon sidewalks. No person shall drive,
wheel or draw any vehicle upon any sidewalk in the Town, nor shall
any person drive or draw any vehicle propelled by hand power across
any sidewalk where no driveway has been constructed, except for the
removal of snow or at the direction of the Board of Selectmen or its
agents. This subsection does not apply to police officers when engaged
in the lawful performance of their duties, children's carriages drawn by
hand, tricycles, wheelchairs that are pushed or power driven and threeway
scooters and hand carts used for business.
B.
Laying out Town ways for acceptance generally. No Town way shall be
laid out for acceptance without the following minimum requirements:
The proposed street shall conform to the current rules and
regulations governing the subdivision of land.11
(1)
There shall be placed on file with the Board of Selectmen an
approved plan and profile in duplicate. One copy shall be filed with
the Town Clerk when the Board of Selectmen recommends the
street for acceptance and the second copy shall be placed in the
Town vault.
(2)
The grade shall be satisfactory to the Director of Public Works,
who in turn shall not approve the same unless he shall have had
a written report from a registered civil engineer that the grade is
proper.
(3)
A.
Acceptance of older unaccepted streets and private ways.
Any way in existence and built on may be accepted by the Town if
it is in conformity with the following requirements:
The way must have been in existence and built on prior to
March 20, 1950.
(a)
It must be a minimum of 18 feet in width, with an assessed
valuation of not less than $25,000.
(b)
(1)
Any way failing to meet the requirements of Subsection B(1) of
this section as to width may be accepted by the Town if so
recommended by the Board of Selectmen and if it is determined
after investigation that justice warrants such acceptance.
(2)
B.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 201, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 105-3 ADAMS CODE § 105-4
101:98
§ 105-5. Street openings and curb cuts.
No person shall disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, parkway or
other public property for any reason without the permission of the Board of
Selectmen. Application for permission shall be on a special form furnished
by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Director of Community Development. A permit fee, as set by the Board
of Selectmen, shall accompany all applications. Prior to the issuance of a
permit, the applicant shall make a deposit in an amount as determined by
the Director of Community Development. The deposit shall be in the form of
cash, certified check or a performance bond. The Board of Selectmen shall
establish regulations governing street openings and curb cuts.
§ 105-6. Temporary repairs to private ways.
Before presenting the proposed acceptance to the Town Meeting,
the Board of Selectmen shall, at Town expense, prepare a proper
layout and cause a plan and profile to be filed in the Town Clerk's
office.
(3)
Proper waivers, releases or quitclaim deeds to the Town shall have
been executed by property owners abutting the proposed Town
way, conditioned upon the acceptance of the street by the Town as a
Town way, which shall be recorded in the County Registry of Deeds
upon an affirmative vote by the Town as to the acceptance of that
street.
(4)
Acceptance of street with no stormwater or domestic sewers. Whenever
the Board of Selectmen shall recommend for acceptance a street upon
which stormwater or domestic sewers have not been laid, it shall
append to its layout a statement of the Director of Public Works as
to the estimated expense of laying such sewers in such street, and
this estimate shall be forwarded to the Finance Committee. When the
Finance Committee makes its recommendation, whether for or against
the acceptance of such proposed street as a Town way, it shall embody
therein for the benefit of the Town Meeting members the Director
of Public Works' estimate of the cost of installing storm or domestic
sewers in the proposed street.
C.
Eligibility requirements. The Town may make temporary repairs on
private ways which meet the following criteria:
The private way is open to public use (as defined by continuous
unrestricted access by the public for the six years preceding May
25, 1992).
(1)
The private way serves a public need and necessity or provides sole
access to two or more separate residential lots with dwellings in
continuous existence for six years preceding May 25, 1992.
(2)
A.
§ 105-4 SOLID WASTE § 105-6
101:99
The maintenance of the private way is required for the protection
of health and safety of the general public.
(3)
One hundred percent of the abutters on the affected way petition
for the repairs, indemnify the Town for any and all claims and
damages which may result from making such repairs and agree to
pay applicable costs as described herein.
(4)
Abutters agree to provide, at no cost to the Town, all easements
adjacent to and beyond the limits of the way for drainage and
repairs as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works.
(5)
Scope of work.
The repair shall be limited to minor work, such as filling, patching,
surface treatment and grading or scraping twice per year.
(1)
All such temporary repair work to be undertaken shall be limited
to that required to make the way reasonably passable and shall
only include the filling of holes and regrading of the surface of such
ways and installation of drainage, if determined to be necessary
by the Director of Public Works and approved by the Town
Administrator. Paving overlays, not more than 1 1/2 inches thick,
may be undertaken only if the Director of Public Works determines
that it is the most cost effective solution and the existing road is
already paved.
(2)
Materials used for the repairs shall be similar to those currently
in existence on the subject way, where practicable, and otherwise
shall be similar to those used in comparable locations, and may
include bituminous material when deemed necessary by the
Director of Public Works.
(3)
If drainage work is deemed necessary by the Director of Public
Works, it shall be the responsibility of the abutters to have the
drainage improvements installed prior to any repair activity or to
pay for the cost as provided below.
(4)
B.
Cost of repairs.
Costs incurred by the Town for temporary repairs shall not exceed
$500 per way (except in the case of an overlay, the average cost of
road treatment shall not exceed $15 per linear foot) in any fiscal
year (excluding the cost of Department of Public Works labor and
Department of Public Works equipment).
(1)
The cost of all drainage improvements will be the sole
responsibility of the property owners on the affected way. No such
drainage improvements to be undertaken by the Town shall
commence unless and until a cash deposit, equal in amount to the
estimated cost of such repairs as determined by the Director of
Public Works, is paid to the Town.
(2)
C.
§ 105-6 ADAMS CODE § 105-6
101:100
§ 105-7. Damage to public streets.
§ 105-8. Use of skateboards.
The use of skateboards on Town sidewalks, roadways, or other Town
property is prohibited except where specifically designated.
Chapter 109
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 22.
Sewers — See Ch. 93.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Zoning — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 201.
Liability.
The Town shall not be liable for any damage whatsoever caused
by such repairs and MGL c. 84, § 25 shall not apply. The Town
shall require property owners abutting the way and drainage
improvements to indemnify the Town for any and all claims and
damages which may result from making such repairs.
(1)
No such repairs shall be done unless there is a unanimous
agreement by all affected property owners that the work should
commence, and the Town of Adams shall be held harmless from
any and all damages or claims arising out of such repairs.
Massachusetts General Laws c. 84, § 25 shall not apply.
(2)
D.
Every owner of property adjoining a public way or any street publicly
maintained or his agents, servants, employees, contractors and
subcontractors shall provide adequate drainage control, barriers or
other suitable measures on said property to prevent damage to said way
or street. “Damage” shall mean the erosion of the subbase or wearing
surfaces and the accumulation of silt or sediment on the road surface
or in drainage structures. “Damage” shall also mean the accumulation
of soil, silt or sediment deposited on the road surface by construction
vehicles or other vehicles entering or exiting the way or street.
A.
After written notice by the Department of Public Works, anyone
violating this section shall be subject to the general penalty provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-1. The imposition of a penalty under
this section shall not relieve the owner from any other civil liability.
B.
§ 105-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 109-1
109:101
§ 109-1. Definitive plan required.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law12 of any land within the Town or proceed with the improvement
or sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction of ways or the installation
of municipal services therein unless a definitive plan of such subdivision has
been submitted and approved by the Planning Board according to Chapter
201, Subdivision Regulations, of the Town Code.
§ 109-2. Required improvements; acceptance of public ways.
§ 109-3. Board of Appeals.
The Town hereby appoints the presently existing Zoning Board of Appeals
administering Chapter 125, Zoning, of the Town Code to be and act as the
Board of Appeals to administer the subdivision control laws as adopted by
the Town in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81Z.
Chapter 113
TOBACCO SALES
§ 113-1. Sale of tobacco products to minors.
Whoever violates any provisions of regulations of the Board of Health
regarding the sale of tobacco products to minors may be penalized by a
noncriminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, as
amended. For the purpose of this provision, the penalty to apply in the event
of a violation shall be as follows: mandatory attendance at retailer training
for clerk and owner within 30 days of the violation for each and every
offense; $50 for the first offense; $150 for the second offense; and $200 for
Whenever a definitive plan has been submitted to the Planning Board,
the Planning Board shall notify the Board of Selectmen, which shall
thereupon notify the Director of Public Works, and it shall be the duty
of the latter to confer with the Chairman of the Planning Board and
the developer to determine required improvements and estimated costs
and to inspect and report on the installation of required improvements,
such as domestic and storm sewers, street layout, road beds and grades
and surface treatment. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public
Works to notify the Planning Board of any installation which does
not meet the requirements of the Subdivision Control Law, and the
Planning Board shall make the subdivider cease operations until the
requirements of the Subdivision Control Law are met.
A.
Upon completion of the subdivision, the Planning Board shall submit a
warrant article to the Town Meeting members requesting acceptance
as a public way.
B.
12.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 109-1 ADAMS CODE § 113-1
113:102
the third and each subsequent offense within a twelve-month period from
the adjudication of the first offense. Enforcement is to be by Board of Health
members and/or their designee.
Chapter 117
TOWN PROPERTY, DISPOSAL OF
§ 117-1. Conditions for disposal.
Personal property belonging to the Town may be sold or disposed of by the
board, officer or head of the department having charge of such property
only if in conformity with the following conditions:
Chapter 121
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105. Traffic regulations — See Ch. 202.
§ 121-1. Parking prohibited in certain places.
No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places, and vehicles
found parked in violation of the provisions of this section may be moved by
or under the direction of any officer and at the expense of the owner to a
place where parking is permitted:
If its value at the time of the proposed sale or disposition is less
than $500, upon specified authorization, in writing, by the Town
Administrator; or
A.
If its value at the time of the proposed sale or disposition is $500
or more, upon specified authorization, in writing, by the Board of
Selectmen and in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 30B.
B.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not have a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 12 feet wide for passing traffic.
A.
B. Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
C. Upon or in front of any private road or driveway.
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except alleys, excepting where street markings designate otherwise.
D.
Upon any street, highway, traveled way, or public parking lot during
a storm emergency declared by the Director of Public Works, which
E.
§ 113-1 TOWN PROPERTY, DISPOSAL OF § 121-1
117:103
§ 121-2. Two-hour parking during certain hours on all streets and
parking lots controlled by the Town. [Amended 6-21-2005 ATM by
Art. 27]
No driver of any vehicle shall park such vehicle in any street or in any
parking lot controlled by the Town for a period of time longer than two
hours between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day.
§ 121-3. Parking in spaces reserved for handicapped persons.
The owner and/or operator of a vehicle which does not bear the distinctive
number plates or placard authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, a vehicle
transporting handicapped persons and which does not display the special
parking identification plate authorized by said MGL c. 90, § 2, or a vehicle
which does not bear the official identification of a handicapped person
issued by any other state or any Canadian province, who parks said vehicle
or leaves said vehicle unattended in a public or private on-street or offstreet
parking space designated by a sign stating “Handicapped Parking:
Special Plate Required: Unauthorized Vehicles May be Removed at Owner's
Expense” or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designated for use
by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way shall
suffer a fine of $25 for the first occurrence and $100 for any subsequent
occurrence within a calendar year.
§ 121-4. Traffic Commission.
§ 121-5. Regulation of Town parking lots. [Added 6-21-2005 ATM by
Art. 28]
impedes the flow of traffic, the removal of water, snow, ice, debris, or
other objects, or emergency work.
The Traffic Commission shall advise the Board of Selectmen on all
matters of traffic safety, to include but not be limited to on-street
parking, traffic flow, and traffic patterns.
A.
Membership shall consist of one person from each of the following
Town departments/boards and two citizens: Department of Public
Works, Police Department and Planning Board. Members shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen and serve for a one-year term.
B.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to designate spaces in the several
parking lots controlled by the Town for the following several categories
of use:
Parking spaces reserved for the exclusive use of designated Town
officers;
(1)
Parking spaces reserved for the exclusive use of public officers and
employees;
(2)
A.
§ 121-1 ADAMS CODE § 121-5
121:104
Parking spaces reserved for the exclusive use of Town, state and
federal vehicles on official business;
(3)
Parking spaces reserved for the exclusive use of persons
possessing and displaying a valid handicapped parking permit;
(4)
Parking spaces reserved for the exclusive use of persons who shall
have purchased and who display on the parked vehicle a valid
parking permit issued by the Town of Adams for the lot in which
said vehicle is parked;
(5)
(6) Parking spaces subject to metered parking; and
(7) Parking spaces available for free unrestricted public parking.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to establish time restrictions
on the parking in Town parking lots where not in conflict with these
bylaws, including but not limited to providing when metered parking
or permit parking shall be in effect and when such lots shall be open
for public use or closed to the public. The Board of Selectmen may
designate areas of said parking lots or parking garages as no-parking,
no-standing or safety zones and may designate pedestrian crossing
areas and provide for the erection therein of such traffic control devices
and regulations as may be appropriate to facilitate ingress and egress
to and from said parking lots and promote the public safety and
convenience.
B.
The Board of Selectmen shall, in the exercise of the authority delegated
to them herein, consider the following factors:
The demand for parking spaces in the area in which the parking lot
or garage is located;
(1)
(2) The peak time of such demand;
(3) The needs of the business community;
(4) The needs of Town residents;
(5) The needs of Town government and its departments; and
The standards for the provision of handicapped-accessible parking
contained in state and federal law and regulations.
(6)
C.
Signs. Signs shall be erected by the Police Department specifically
designating said parking spaces and indicating that the use of said
parking spaces is limited to a particular class of vehicle or individual or
that there is no parking or standing allowed in such spaces.
D.
Prohibition. No person shall park in any parking spaces designated
under the provisions of this section unless he or his vehicle shall be
within the class to which the parking in said space has been limited.
E.
§ 121-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 121-5
121:105
Chapter 125
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 22.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 62
Right to farm — See Ch. 89.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 109.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 201.
Towing. Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be towed
away by the Police Department of the Town of Adams or its authorized
representatives at the owner's expense.
F.
G. The Board of Selectmen shall establish fees for parking permits.
The Treasurer Collector is authorized, upon receipt of the fee
hereinafter provided, to issue parking permits for the parking of
vehicles in Town-owned or Town-operated parking lots or parking
garages. Each permit shall indicate which parking lot it has been issued
for and at the time period for which the permit is issued, and it shall not
be valid in any other parking lot or at any other time period. The permit
must be displayed on the vehicle for which it is issued in the manner
provided by the Board of Selectmen.
H.
§ 121-5 ADAMS CODE § 121-5
121:106
ARTICLE I
Administration and Procedure
§ 125-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, convenience,
morals and welfare of the Town of Adams as authorized by MGL c. 40A and
any amendments thereof.
§ 125-2. Enforcement; administration; violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, who shall
take such action as may be necessary to enforce full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and of permits and variances issued
hereunder, including notification of noncompliance and request for
legal action through the Selectmen to the Town Counsel.
A.
Buildings, structures or signs may not be erected, substantially altered
or moved and land or structures may not be changed in use without
certification by the Building Inspector that such action is in compliance
with then applicable zoning or without review by him regarding
whether all necessary permits have been received from those
government agencies from which approval is required by federal, state
or local law. Issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and
occupancy, where required under the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
State Building Code, may serve as such certification.
B.
Submissions. All applications for activities referenced in this chapter
shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for
review by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector will review
applications for completeness and conformance with this chapter.
Submission requirements are referenced below:
Building permits. Applications shall be accompanied by three
prints of a plan of the lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot, the exact location and size of any existing
or proposed buildings, and the distance of each to all lot lines
and showing streets and ways adjacent to the lot. Also required
are three sets of construction plans showing sufficient detail to
determine compliance with the Building Code.
(1)
Fill and grading permits. All proposed grading, filling and soil
removal activity must be reviewed with the Building Inspector. Plan
submission requirements to accompany applications are provided
in § 125-16B(2)(b).
(2)
Planned development. Plan submission requirements to accompany
applications are provided in § 125-24C.
(3)
Planned resort special permit. Plan submission requirements to
accompany applications are provided in §§ 125-29 and 125-19 and
in Chapter 201, Subdivision Regulations, of the Town Code.
(4)
C.
§ 125-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-2
121:107
§ 125-3. Zoning Board of Appeals.
Special permits and variances. Plan submission requirements to
accompany applications for hearing before the special permit
granting authority (Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals) are
provided in § 125-19B.
(5)
Site plan review. Plan submission requirements to accompany
applications to the Planning Board are provided in § 125-19B.
Activities requiring the preparation of a site plan are listed in
§ 125-19E.
(6)
Following 30 days' notice of such violation, any person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, any conditions under which a permit is
issued, or any decision rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals may be
fined not more than $50 for each offense. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and three
associate members, who shall be appointed in the manner prescribed
by MGL c. 40A, as amended.
A.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have and exercise all the powers
granted to it by MGL c. 40A, 40B and 41 and by this chapter. The
Board's powers are as follows:
To hear and decide applications for special permits upon which the
Board is empowered to act under this chapter, in accordance with
§ 125-4.
(1)
To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the
terms of this chapter, including variances for use with respect
to particular land or structures. Such variance shall be granted
only in cases where the Zoning Board of Appeals finds all of the
following:
A literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the
petitioner or appellant.
(a)
The hardship is owing to circumstances relating to the soil
conditions, shape or topography of such land or structures and
especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting
generally the zoning district in which it is located.
(b)
Desirable relief may be granted without either:
[1] Substantial detriment to the public good; or
Nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or
purpose of this chapter.
[2]
(c)
(2)
B.
§ 125-2 ADAMS CODE § 125-3
121:108
§ 125-4. Special permits.
To hear and decide other appeals. Other appeals will also be heard
and decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals when filed by:
Any person aggrieved by reason of his inability to obtain a
permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer
under the provisions of MGL c. 40A;
(a)
(b) The Berkshire County Regional Planning Commission; or
Any person, including any officer or board of the Town of
Adams or of any abutting town, if aggrieved by any order
or decision of the Building Inspector or other administrative
official, in violation of any provision MGL c. 40A or this chapter.
(c)
(3)
To issue comprehensive permits. Comprehensive permits for
construction may be issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
construction of low- or moderate-income housing by a public
agency or limited dividend or nonprofit corporation, upon the
Board's determination that such construction would be consistent
with local needs, whether or not consistent with local zoning,
building, health, or subdivision requirements, as authorized by
MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 to 23.
(4)
To issue withheld building permits. Building permits withheld by
the Building Inspector acting under MGL c. 41, § 8lY as a means
of enforcing the Subdivision Control Law may be issued by the
Zoning Board of Appeals where the Board finds practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship and if the circumstances of the case do
not require that the building be related to a way shown on the
subdivision plan in question.
(5)
To serve as the Zoning Board of Appeals as established under the
provisions of the State Building Code.
(6)
Repetitive petitions for special permits, appeals and petitions for
variances and applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
limited as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 16.
C.
Applications for special permits or variances shall be accompanied
by a plot plan drawn to scale and including the information listed in
§ 125-19B (site plan approval).
D.
Special permit granting authority. Unless specifically designated
otherwise, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the special permit
granting authority.
A.
Submission requirements. Plan submission content requirements vary
according to type of activity proposed. Submissions required by this
chapter will be determined after review of the proposed activity by the
applicant and the Building Inspector.
B.
§ 125-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-4
121:109
Public hearing. Special permits shall only be issued following public
hearings held within 65 days after filing with the special permit
granting authority of an application, a copy of which shall forthwith be
given to the Town Clerk by the applicant.
C.
Criteria. Special permits shall normally be granted where specific
provisions of this chapter are met, except when particulars of the
location or use, not generally true of the district or of the uses
permitted in it, would cause granting of such permit to be to the
detriment of the public interest because:
Traffic generated or patterns of access or egress would cause
congestion, hazard, or substantial change in established
neighborhood character;
(1)
The continued operation of or the development of adjacent uses as
permitted in this chapter would be adversely affected by the nature
of the proposed use;
(2)
Nuisance or hazard would be created to the detriment of the
health, safety and/or welfare of the occupants of the proposed use
or the citizens of the Town;
(3)
For other reasons, the proposed use would impair the integrity of
the district or adjoining districts or otherwise derogate from the
intent and purpose of this chapter;
(4)
The basic design of the proposed use(s) or buildings, the
relationship between the buildings and the land, and/or the overall
physical appearance of the proposed use(s) or buildings would
not be in general harmony with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood and would serve to blight or detract from abutting
residences or other property;
(5)
Adequate safeguards have not been taken to protect the natural
environment;
(6)
All required public services (i.e., water, sewer, schools, fire
protection, etc.) are not reasonably available to serve the proposed
development; or
(7)
The economic effect of the proposed development would result in
economic conditions leading to deterioration of properties due to
excessive concentration of commercial activity unsustainable in the
projected market.
(8)
D.
Conditions. Special permits may be granted with such reasonable
conditions, regulations, or limitations as the special permit granting
authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this chapter.
E.
Expiration. Special permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or
construction has not begun, except for good cause, within 24 months
of special permit approval (excepting such time required to pursue or
F.
§ 125-4 ADAMS CODE § 125-4
121:110
§ 125-5. Amendments.
This chapter may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or
repeal by Town Meeting in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5.
§ 125-6. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 125-7. Effect on other regulations; conformance required;
nonconforming uses.
await the determination of an appeal referred to in MGL c. 40A, § 17,
from the grant thereof).
Other laws. Where the application of this chapter imposes greater
restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits,
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
A.
Conformance. Construction or operations under a building or special
permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this chapter
unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of six
months after the issuance of the permit and, in cases involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to
completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
B.
Nonconformancy. The lawful use or maintenance of any structure or
land existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of
this chapter may be continued, although such structure or use does not
conform to provisions of this chapter, subject to the following conditions
and exceptions:
Abandonment. A nonconforming use which has been abandoned
or discontinued for a period of two years or more shall not be
reestablished and any future use shall conform to this chapter.
(1)
Change, extension or alteration. As provided in MGL c. 40A, § 6,
a nonconforming single- or two-family dwelling may be altered
or extended, provided that doing so does not increase the
nonconforming nature of said structure, and other preexisting
nonconforming structures or uses may be extended or altered on
special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals if the Zoning
Board of Appeals finds that such extension or alteration will not
substantially be more detrimental to the neighborhood than the
existing nonconforming use. Once changed to a conforming use, no
structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming
use. Such findings relative to the nonconforming nature and
whether or not a structure will be substantially more detrimental
shall be addressed as follows:
(2)
C.
§ 125-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-7
121:111
In the case of dimensional nonconformancy, any dimension or
measurement, including side, front and rear yards, height and
open space, may be altered, whether increased or decreased,
to the limitations permitted by zoning. Such dimensions or
measurements already not in conformance with those
permitted by this chapter may only be adjusted so as to reduce
their difference from the chapter requirements.
(a)
In the case of a use nonconformancy, no change or adjustment
in size, intensity of use, or nature of use shall be granted which
shall be deemed to increase the objectionable quality of the
original nonconforming use, including but not limited to traffic,
parking, noise, light and glare, hours of operation, unsightly
storage or conditions, objectionable odors, neighborhood
character, safety, overcrowding and pollution.
(b)
One or two-family dwelling change. For the purposes of this
Subsection C, the following activities are deemed not to increase
the nonconforming nature of a lawfully preexisting nonconforming
one- or two-family dwelling. Such changes are permitted by right,
subject to the issuance of a building permit:
(a) Interior alterations, structural and nonstructural.
Changes, extensions or structural alterations which do not
violate the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
(b)
(3)
Restoration. Necessary repairs and rebuilding of nonconforming
structures or signs after damage by fire, storm or similar disaster
are permitted, provided that they are started within 12 months
and completed within 24 months of the catastrophe and do not
substantially change the character or size of the buildings or the
use to which they were put prior to such damage.
(4)
Replacement. Replacement of mobile homes or commercial
vehicles parked in nonconformity with the Use Regulation
Schedule13 is not permitted, even where such replacement does not
increase the extent of nonconformity.
(5)
Isolated lots.
Any increase in lot area, width, frontage, yard, open space,
or coverage requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
erection, extension, alteration, or moving of a one- or twofamily
home on a legally created lot not meeting current
requirements, provided that the applicant documents that at
the time such increased requirements became applicable to it,
the lot:
(a)
(6)
13.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of the chapter.
§ 125-7 ADAMS CODE § 125-7
121:112
§ 125-8. Court appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or of
any special permit granting authority, whether or not previously a party to
the proceeding, or any municipal officer or board may, as provided in MGL
c. 40A, § 17, appeal to the Superior Court or to the Land Court by bringing
an action within 20 days after the decision has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk.
Had at least 5,000 square feet of lot area and 50 feet of
frontage on a street;
[1]
Was not held in common ownership with any contiguous
lot at any time since such requirements were instituted;
and
[2]
[3] Conformed to then existing dimensional requirements.
Such nonconforming lot may be changed in size or shape or its
land area recombined without losing this exemption, so long as
the change does not increase the actual or potential number of
buildable lots.
(b)
§ 125-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-8
121:113

ARTICLE II
Use and Intensity Regulations
§ 125-9. Establishment of districts.
§ 125-10. Use Regulation Schedule.
For purposes of this chapter, the Town of Adams is hereby divided into
the following types of districts:
Residence District R1, R2, R3, R4
Business District B1, B2, B3
Industrial District I, IP
Open Space
District
OS
A.
The boundaries of these districts are defined and bounded on the map
titled “Zoning Map, Adams, Massachusetts” on file with the Town Clerk.
That map and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made a part of
this chapter.
B.
Except when labeled to the contrary, boundary or dimension lines
shown approximately following or terminating at street, railroad, or
utility easement center or layout lines, boundary or lot lines, or the
channel of a stream shall be construed to be actually at those lines,
and when shown approximately parallel, perpendicular or radial to
such lines shall be construed to be actually parallel, perpendicular or
radial thereto. When not locatable in any other way, boundaries shall be
determined by scale from the map.
C.
Where a district boundary line divides any lot existing at the time such
line is adopted, the regulations for any district in which the lot has
frontage on a street may be extended not more than 30 feet into the
other district. Required lot dimensions shall be those of the district in
which the lot has the greatest frontage.
D.
When a lot in one ownership is situated in part in the Town of Adams
and in part in an adjacent municipality, the provisions of this chapter
shall be applied to that portion of the lot lying in the Town of Adams in
the same manner as if the entire lot were situated therein.
E.
No building or structure shall be erected or used and no premises shall
be used except as set forth in the Use Regulation Schedule14 or as
exempted by § 125-7 or by statute. Symbols employed shall mean the
following:
Yes A permitted use
No An excluded or prohibited use
A.
14.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-10
121:115
§ 125-11. Intensity of Use Schedule.
§ 125-12. Apartment dimensional controls.
Dimensional controls for apartments and multifamily dwellings shall be as
follows:
SP Use authorized under special permit as provided for in § 125-4
herein
SPR Site plan review required by Planning Board
Where an activity might be classified under more than one of the uses
on the Use Regulation Schedule, the more specific classification shall
determine permissibility; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall
govern.
B.
Uses subject to site plan review (§ 125-19) are designated by the
column headed SPR and further by § 125-19E.
C.
All structures hereafter erected in any district shall be located on a lot
such that all of the minimum requirements set forth in the Intensity
of Use Schedule15 are conformed with, except where specifically
exempted by this chapter or by General Law.
A.
No existing lot shall be changed in size or shape except through a
public taking so as to result in violation of the requirements set forth in
the Intensity of Use Schedule.
B.
Uncovered steps, stairs, sills, cornices, or similar architectural features
shall not be included in computing floor area and need not observe yard
requirements.
C.
No fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision (other
than a principal building) between 2 1/2 and eight feet above the lowest
elevation at the street line shall be permitted on a corner lot within the
area of a triangle formed by a line joining points on each front lot line
20 feet from the intersection of the tangents of such streets.
D.
No part of any lot used to satisfy the requirements of this chapter for
a given building or use shall also be used to satisfy requirements for a
different building or use.
E.
Not more than one principal building shall be erected on a lot unless
each building thereon is served by access functionally equivalent to
that required by the Planning Board under Chapter 201, Subdivision
Regulations, of the Town Code.
F.
15.Editor's Note: The Intensity of Use Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-10 ADAMS CODE § 125-12
121:116
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
District Apartments/
Multifamily
Dwellings
R2 25,000
R3 20,000
R4 10,000
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit
(square feet)
R2 4,500
R3 3,000
R4 2,500
Minimum open space All See district
Minimum lot width and frontage (feet) R2 125
R3 120
R4 70
Minimum front yard (feet) All 20
Minimum side yard (feet) R2 15
R3 10
R4 8
Minimum rear yard (feet) R2 30
R3 20
R4 10
Maximum lot coverage R2 25%
R3 30%
R4 35%
§ 125-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-12
121:117

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 125-13. Parking and loading requirements.
Adequate off-street parking must be provided within a reasonable
distance to service all parking demand created by new construction,
whether through new structures or additions to old ones, and by change
of use, except in the B-1 District, to which these requirements do not
apply, unless otherwise provided for below. Such parking shall be either
on the same premises as the activity it services or within 600 feet on a
separate parcel, which may be jointly used with other premises for this
purpose if permitted in the Use Regulation Schedule.
The following minimums must be met unless these are reduced
on special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals, upon
determination that special circumstances render a lesser provision
adequate for all parking needs. Any reduction of existing off-street
parking due to construction or change of use shall require a special
permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1)
In B-1 Districts, residential uses that generate 10 or more parking
spaces in accordance with Subsection B below shall be required
to provide parking consistent with this article unless determined
otherwise through the site plan review process.
(2)
A.
Schedule of requirements.
(1) Dwellings: two spaces per dwelling unit.
Offices or stores: one space per 250 square feet leasable floor area
or fraction thereof.
(2)
(3) Restaurant or place of assembly: one space per four seats.
(4) Bowling alley: four spaces per lane.
(5) Nursing home or hospital: one space per four beds.
Manufacturing, research and testing laboratories: one space per
1.3 employees at the largest shift plus one space per 2.6 employees
at the second largest shift.
(6)
Bed-and-breakfast: one space per guest room plus two spaces for
residents.
(7)
Those not listed in this schedule shall be individually determined
through site plan review pursuant to § 125-19B.
(8)
B.
No off-street parking or loading area shall be maintained within 15 feet
of a street line or, if servicing a use not allowed in a residential district,
within 10 feet of said district bounds.
C.
§ 125-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-13
121:119
Not more than one parking area entrance and one exit shall be
permitted onto a street per 200 feet of frontage or fraction thereof.
Parking areas for six or more cars shall be so designed and located that
their use does not require backing onto a public way.
D.
Adequate off-street loading facilities and space must be provided to
service all needs created by new construction or new use, whether
through new structures or uses or additions to old ones, and by change
of use of existing structures. Facilities shall be so sized and arranged
that no vehicles need back onto or off a public way or be parked on a
public way while loading, unloading, or waiting to do so.
E.
No entrance, exit or access drive for other than residential uses shall
be located within 40 feet of an intersection of streets.
F.
The intersection of the tangents of any vehicular exit line and street line
shall not be within a ten-foot radius of any building.
G.
Driveways and curb cuts.
Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection H is to provide maximum
protection to the public through the orderly control of traffic
moving onto and off of streets, uniform design and layout of new
driveways and entrances (curb cuts), adequate vehicular access to
a lot and drainage of surface water.
(1)
Procedures.
The Department of Community Development shall issue
permits for all proposed curb cuts and street access points.
(a)
Appeals of decisions may be made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(b)
No curb cut permit shall be issued until all relevant state
and local permits are secured. Before approval is granted, the
application shall be referred to the Department of Public Works
and, if necessary, the Conservation Commission.
(c)
The Community Development Director may require plans and
specifications deemed necessary for adequate review.
(d)
Installations carried out by private contractors are subject to
inspections by the Adams Department of Public Works before,
during and after actual installation.
(e)
(2)
Design and construction standards.
Entrances shall be located to the best advantage with regard to
street alignment, profile, sight distance and safety conditions.
(a)
Driveways, entrances (curb cuts) and vehicular access to and
from a lot shall be through the frontage, except that the
Planning Board may issue a special permit allowing driveways,
(b)
(3)
H.
§ 125-13 ADAMS CODE § 125-13
121:120
entrances and vehicular access to a lot over a side or rear lot
line if the proposed location meets the criteria listed in § 125-4.
Driveways serving residential uses shall have one curb cut for
lots with frontage of less than 200 feet. Curb cuts for one- and
two-family units shall be considered one-way access.
(c)
Driveways serving residential uses with an excess of 200 feet
of frontage may be allowed two curb cuts, each to be
considered one-way.
(d)
Driveways serving 20 units or more of residential units or
commercial/industrial uses may be allowed two curb cuts, each
to be considered two-way, with a minimum of 200 feet between
each curb cut.
(e)
Curb cut width shall be measured from between the edges of
the road surface at the intersection with the right-of-way.
Residential Commercial/
Industrial
Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
One-way 10 feet 14 feet 12 feet 16 feet
Two-way 12 feet 18 feet 22 feet 26 feet
(f)
Wherever possible, driveways shall have a stopping area of no
greater than four-percent (4%) slope for a distance of 12 feet
back from the edge of the road surface.
(g)
Wherever possible, residential curb cuts are to be set back
50 feet or more from a street corner measured between the
nearest edge of the driveway and the cross road edge of
pavement.
(h)
Any adjacent disturbed areas before, during and after
construction shall be stabilized so as to prevent erosion onto
the subject property, abutting property and/or onto the
roadway. Disturbed areas shall be graded and seeded within 30
days of curb cut installation.
(i)
Curb cuts off state highways shall conform to Massachusetts
Department of Public Works standards and regulations.
(j)
Common driveways. If driveway access is provided, each lot shall be
serviced individually, except that the Planning Board may issue a
special permit for a common driveway serving up to four lots if the
following minimum requirements are met:
An easement providing permanent access for all properties served
by the driveway shall be provided upon application and, if
approved, recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
(1)
I.
§ 125-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-13
121:121
The special permit shall state that the driveway is not a private
road or a public road, that it does not meet the standards for
a Town road, and that the driveway shall permanently remain a
private driveway.
(2)
The grade, length and location of common driveways shall be
constructed and maintained to provide:
Adequate access and turnaround for vehicles, including
sanitary and emergency vehicles, year round. A turnaround
area shall be provided at the end of the driveway so that
vehicles do not need to enter onto adjoining lots. The Planning
Board may require passing turnouts depending on the length
and design of the proposed driveway.
(a)
A width of at least 14 feet with drainage and culverts where
the Planning Board deems necessary.
(b)
Any additional storm drainage generated by the new driveway
shall not run onto any adjacent property except through an
approved drainage system.
(c)
(d) A maximum grade of 10%.
(e) A maximum length of 600 feet.
The driveway entrance shall be located a minimum of 50 feet
from any street intersection.
(f)
No parking areas or structures shall be allowed in the driveway
right-of-way.
(g)
The driveway shall have a minimum three-inch crown, a
twelve-inch gravel base and a surface material deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board.
(h)
(3)
Approval from the Development Cabinet shall be obtained prior to
the granting of the special permit.
(4)
No common driveway shall be extended to serve additional lots
subsequently created.
(5)
Land held in common ownership with lots served by a common
driveway at the time the lots were created shall not be
subsequently subdivided to be served by another common
driveway.
(6)
The Planning Board may deny the special permit if it determines
that the land being subdivided is better served by individual
driveways or subdivision approval under Chapter 201, Subdivision
Regulations, of the Town Code.
(7)
Ownership and maintenance of a common driveway shall be
assured through a restrictive covenant, satisfactory to the Planning
(8)
§ 125-13 ADAMS CODE § 125-13
121:122
§ 125-14. Noise, light, glare, heat, vibration and smoke standards.
Board, which binds current and future owners of each lot served by
the common driveway to the responsibility for maintenance, repair
and reconstruction of the common driveway. A draft covenant shall
be submitted for approval with the special permit application and
shall include but not be limited to specific standards for
maintenance and repair of the drainage system, provision for
allocating financial responsibility and a procedure for resolution of
disagreements. If the special permit is granted, the covenant shall
be recorded at the Registry of Deeds and shall be made part of
every deed to every lot served by the common driveway.
The Planning Board may require a performance bond or other
security for the completion of the common driveway. Such security
shall be posted prior to construction of the driveway. The driveway
shall be completed, inspected by the Planning Board or its
designee, and the security released prior to the issuance of
occupancy permits for the lots served by the common driveway.
(9)
Common driveways permitted under this Subsection I shall be
limited to single- and two-family dwellings.
(10)
Every use, structure or fixture shall be so arranged that any glare or
radiant heat produced is shielded so as not to be perceptible at or
beyond any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. Exterior
lighting, including but not necessarily limited to lighting of exterior
walls of buildings from an external light source and lighting of parking
areas, signs, walks and drives, shall be arranged in such a manner as to
direct light away from other lots and public ways.
A.
Every use shall be so operated that resultant ground vibrations are
not discernible without the use of instruments at any boundary line
of the lot on which the use is located for more than three minutes'
duration in any one hour of the day. The above shall not apply to those
vibrations caused by motor vehicles, trains, aircraft, or water vessels
being operated in a manner normally incidental to the principal use.
B.
The Building Inspector may require that the applicant for a facility
whose future compliance with these standards is questionable furnish
evidence of probable compliance, whether by example of similar
facilities or by engineering analysis. Issuance of a permit on the basis
of that evidence shall certify the Town's acceptance of the conformance
of the basic structure and equipment, but future equipment changes
and operating procedures must be such as to also comply with these
standards.
C.
Noise.
(1) Maximum permitted sound-pressure levels.
D.
§ 125-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-14
121:123
Octave Band
Center Frequency
of Measurement
(Hz)
Octave Band Level
for Business/
Industrial Zones in
Decibels
Octave Band Level
for Residential
Zones and for Uses
Abutting
Residential Zones
31.5 79 54
63 78 53
125 73 48
250 68 45
500 62 41
1,000 56 37
2,000 51 34
4,000 47 32
8,000 44 30
Notes:
l. Acoustical terminology is that most recently approved by the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
2. Reference pressure shall be 0.0002 microbars.
3. Hz is the abbreviation for Hertz, which means cycles per
second.
4. For preliminary survey and monitoring the approximate single
number, 65 dB(A) may be used for commercial and industrial
zones and 40 dB(A) may be used for residential zones and for
uses abutting residential zones.
5. dB(A) shall mean A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a general purpose sound-level meter
complying with the provisions of American Standard for
General Purpose Sound-Level Meters (Sl.4-1971), ANSI or OSI
(1999), properly calibrated, and operated on the “A” weighting
network.
Measurements to determine compliance with these standards shall
be provided by the applicant upon request by the Building
Inspector. Such measurements may be made by any public or
private agency, firm, or person competent to perform such activity.
All measurements shall be obtained through the utilization of
procedures and equipment approved by the Town of Adams, and
measurements shall be taken at property lines of subject property
and at adjoining properties as directed by the Town of Adams. This
Subsection D shall not apply to the operation of farm machinery
accessory to agricultural uses.
(2)
All resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter,
smoke, vapor, radioactive emission, or other atmospheric pollutant
E.
§ 125-14 ADAMS CODE § 125-14
121:124
§ 125-15. Sign regulations.
which is inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health
or is capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or damage
to property shall be effectively regulated and disposed of so as to
avoid any nuisance or hazard to the public's health or safety. Such
air pollutants shall not exceed any limits established by the Adams
Board of Health, under the provisions of MGL c. 111, § 31C, titled
“Atmospheric pollution; regulation and control; publication; hearings;
penalties; enforcement; jurisdiction; injunction,” any other statute, or
310 CMR 6.0, 7.0 or 8.0. These standards shall not apply to
conventional residential heating appliances.
General provisions.
No signs that advertise a nationally or regionally advertised
product shall be allowed, except that a franchised dealer may
display the trademark of his product on his sign, and a gasoline
station may display the trademark of that particular gasoline
company on said sign. Endorsements or approvals may also be
displayed as part of a single sign.
(1)
Standing signs are prohibited except as they may be authorized
in particular instances by the Zoning Board of Appeals when it
determines that the nature of use of the premises, the architecture
of the building, or its location with reference to the street is such
that a sign should be permitted in the public interest. In granting
such permission, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall specify the
size, height, type and location of the sign and impose such other
terms, restrictions and conditions as it may deem to be in the public
interest. The maximum size that can be authorized shall be 32
square feet.
(2)
The most restrictive case of sign allowance shall always apply in
the application of this section.
(3)
(4) All signs shall be prepared in a professional manner.
A.
Illumination, motion and noise regulations.
Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light
directed solely at the sign, without causing glare for motorists,
pedestrians or neighboring residential premises.
(1)
Except for indicators of time and temperature, no sign or part of
any sign shall flash, move or make noise.
(2)
Neon signs shall be allowed within windows up to 10% of the total
window area, not to exceed a total of six square feet.
(3)
B.
§ 125-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-15
121:125
Exterior neon signage shall be allowed on special permit, shall
not exceed the guidelines of Subsection F(1) to (4) and shall not
advertise a nationally or regionally advertised product or service.
(4)
Location requirements.
Signs shall not be painted or posted directly on the exterior surface
of any wall but rather shall be affixed to a substantial intermediary
removable surface securely affixed to the building.
(1)
(2) No sign shall protrude over public property more than three feet.
No signs or flags shall be placed within or projecting over a public
way or on public property unless authorized by the Board of
Selectmen as required by MGL c. 85, § 8. No signs shall be placed
on shade trees without approval of the Tree Warden as required by
MGL c. 87, § 9.
(3)
C.
Temporary signs.
Temporary signs listed below shall be allowed for up to 12 months
in any district without necessity of a permit:
An unlighted sign of up to 10 square feet indicating parties
involved in construction on the premises.
(a)
An unlighted sign of up to eight square feet pertaining to lease
or sale of the premises.
(b)
A sign of up to 10 square feet pertaining to a subdivision while
under development.
(c)
Signs inside display windows covering not more than 30% of
the window area, illuminated by building illumination only.
(d)
(1)
(2) (Reserved)16
Temporary signs, posters, banners or the like for the opening of
a new business shall be permitted within the limits prescribed for
permanent signs. All such signs shall be identified on a permit from
the Building Inspector. Such devices shall be removed within 60
days of the opening of said business.
(3)
D.
Permitted accessory signs in Residence and Forest Recreation District
(B-3).
One sign for each family residing on the premises indicating the
owner or occupant or pertaining to a permitted accessory use shall
be permitted, provided that no sign shall exceed two square feet in
area.
(1)
E.
16.Editor's Note: Subsection D(2), imposing regulations on political signs, was disapproved
by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted and reserved for
future use.
§ 125-15 ADAMS CODE § 125-15
121:126
One sign pertaining to permitted buildings and uses of the
premises other than dwellings and their accessory uses shall be
permitted, not to exceed 5% of the area of the wall it is viewed with
and in no case more than six square feet.
(2)
Illumination of signs in residential districts shall be by white light
and indirect method only.
(3)
Permitted accessory signs in Business and Industrial Districts (B-1, B-2,
I and IP).
Signs attached to a building shall be permitted provided that they
aggregate not more than 5% of the wall area they are viewed with,
subject to the guidelines in Subsection F(4).
(1)
There shall be not more than one exterior sign for each business
establishment, except that if there is more than one public
entrance to any such business establishment, there may be one
additional secondary sign for each such additional entrance,
provided that the aggregate area of all such secondary signs shall
not exceed 50% of the maximum permissible area authorized and
further provided that not more than one secondary sign per
building face shall be allowed, that any secondary signs shall be at
least 30 feet from each other, and that such secondary signs shall
be located at such entrances.
(2)
In addition to the foregoing sign or signs, one directory of the
business establishments occupying a building may be affixed to the
exterior wall of the building at each public entrance to the building.
Such directory shall not exceed an area of one square foot for each
establishment occupying the building.
(3)
Signs located on business property, or limited industrial property,
shall be according to the following guidelines:
A limit of 16 square feet per 40 feet, or less, of building
frontage occupied by the applicant.
(a)
Building frontages greater than 40 feet shall be allowed to add
two square feet per five feet of frontage up to a maximum of 32
square feet.
(b)
Combined frontages on more than one street shall be allowed
two square feet per five feet of total building frontage occupied
by the applicant up to a maximum of 48 square feet.
(c)
Signs located on business property, or limited industrial
property, may not rise more than two feet above the eave line.
(d)
Only one sign per business shall be allowed in a shopping
center, and the sign must be located on the building in which
the business is located.
(e)
(4)
F.
§ 125-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-15
121:127
§ 125-16. Screening and landscaping requirements.
Each business establishment may display one flag indicating
“Open,” “Welcome,” other greeting, or the business logo but shall
not advertise a nationally or regionally advertised product or
service. Maximum size that can be allowed shall be 16 square feet.
Flags shall not be considered as standing signs.
(5)
Permitted nonaccessory signs. No billboard or other nonaccessory sign
shall be permitted. However, a nonaccessory directional sign not
exceeding 10 square feet in area designating the route to an
establishment not on a state highway may be allowed in any district on
special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to its finding
that such sign will promote the public interest, will not endanger the
public safety, and will be of such size, location and design as will not be
detrimental to the neighborhood.
G.
Administration.
No sign, except those specifically exempted by this chapter, shall
be erected without a permit issued by the Building Inspector,
application for which shall be accompanied by such scale drawings
or photographs as the Building Inspector may require.
(1)
Legally nonconforming signs, except those regulated by MGL c. 93,
§ 29, shall be governed by § 125-7C, Nonconformancy.
(2)
All signs, whether erected before or after the effective date of this
chapter, shall be maintained in a safe condition to the satisfaction
of the Building Inspector.
(3)
Any sign which has been abandoned or advertises any product,
business or activity which is no longer sold or carried on for at
least 60 days must be removed within 30 days by the owner of the
premises after notice to that effect from the Building Inspector.
(4)
H.
Outdoor parking lots (screening and landscaping requirements).
On at least three sides of the perimeter of an outdoor parking lot
for 10 or more cars, a screening scheme shall be installed. The
scheme could include a combination of vegetative plantings and
fencing or strictly vegetative plantings, evergreen or deciduous in
nature, to be determined through site plan review. In performing a
site plan review, the Planning Board may authorize alternatives to
these specifications, taking into consideration existing vegetation,
topography, soils, and other site conditions, provided that
appropriate screening, shading and articulation are achieved. In
the interior part of an outdoor parking lot where two rows of
parking spaces containing a total of 10 or more parking spaces face
each other, a landscaped open space separated from the parking
area by a suitable curb with at least four inches vertical and not
less than six feet in width shall be provided. The landscaped strip
(1)
A.
§ 125-15 ADAMS CODE § 125-16
121:128
may be provided either between the rows of parking spaces parallel
to the aisle or in two or more strips parallel to the spaces and
extending from the aisle serving one row of spaces to the aisle
serving the other row of spaces and shall contain at least one tree
per 30 linear feet.
Trees required by this section shall be canopy-forming deciduous
trees at least 2.5 inches in diameter at a height four feet above the
ground at time of planting and shall be of a species characterized
by suitability and hardiness for location in a parking lot. To the
extent practicable, existing trees shall be retained and used to
satisfy this section.
(2)
Grading and erosion. Site design, materials, and methods of
construction or operation shall be designed to avoid erosion damage,
sedimentation or uncontrolled surface runoff, including conformity with
the following:
Requirements.
Slopes of 10% or greater that result from grading,
construction, or other land alteration shall be stabilized either
through a structural retaining wall or cribbing, or through
vegative slope stabilization, comprising not less than four
inches of topsoil planted densely with plants having shallow
fibrous roots sufficient to retain the soil, such as grasses,
legumes, dogwood, amur privet, rugusa, rose or bayberry. The
Building Inspector may require mulch or other temporary
stabilization measures. Either a constructed surface or cover
vegetation will be provided not later than the first full spring
season immediately following filling or stripping, and in the
case of building demolition the site will be graded in
accordance with the State Building Code.
(a)
Placing more than 100 cubic yards of fill on any parcel or
raising ground level by three vertical feet or more within any
required yard shall require a permit from the Building
Inspector, which shall be issued only upon demonstration that
all provisions of this Subsection B are being complied with;
that reasonable care is being taken to avoid harmful diversion
of water affecting adjoining properties; that mature trees are
being reasonably protected; and that no resultant slope
exceeds one foot vertically to two feet horizontally. Either a
constructed surface or cover vegetation will be provided not
later than the first full spring season immediately following
filling or stripping, and in the case of building demolition the
site will also be graded in accordance with the State Building
Code.
(b)
Maximum allowable slope from any activity is one foot vertical
for each two feet horizontal.
(c)
(1)
B.
§ 125-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-16
121:129
Erosion from one property onto another resulting from
construction activity or change in land use or other activity is
prohibited.
(d)
Special permits required.
Each of the following shall require a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals:
[1] Placing more than 200 cubic yards of fill on any parcel.
Raising ground level within any required yard by six feet
or more.
[2]
Simultaneously exposing more than 80,000 square feet
of bare earth through either removal or filling unless in
conjunction with agricultural activity or in conjunction
with a currently valid building or use permit or within
streets which either are public or shown on an approved
subdivision plan.
[3]
Construction or grading on more than 1,000 square feet of
land where the average natural slope exceeds 25%.
[4]
(a)
Submission requirements. Application for a special permit
shall include a plan showing existing and proposed grades
at key locations, vegetation (or other surface cover) and
description of temporary or permanent impoundment basins
or other methods proposed for controlling erosion,
sedimentation, or other soil instability during and after
construction. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require the
applicant to submit a report from the Soil Conservation Service
or soil loss calculations prepared by a soils scientist or
engineer in cases of doubt as to the adequacy of proposed
measures. The Board may also require the furnishing of a
performance bond or other security during the construction
period. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall obtain a
recommendation from the Conservation Commission.
(b)
Review criteria. Such special permit shall be granted only
if the Board determines that adequate provisions have been
made for control of erosion, sedimentation, and runoff, both
during and after construction, for avoidance of unsightly
conditions and for protection against other environmental
degradation.
(c)
(2)
Screening and buffering requirements.
All parking areas for five or more cars, all outdoor sales display
areas, all mobile home parks, all business uses and industrial uses
(see the Use Regulation Schedule), all contractors' yards, open
storage and loading service yards and all commercial outdoor
(1)
C.
§ 125-16 ADAMS CODE § 125-16
121:130
recreation shall be screened from any adjacent residential use or
district in accordance with the following schedule:
Zone Screening
Requirement
Buffer Width
I and B2 Greenbelt 30 feet
IP Greenbelt 40 feet
B1 Barrier 5 feet
Such greenbelt shall consist of three staggered rows, each row
eight feet apart, of substantially sight-impervious evergreen foliage
at least eight feet in height or planting of shrubs and trees
complemented by a sight-impervious fence of at least six feet but
not more then eight feet in height or such other type of landscaping
as may be required under site plan approval. In all developments,
to the extent practicable, existing trees shall be retained and used
to satisfy the provisions of the minimum lot landscaping.
(2)
Such barriers shall consist of at least sight-impervious fence
satisfying the requirements of all greenbelt fence and may be
supplemented by additional plantings as required under site plan
approval.
(3)
Buffers shall be for the sole purpose of accommodating the
screening and other landscaping as may be required and shall not
be used for any other purpose.
(4)
Permitted uses in a required front yard. No parking, loading or outdoor
sales or display areas shall be permitted in any required front yard.
Such yard shall be landscaped to include at least a single row of canopyforming
trees planted no more than 30 feet on center and of no less
than two inches in caliper when planted.
D.
Industrial Park District landscape buffer. In an Industrial Park (IP)
District, a landscaped buffer 40 feet wide shall be placed adjacent to
any general use public street (not including any street internal to the
industrial park, whether or not such street forms a through way or is
open to general public use). Such landscaped buffer shall consist of
open space planted in grass and at least a single row of canopy-forming
trees which when planted shall be of at least 2 1/2 inches in caliper.
Such landscaped buffer shall be left as open space and shall not be
used for any other use except for one nonaccessory sign in conformance
with the requirements of § 125-15 of this chapter and no more than two
roadway crossings.
E.
Satellite television antennas.
Standard satellite television and radio antennas are permitted in all
zoning districts unless the installed device is higher than 15 feet,
in which case the installation requires a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1)
F.
§ 125-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-16
121:131
§ 125-17. Unregistered motor vehicles.
§ 125-18. Floodplain District.
No satellite television and/or antenna shall be placed in any
required accessory yard. Relief from this requirement will require
a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2)
All satellite television and/or radio antennas shall be screened from
view by plantings, shrubs, trees or other suitable means insofar as
possible without interfering with reception of satellite signals and
shall not be illuminated in any way.
(3)
No person shall permit more than one unregistered motor vehicle or
major part or portion of a motor vehicle to remain for more than 30
consecutive days on premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him if
the vehicle or parts are within view from any public way or abutting
property, unless the vehicle is regularly operated on the premises or
unless the premises are duly licensed under the provisions of MGL c.
140, §§ 58 and 59.
A.
The Building Inspector shall ticket any vehicle in violation of this
section. The violator shall have a period of 14 days from notification in
which to remove the vehicle. Any person or entity who or which violates
this section shall be subject to a fine of $50. Each day of violation shall
be a separate and distinct offense. In the event of violation, the Building
Inspector may give to the offender a written notice to either appear
before the Clerk of the District Court at any time during office hours not
later than 21 days after the date of such notice or mail the stipulated
penalty to said Clerk, as provided under MGL c. 40, § 21D.
B.
Purpose. The Floodplain District, in addition to the purposes
enumerated in Article I of this chapter, is intended to protect human
life and property from hazards of periodic flooding, to preserve natural
flood-control characteristics and flood storage capacity of the
floodplain, and to preserve and maintain the groundwater table and
water recharge areas within the floodplain.
A.
District delineation. The general boundaries of the Floodplain District
are shown on the Adams Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
August 1, 1983, as Zones A and A1-30 to indicate the one-hundred-year
floodplain. The exact boundaries of the district are defined by the onehundred-
year water surface elevations shown on the FIRM and further
defined by the flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study
dated August 1, 1983. The floodway boundaries are delineated on the
Adams Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM) dated August 1, 1983,
and further defined by the Floodway Data Tables contained in the Flood
Insurance Study. These two maps, as well as the accompanying study,
are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town
Clerk, Planning Board, and Building Inspector.
B.
§ 125-16 ADAMS CODE § 125-18
121:132
Use regulations. The Floodplain District is established as an overlay
district to all other districts. All development, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit, must be in compliance with MGL c. 131, § 40 and with the
requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code pertaining to
construction in the floodplains.
C.
Permitted uses. There shall be allowed the following uses which create
a minimal risk of damage due to flooding and will not constitute
obstructions to flood flow, provided that they are permitted in the
underlying district and that they do not require structures, fill, or
storage of materials or equipment:
Agricultural uses, such as farming, grazing, truck farming and
horticulture.
(1)
(2) Forestry and nursery uses.
Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play area,
etc.
(3)
(4) Conservation of water, plants and wildlife.
(5) Wildlife management areas and foot, bicycle and horse paths.
Temporary nonresidential structures used in connection with
fishing, growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the
premises.
(6)
(7) Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions.
D.
Special permits.
No structure or building shall be erected, constructed,
substantially improved, or otherwise created or moved, and no
earth or other materials shall be dumped, filled, excavated, or
transferred, unless a special permit is granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(1)
Within 10 days of receipt of an application for a special permit,
the Board shall transmit one copy of the development plan to the
Conservation Commission, Board of Health, and Building Inspector.
Final action shall not be taken until reports have been received
from the above boards or until 35 days after the transmittal of the
development plan to the boards, whichever occurs first.
(2)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special permit if the
application complies with the following provisions:
The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the
provisions of the underlying district.
(a)
In the floodway prohibit all encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement to existing structures,
(b)
(3)
E.
§ 125-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-18
121:133
and other development; the applicant shall provide
certification by a registered professional engineer
demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the onehundred-
year flood.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may specify such additional
requirements and conditions as it finds necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(4)
Subdivision standards for the Floodplain District. All subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development shall be reviewed to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If any part of a subdivision proposal or other new development
is located within the Floodplain District established under this chapter,
it shall be reviewed to assure that:
The proposal is designed so as to minimize the risk of damage due
to flooding.
(1)
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, are located and constructed so as to minimize or
eliminate the risk damage due to flooding.
(2)
Adequate drainage systems are provided in order to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
(3)
Base flood elevation data (the level of the one-hundred-year flood)
is provided for all proposals for development within the Floodplain
District.
(4)
F.
Health regulation pertaining to the Floodplain District. The Board of
Health, in reviewing all proposed water and sewer facilities to be
located in the Floodplain District established under this chapter, shall
require that:
New and replacement water supply systems be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
and
(1)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(2)
G.
Conservation Commission duties. The duties of the Conservation
Commission shall be as follows:
To notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
Massachusetts Division of Water Resources, the state coordinating
agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse where
an order of conditions has been issued and submit copies of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(1)
H.
§ 125-18 ADAMS CODE § 125-18
121:134
§ 125-19. Site plan approval.
To assure that the flood capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(2)
Development regulations.
Within Zone A1-30, all mobile homes shall provide that: 17
(a) (Reserved)
Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are
provided.
(b)
(c) (Reserved)
(1)
The placement of mobile homes, except in an existing mobile home
park or mobile home subdivision, is prohibited in the floodway.
(2)
In A zones, in the absence of FIA base flood elevation data, other
available data shall be considered as a basis for elevating
residential structures to or above base flood level and floodproofing
or elevating nonresidential structures to or above base flood level.
(3)
In the regulatory floodway, any encroachment which would cause
any increase in the base flood level is prohibited.
(4)
I.
This section shall apply to all new uses or additions to existing uses or
buildings or structures for which a site plan is required by Subsection
E except when both of the following are met:
The project involves the use of an existing building and no exterior
changes, other than signage, standard exterior building
illumination (exits included) and trash containers (which are
screened from adjacent properties and street), and no site
elements which mitigate negative impacts are proposed for
elimination; and
(1)
The proposed use is permitted as a matter of right pursuant to the
Use Regulation Schedule18 of this chapter.
(2)
A.
Contents. Said site plan shall show the following:
All property boundaries and the use and ownership of abutting land
and the location and use of any building thereon of the subject
property.
(1)
B.
17.Editor's Note: Subsections I(1)(a) and (b), which were deemed inconsistent with the State
Building Code, were disapproved by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and have
been deleted and reserved for future use.
18.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-19
121:135
All existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking spaces,
driveway openings, loading areas and service areas on the subject
property.
(2)
Provisions for screening, surfacing, lighting, landscaping
(including fences, wall, planting area and walks) and signs.
(3)
Provisions for waste disposal, drainage, dust, erosion control and
other utilities.
(4)
Criteria. In reviewing such plans, the Planning Board shall consider the
following:
Protection of adjoining premises and the general neighborhood
from any detrimental impact resulting from the use of the subject
property, including but not limited to the creation of a nuisance by
virtue of noise, odor, unsightliness, signs or vibration.
(1)
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
within the site and in relation to adjacent streets, properties or
improvements.
(2)
Adequacy of the methods of disposal for sewage, refuse, and other
wastes and of the methods of drainage of surface water.
(3)
Provisions for off-street loading and unloading of vehicles
incidental to the servicing of the buildings and related uses on the
subject property.
(4)
Projects involving in excess of five acres or 10,000 square feet
of building shall require an environmental impact report and
performance bond (amount of bond to be determined by the
Planning Board) unless waived by the Board.
(5)
C.
Procedure.
A site plan subject to this section shall be submitted in duplicate
to the Town Clerk, who shall give the applicant a dated receipt.
The Town Clerk, within three days of receiving such a site plan,
shall transmit one copy to the Building Inspector for his review.
The Building Inspector shall, within five working days, report his
findings and recommendations in writing to the Town Clerk. If
the Building Inspector finds that the plan does not show the
information specified in Subsection B above, he shall notify the
Town Clerk in writing, who shall return the plan to the applicant
with a copy of the Building Inspector's report. If the plan does
comply, or if the Building Inspector fails to respond within five
days, the Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing within 65
days of the receipt of the plan by the Town Clerk. The Community
Development Department shall submit recommendations to the
Board prior to the hearing, and if the proposed project must be
authorized by a special permit or special permits, the special
(1)
D.
§ 125-19 ADAMS CODE § 125-19
121:136
permit granting authority shall hold a hearing to act on the permit
prior to the Planning Board's hearing. The Planning Board may,
in approving such a plan, establish a time period within which
the approval so granted shall be exercised. Such time period shall
not exceed two years. The applicant shall be notified by the Town
Clerk of a plan meeting the requirements of this section and of the
actions taken or approval will be assumed and the Town Clerk shall
issue a certification to that effect.
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure or
use of land for which site plan approval is required unless approval
thereof shall have been obtained in compliance with the above.
(2)
The Planning Board may adopt from time to time such additional
procedures, criteria, forms, etc., as it may deem appropriate to
administer this section.
(3)
Uses requiring site plan approval. For the purpose of assuring proper
drainage and safe access, administering provisions of this chapter in
regard to parking and loading areas, signs, and screening and to assure
adequate consideration for abutting landowners, a site plan shall be
submitted for the following:
(1) Restaurants.
Recreation, including golf courses, ski areas and tows and parks,
including amusement parks, schools, including nursery and
kindergarten schools, and dance and music studios.
(2)
Veterinary hospitals, stables and kennels, commercial raising or
breeding animals for sale, poultry farms and boarding animals.
(3)
Cemeteries, hospitals, sanitariums or other medical institutions,
including nonprofit research laboratories, nursing homes, or
charitable institutions.
(4)
Telephone exchange buildings, radio stations, or other utility
structures.
(5)
Buildings to house generators, boilers, and similar equipment used
in connection with greenhouses and farms.
(6)
(7) Research laboratories.
(8) Office buildings.
(9) Multifamily dwellings.
(10)Tourist homes and boarding or rooming houses, hotels and motels.
(11)Membership clubs.
(12)Retail store or service establishment.
E.
§ 125-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-19
121:137
(13)Gasoline service stations, garages and repair shops.
(14)Passenger depots and terminals.
Theater halls, bowling alleys, skating rinks, clubs and other places
of amusement or assembly.
(15)
(16)Manufacturing enterprises.
Contractors' storage, warehouses and buildings and wholesale
distribution plants.
(17)
Printing and publishing establishments, photographic studios, and
medical or dental laboratories.
(18)
(19)Storage tanks or yards either above or below ground.
Construction of man-made body of water or alteration of any body
of water or diversion of any stream that is running.
(20)
(21)Underground tanks or direct burial tank of any fluid substance.
Signs when principal uses or accessory to uses listed in this
section.
(22)
(23)Uses accessory to principal uses listed in this section.
§ 125-19 ADAMS CODE § 125-19
121:138
ARTICLE IV
Special Regulations
§ 125-20. Personal wireless service facilities.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
Preserve the character and appearance of the Town while
accommodating adequate personal wireless services to be
developed;
(1)
Protect the scenic, historic, environmental, and man-made
resources of the community;
(2)
Provide standards and requirements for regulation, placement,
construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of
personal wireless service facilities;
(3)
(4) Preserve property values;
Minimize the total number and height of towers throughout the
community;
(5)
Locate towers and personal wireless service facilities in a manner
that mitigates potential negative impacts, such as, but not limited
to, visual nuisance, noise, and falling objects, on the general safety,
welfare and quality of life of the community; and
(6)
Require tower sharing and the clustering of personal wireless
service devices where possible.
(7)
A.
Consistency with federal law.
These regulations are intended to be consistent with the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that they do not:
Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services.
(a)
Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services.
(b)
Regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the
extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with
the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions.
(c)
(1)
Exempted wireless telecommunications uses. This section
specifically exempts the following wireless telecommunications
facilities: police, fire, ambulance and other emergency dispatch;
amateur (ham) radio; personal satellite phones; citizens band
radio; any existing commercial radio tower; and radio dispatch
services for local businesses. No personal wireless service facility
shall be considered exempt from this section for any reason,
(2)
B.
§ 125-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-20
121:139
whether or not said facility is proposed to share a tower or other
structure with such exempt uses.
General requirements.
No personal wireless service facility, tower, or personal wireless
service device shall be erected, constructed, or installed without
first obtaining a special permit from the Planning Board.
(1)
Wherever feasible, personal wireless service devices shall be
located on existing towers or other nonresidential structures to
minimize proliferation of new towers.
(2)
Tower(s) must be of a type that will maximize potential sharing.
Lattice-type structures are preferred, but where a monopole is
requested the applicant must demonstrate the future utility of such
structure for expansion of service for the applicant or other future
applicants.
(3)
No tower or personal wireless service facility that would be
classified as a hazard to air navigation, as defined by the Federal
Aviation Administration regulations (Title 14, Code of Federal
Regulations), is permitted.
(4)
Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any component of
a personal wireless service facility, including but not limited to any
antenna, tower, accessory building, or communication equipment
shelter.
(5)
C.
Design requirements.
Personal wireless service facilities and towers shall be located
so as to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity with
the least number of towers and antennas that is technically and
economically feasible.
(1)
New towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to
provide adequate coverage for the personal wireless service
devices proposed for use on the tower.
(2)
The minimum distance from the base of any new tower to any
property line or right-of-way shall be at least one times the height
of the tower plus 50 feet.
(3)
No tower or personal wireless service facility with the exception
of repeaters shall be located less than 50 feet from an existing
dwelling unit or less than 25 feet above ground.
(4)
If the facility or tower site is in a wooded area, a buffer strip of
undisturbed mature trees shall be retained for at least 50 feet
in width around the entire perimeter, except to accommodate an
access drive. The applicant shall obtain a financial surety to cover
(5)
D.
§ 125-20 ADAMS CODE § 125-20
121:140
the cost of the remediation of any damage to the landscape that
occurs during the clearing of the site.
The area around the tower and communication equipment
shelter(s) shall be completely fenced and gated for security to a
height of six feet. Use of razor wire is not permitted. A sign no
greater than one square foot indicating the name of the facility
owner(s) and a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number
shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, “no
trespassing” or other warning signs may be posted on the fence, as
approved by the Planning Board.
(6)
The Planning Board shall request input from the Fire and Police
Departments and other emergency services regarding adequacy of
emergency access to the planned drive for the personal wireless
service facility.
(7)
Communication equipment shelters and accessory buildings shall
be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible with each
other and shall be no more than 12 feet high. The buildings shall be
used only for housing of equipment related to the particular site.
Whenever possible, buildings shall be joined or clustered so as to
appear as one building.
(8)
New tower(s) shall have a galvanized finish unless otherwise
required. The Planning Board may require tower(s) to be painted
or otherwise camouflaged to minimize potential adverse visual
impact.
(9)
Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, no night
lighting of towers or other components of the personal wireless
service facility is permitted, except for manually operated
emergency lights for use only when operating personnel are on
site.
(10)
The use of repeaters to assure adequate coverage or to fill holes
within areas of otherwise adequate coverage, while minimizing the
number of required towers, is encouraged.
(11)
If a proposed personal wireless service facility primarily provides
coverage (greater than 50%) outside Adams, the Planning Board
may deny the permit unless the applicant can demonstrate the
inability to locate the proposed facility within the town that is
primarily receiving service.
(12)
Siting criteria.
Personal wireless service facilities and towers shall be located so
as to minimize the following potential impacts:
(1)
E.
§ 125-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-20
121:141
Visual/aesthetic. Towers shall, when possible, be sited off
ridgelines to locations where their visual impact is least
detrimental to valuable historic and scenic areas.
(a)
(b) Diminution of residential property values.
(c) Safety in cases of structural failure and attractive nuisance.
Safety from excessive electromagnetic radiation in cases
where the tower or personal wireless service facility is found
to exceed the FCC guidelines.
(d)
The following siting criteria are ranked in order of preference:
Shared use of existing personal wireless service facilities shall
be encouraged.
(a)
The use of existing structures in lieu of constructing new
towers.
(b)
The use of land distant from higher-density residential
properties and where visual impact can be minimized shall be
encouraged.
(c)
(d) Sharing with neighboring communities.
(2)
Application requirements; provisions for independent consultants.
No personal wireless service facility, tower, or personal wireless
service device shall be erected, constructed, or installed without
first obtaining a special permit from the Planning Board. No major
modification of a personal wireless service facility, tower, or
personal wireless service device shall be commenced without first
obtaining a special permit from the Planning Board.
An applicant requesting a permit for a personal wireless
service facility shall provide a copy of the existing lease/
contract with a personal wireless service provider. No personal
wireless service facility or tower shall be permitted to be built
on speculation.
(a)
An applicant requesting a permit for a tower shall provide a
written, irrevocable commitment valid for the duration of the
tower's existence to lease available space for colocation on the
tower at fair-market prices and terms, without discrimination
to other personal service.
(b)
(1)
Required submittals, including written documentation, plans and
maps, engineering drawings, and other information, shall be
provided consistent with the Planning Board's special regulations
titled “Personal Wireless Service Facility Review Requirements.”
(2)
Upon submission of an application for a special permit under this
section, the Planning Board shall hire independent consultants
(3)
F.
§ 125-20 ADAMS CODE § 125-20
121:142
whose services shall be paid for by the applicant(s). These
consultants shall each be qualified professionals with a record
of service to municipalities in one of the following fields:
telecommunications engineering; structural engineering;
monitoring of electromagnetic fields; and others as determined
necessary by the Planning Board.
Upon submission of a complete application for a special permit
under this section, the Planning Board shall provide its
independent consultants with the full application for their analysis
and review.
(4)
Applicants for any special permit under this section shall obtain
permission from the owner(s) of the proposed property and/or
facility site for the Town's independent consultants to conduct any
necessary site visits.
(5)
Approval criteria.
In acting on the special permit application, the Planning Board
shall proceed in accordance with the procedures and timelines
established for special permits in § 125-4 of this chapter.
(1)
In addition to the findings required by §§ 125-4 and 125-19 of
this chapter, the Planning Board shall, in consultation with the
independent consultants, make all of the following findings before
granting the special permit, as applicable:
The applicant is not already providing adequate coverage and/
or adequate capacity to the Town of Adams;
(a)
The applicant is not able to use existing towers/facility sites
either with or without the use of repeaters to provide adequate
coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town of Adams;
(b)
The applicant has agreed to rent or lease available space on
the tower, under the terms of a fair-market lease, without
discrimination to other personal wireless service providers;
(c)
The proposed personal wireless service facility or tower will
not have an undue adverse impact on historic resources, scenic
views, residential property values, or natural or man-made
resources;
(d)
The applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable
measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the
facility or facility component; and
(e)
The proposal shall comply with FCC Regulation 96-325
regarding emissions of electromagnetic radiation and the
required monitoring program is in place and shall be paid for
by the applicant.
(f)
(2)
G.
§ 125-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-20
121:143
Any decision by the Planning Board to deny any application for
a special permit under this section shall be in conformance with
§ 332(7)(B)(iii) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C.
§ 332), in that it shall be in writing and supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record.
(3)
Monitoring and evaluation of compliance.
Pre-testing. Before a permitted personal wireless service device
begins transmission, the owner(s) shall pay for an independent
consultant, hired by the Town, to monitor the background levels
of EMF radiation around the facility site and/or repeater locations
to be utilized for the applicant's personal wireless service devices.
The independent consultant shall use the monitoring protocol. A
report of the monitoring results shall be prepared by the
independent consultant and submitted to the Building Inspector.
(1)
Post-testing. After transmission begins, the owner(s) of any
personal wireless service devices located on any facility site shall
pay for an independent consultant, hired by the Town, to conduct
testing and monitoring of EMF radiation emitted from said site and
to report results of said monitoring, as follows:
There shall be routine annual monitoring of emissions by the
independent consultant using actual field measurement of
radiation, utilizing the monitoring protocol. This monitoring
shall measure levels of EMF radiation from the facility site's
primary antennas as well as from repeaters (if any). An annual
report of the monitoring results shall be prepared by the
independent consultant and submitted to the Building
Inspector.
(a)
Any major modification of existing facility, or the activation
of any additional permitted channels, shall require new
monitoring.
(b)
(2)
Excessive emissions. Should the monitoring of a facility site reveal
that the site exceeds the FCC 96-326 standard, then the owner(s)
of all facilities utilizing that site shall be so notified. The owner(s)
shall submit to the Planning Board and the Building Inspector a
plan for the reduction of emissions to a level that complies with
the FCC 96-326 standard within 10 business days of notification of
noncompliance. This plan shall reduce emissions to the standard
within 15 days of initial notification of noncompliance. Failure to
accomplish the reduction of emission within 15 business days of
initial notification of noncompliance shall be a violation of the
special permit and subject to penalties and fines as specified in
§ 125-2D of this chapter. Such fines shall be payable by the
owner(s) of the facilities and antennas on the facility site until
compliance is achieved.
(3)
H.
§ 125-20 ADAMS CODE § 125-20
121:144
Structural inspection. The tower owner(s) shall pay for an
independent consultant (a licensed professional structural
engineer), hired by the Town, to conduct inspections of the tower's
structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be inspected
every three years; monopoles and nonguyed lattice towers shall
be inspected every five years. The independent consultant shall
prepare and submit a report of the inspection results to the
Building Inspector. Any major modification of an existing facility
involving changes to tower dimensions or antenna numbers or type
shall require a new structural inspection.
(4)
Unsafe structure. Should the inspection of any tower reveal
structural defects that, in the opinion of the independent
consultant, render that tower unsafe, the following actions must
be taken. Within 10 business days of notification of an unsafe
structure, the owner(s) of the tower shall submit a plan to
remediate the structural defect(s) to the Building Inspector. This
plan shall be initiated within 10 days of the submission of the
remediation plan. Failure to accomplish this remediation of the
structural defect(s) within 10 business days of initial notification
shall be a violation of the special permit and subject to penalties
and fines as specified in § 125-2D of this chapter. Such fines shall
be payable by the tower owner(s) until compliance is achieved.
(5)
Removal requirements. Any personal wireless service facility that
ceases to operate for a period of one year shall be removed. “Cease to
operate” is defined as not performing the normal functions associated
with the personal wireless service facility and its equipment on a
continuous and ongoing basis for a period of one year. At the time
of removal, the facility site shall be remediated such that all personal
wireless service facility improvements that have ceased to operate are
removed. If all devices on a tower have ceased to operate, the tower
shall also be removed and the site shall be revegetated. Existing trees
shall only be removed if necessary to complete the required removal.
The owner(s), upon obtaining a permit, shall obtain a financial surety to
cover the cost of removal of the personal wireless service facility and
the remediation of the landscape, should the facility cease to operate.
I.
Bonds, indemnities and insurance.
The applicant or the current permittee shall post and maintain
in effect the following bonds at all times commencing with the
construction or installation of a personal wireless service facility,
device, repeater, or tower, each in an amount and on terms
reasonably satisfactory to the Town:
A remediation bond covering the costs of remediation of the
facility site if damage occurs during construction or
installation and the costs of removal of the personal wireless
service facility, repeater, and tower and remediation of the
(a)
(1)
J.
§ 125-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-20
121:145
§ 125-21. Home occupations.
Customary home occupations are permitted on special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals as an accessory use if conforming to the following
conditions:
facility site should the tower, facility and/or repeater cease to
operate.
A maintenance bond covering the costs of maintenance of the
access road, tower, and facility site.
(b)
No construction or installation of any personal wireless service
facility, including any repeater, device, or tower, shall commence
and none of the foregoing shall be put in operation unless the
Planning Board shall have received:
An agreement from each of the owners and operators of such
equipment indemnifying the Town and its officers, agents,
boards, and employees on terms satisfactory to the Town
against all liability, cost, and expense (including legal fees
and expenses) incurred in connection with the construction,
operation, and removal of such equipment; and
(a)
Satisfactory evidence that insurance determined by the Town
to be adequate (as to coverage, amount and terms) has been
obtained by all appropriate parties (including, without
limitation, owners, operators, contractors, and subcontractors)
and is in effect. Such insurance shall cover liability, bodily
injury, and property damage, name the Town as an additional
insured and be maintained in effect for the entire period that
the facility and any of its components (devices installed
thereon, tower and repeaters) used in connection therewith
are in existence. Satisfactory certificates of insurance shall be
filed with the Town on an annual basis.
(b)
(2)
The area used for the home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the
grade floor living space.
A.
The home occupation shall be accommodated within an existing
structure without extension thereof.
B.
Not more than two persons not members of the household shall be
employed on the premises in the home occupation.
C.
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and
no other exterior indication of the home occupation or other variation
from the residential character of the principal building other than a
sign not to exceed two square feet in area.
D.
No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be
produced (see § 125-14).
E.
§ 125-20 ADAMS CODE § 125-21
121:146
§ 125-22. Mobile home parks and campgrounds.
§ 125-23. Cluster development.
Parcels in excess of five times the minimum lot size and located within
the R-1 District may be subdivided and developed with clustered lots upon
issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board. Such permit shall be
subject to all applicable codes and regulations and shall additionally comply
with the following requirements and conditions. The proposed development
shall be, in the judgment of the Planning Board, superior to a conventional
Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally expected in a
residential neighborhood.
F.
Parking generated shall be accommodated off street, other than in a
required front yard.
G.
H. (Reserved)19
Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks shall be operated only under
license from the Board of Health and shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
(1) Parcel minimum area shall be 10 acres.
Each plot shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square feet and shall
be serviced with electricity, water, and sanitary drainage suitable
for permanent connection.
(2)
No mobile home shall be placed within 100 feet of a street line or
within 60 feet of any other lot line.
(3)
No mobile home shall be closer to another mobile home or other
structure than 10 feet end to end or 24 feet laterally.
(4)
A.
Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall be operated only under license from
the Board of Health and shall conform to the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Parcel minimum area to be 10 acres.
If each plot is not serviced with water and sanitary drainage,
common sanitary facilities meeting all requirements of the Adams
Board of Health shall be provided.
(2)
No unit for overnight occupancy shall be placed within 75 feet of a
street line or 60 feet of any other lot line.
(3)
The development shall comply with all requirements of Article VIII
of the Sanitary Code for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(4)
B.
19.Editor's Note: Subsection H, which was deemed inconsistent with the State Building Code,
was disapproved by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted and
reserved for future use.
§ 125-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-23
121:147
plan in preserving open space for conservation or recreation, utilizing
natural features of the land, and allowing more efficient provision of public
services and at least equal to a conventional plan in other respects.
Permitted uses. The following principal uses of the lots within the
cluster residential development shall be permitted: one-family detached
dwellings; multifamily residential structures with up to six dwelling
units; church or other religious purpose; agriculture on parcels greater
than five acres; public park; conservation area and preserved open
spaces; and membership clubs and recreation facilities for the exclusive
use of the residents of the development.
A.
The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number of
dwelling units which could legally be constructed were it not for the
provisions of this section, to be estimated in the absence of an
alternative conventional plan as being equal to 85% of the overall
parcel area divided by the lot area requirements for the R-1 District as
provided in the Intensity of Use Schedule.20
B.
Dimensional requirements.
Single-family detached house cluster.
(a) Lot size. No lot shall be less than 21,780 square feet.
Lot frontage. A cluster lot shall have a frontage of not less than
75 feet.
(b)
Required minimum open space: 35% of the gross land area of
the tract.
(c)
(1)
Multifamily cluster development.
Distance between structures. The minimum distance between
structures shall be 40 feet.
(a)
Distance between building cluster. The minimum width of open
land between any building cluster and adjacent property not
part of the cluster development shall be 100 feet.
(b)
(2)
C.
The lots for building purposes shall be grouped in a cluster or in
clusters, and within each cluster the lots shall be contiguous. The
maximum number of dwelling units that may be clustered in one cluster
with no intervening open space shall be 24.
D.
All remaining land in the tract not contained in building lots or within
road rights-of-way shall be contiguous or, if not contiguous, in parcels
of not less than two acres in each area, having not less than 40 feet of
frontage on a street and of such shape and condition as to be usable for
recreation.
E.
20.Editor's Note: The Intensity of Use Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-23 ADAMS CODE § 125-23
121:148
§ 125-24. Planned development.
All land not designated for roads, lots for dwellings or other
development within the tract shall be held for common open space.
Such land shall either be conveyed to the Town of Adams and accepted
by it for park or open space use or be conveyed to a nonprofit
organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open
space, or be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned
by the owners of the lots or residential units within the plan. If such
a corporation or trust is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass with
conveyances of the lots or residential units. In any case, where such
land is not conveyed to the Town, a restriction enforceable by the Town
of Adams shall be recorded providing that such land be kept in an open
or natural state and not be built upon or developed for accessory uses
such as parking or roadway. Building coverage shall be for exclusively
recreational purposes and shall not exceed 5% in such recreation areas.
Where such common open space is to be held by an association of
owners or where suitable easements may be negotiated on behalf of
such association or of individual owners, such open space may be used
for on-site sanitary or water supply facilities, subject to all codes and
regulations, provided that maintenance of such facilities is enforceable
solely on the owners, whether singly or jointly. Such common open
space may also be leased or otherwise made available for agriculture.
F.
Approval of a cluster development shall be subject to a subdivision
plan designating streets, lots, parcels to be dedicated, and parcels
for community use in conformance with Chapter 201, Subdivision
Regulations, of the Town Code and further to the requirements of site
plan approval, § 125-19 of this chapter.
G.
Subsequent to approval of such cluster development, no land therein
shall be sold and no lot line shall be changed in such way as to increase
the number of lots or the extent of nonconformity with the provisions of
§ 125-11 of this chapter. Prior to development or sale of any lot within
a cluster development, all lots to be so developed shall be shown on a
plan recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
H.
Cluster development density bonus. Where cluster residential
development is elected, additional density may be granted by special
permit of the Planning Board as a bonus for the provision of common
open space. Such bonus shall be granted at the time of issuance of the
special permit for cluster development and shall not exceed an increase
of 20% in the number of dwelling units permitted by Subsection B of
this section.
I.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the
construction and occupancy of a planned development as permitted in
the Use Regulation Schedule,21 subject to the following regulations and
conditions.
A.
21.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-24
121:149
The intent of planned development is to allow relatively intensive use
of land while at the same time preserving open space for conservation
and recreation, to introduce variety and choice into residential
development, and to facilitate economical and efficient provision of
public service.
B.
Applicants are encouraged to submit preliminary materials for informal
review by both the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning Board
prior to formal application. Applicants for a special permit for a planned
development shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals five copies of
an application and of an overall concept plan.
The concept plan shall indicate:
(a) Location and boundaries of the site;
(b) Proposed land and building uses;
(c) Existing topography and proposed grading;
(d) Location of streets, ways and parking;
(e) Areas of proposed and retained vegetation;
(f) Distinctions between upland and wetland;
(g) Water, drainage and sewerage systems; and
(h) Location of any proposed structures.
(1)
The plan shall have been prepared by a registered landscape
architect, architect, civil engineer, or land surveyor. If necessary in
order to determine compliance with the requirements or intent of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require engineering
or environmental analyses to be prepared at the expense of the
applicant, employing professionals approved by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(2)
Portions of the concept plan may be designated for development
at a later phase. Those portions of the plan may initially omit
Subsection C(1)(d) through (h) of the contents above, which shall,
however, be shown on a plan approved as a major amendment [(see
Subsection G(1)] prior to granting of any building permits within
such area.
(3)
If the application so stipulates and the necessary plans, elevations,
and sections have been submitted (see § 125-10A), the Zoning
Board of Appeals may, as part of the same procedure in acting upon
the overall concept plan, act upon special permits for those uses
which require them.
(4)
C.
Within three business days of receipt of the application and required
plans, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit two copies of all these
materials to the Planning Board and one copy each to the Board of
D.
§ 125-24 ADAMS CODE § 125-24
121:150
Health and Conservation Commission. The Planning Board, Board of
Health, and Conservation Commission shall submit written reports to
the Zoning Board of Appeals within 35 days of the application date. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall make no decision upon the application
and shall not close its hearing until receipt of the Planning Board, Board
of Health and Conservation Commission reports or until 35 days have
lapsed since date of application without such reports.
In considering special permits under this section, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall give consideration to the reports of the Planning Board
and Board of Health and to the degree to which the proposed
development conforms to the intent of planned development outlined in
Subsection B above.
E.
Any planned development must conform to the following:
(1) The development shall comprise at least 25 acres.
The total number of single-family dwelling units allowed within
a planned development shall be determined by dividing the total
land area within the planned development by the minimum lot
area set forth in the Intensity of Use Schedule22 for single-family
dwelling units, minus one dwelling unit for every five sleeping
rooms in a resort, hotel, motel or motor inn. The total number of
multifamily dwelling units allowed within a planned development
shall be determined by multiplying two times the difference
between the number of single-family dwelling units allowable
under the preceding sentence and the number of single-family
dwelling units designated to be within the planned development.
Where the planned development lies in more than one district,
the number of dwelling units allowed shall be calculated as above
for each district and summed to give an overall allowable total
which may be located in any district without respect to allowable
subtotals by districts. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce
the number of allowed units to reflect allocation of land within the
development to uses unrelated to the dwellings.
(2)
Minimum lot area and frontage requirements for single-family
dwellings shall equal 50% of those prescribed by the Intensity
of Use Schedule. Single-family, attached single-family, two-family,
garden apartments, high-rise apartments, and resorts shall be
allowed in all districts within a planned development if granted
a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Side yard
requirements are waived, except where the development abuts
other property and on lots for which the overall development plan
does not indicate building location. The side yard requirements,
where not waived, shall be those set forth in the Intensity of
Use Schedule, provided always that attached single-family, garden
apartments, and high-rise apartments shall meet the side yard
(3)
F.
22.Editor's Note: The Intensity of Use Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-24
121:151
requirements of § 125-12, R2 District. Maximum coverage shall be
10% of lot area higher than as prescribed by the Intensity of Use
Schedule. Building height may be increased above the limits of
the Intensity of Use Schedule upon determination by the Zoning
Board of Appeals that such increase will not create undesirable
conditions caused by overshadowing, loss of privacy, microclimate
disturbance or visual intrusion, that utility and protective services
will be adequate, and that no such building shall be nearer the
development boundary than twice the building height.
Uses allowed by right or allowable by special permit in a district
within which the planned development is situated shall be allowed
at any location within the planned development, subject to the
requirements of the district in which the location is situated as
modified by Subsection F(2) and (3), and except that the Zoning
Board of Appeals rather than the Board of Selectmen shall act
on applications for uses designated “SPS” in the Use Regulation
Schedule. Certain additional residential uses are allowed as cited
in Subsection F(3) above. In addition, retailing, services and other
nonresidential uses, if not otherwise allowed by right or allowable
by special permit or under Subsection F(2) or (3) hereof, may
nevertheless be allowed on special permit by the Zoning Board
of Appeals and if deemed by the Zoning Board of Appeals to be
primarily servicing the residents or overnight guests of the planned
development, and provided that not more than 5% of the overall
land area of the development tract is devoted to such normally
disallowed use and at no time does the gross floor area occupied
by such uses exceed 5% of the gross floor area of all residential
structures occupied within the development tract. In Forest
Recreation Districts, business and open uses may be permitted in
addition to the above limitations.
(4)
Not less than 20% of the land area within the planned development
shall be preserved for recreation, open space, conservation, or
public use.
Preservation shall be guaranteed through one or more of the
following:
[1] Dedication to and acceptance by the Town of Adams.
Dedication to and acceptance by the Adams Conservation
Commission.
[2]
Dedication, by covenant or comparable legal instrument,
to the community use of the residents of the planned
development for recreational purposes. Building coverage
shall not exceed 5% in such dedicated areas. Ownership
of common open space areas shall be arranged and
maintenance shall be permanently assured through an
incorporated association, condominium deeds or other
[3]
(a)
(5)
§ 125-24 ADAMS CODE § 125-24
121:152
recorded land agreement through which each residential
lot owner in the development is automatically a member
and each residential lot is subject to a charge for a share
of the maintenance expenses or through comparable
arrangement satisfactory to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Restriction by deed restriction recorded in the Registry
of Deeds, enforceable by owners of lots or condominiums
within the planned development, to golf course, ski area,
or similar extensive recreational use.
[4]
If Subsection F(5)(a)[3] or [4] is elected, the Town or its
Conservation Commission shall be granted a conservation
restriction or easement over such land sufficient to ensure its
perpetual maintenance in the use to which it is dedicated or
restricted.
(b)
Access, drainage, utilities and grading shall serve each structure in
the manner otherwise required for separate lots in a subdivision,
whether or not the development comprises a subdivision. Prior to
the issuance of building permits, the Planning Board shall certify to
the Building Inspector that a detailed site plan has been submitted
to it and meets this standard, and before occupancy permits for
any structure are issued the Building Inspector shall certify to
the Board of Selectmen that improvements to meet such standard
have either been completed to serve such structure or security for
their completion has been received. If the Zoning Board of Appeals
has approved a planned development to be constructed in phases,
the Building Inspector's certification shall relate only to phases of
the development for which the applicant has requested building
permits.
(6)
Any special permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
planned development under the provisions of this section shall
incorporate by reference the plan required at Subsection C and
development schedule submitted by the developer with the application.
Minor amendments to such special permit may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, upon application and for good cause
shown, but without necessity of a public hearing; provided,
however, that any of the following shall be considered a major
amendment and shall be acted upon only under the procedure
applicable to the initial approval for a planned development:
Reduction in the amount of land preserved for recreation, open
space use, conservation, or public use or any change in the
general location of such land as provided in the permit;
(a)
Any change in the general layout of the ways as provided in the
permit;
(b)
(1)
G.
§ 125-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-24
121:153
§ 125-25. Soil removal regulations.
Any increase in the number of lots or dwelling units for
sleeping rooms as provided in the permit;
(c)
Altering the location of any building or structure by more
than 10 feet or distance as otherwise specified by the permit
granting authority at the time of the special permit approval;
or
(d)
Approval of detailed provisions for portions of a concept plan
designated for development at a later phase.
(e)
No lot shown on a plan for which a permit is granted for a planned
development may be further subdivided so as to increase the
number of lots unless approved as a major amendment, and a
notation to this effect shall be shown on any definitive plan of a
subdivision based upon this section.
(2)
Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit or sale of any lot
within a planned development, all lots to be so developed shall be
shown on a plan recorded in the Registry of Deeds or registered
with the Land Court, and a covenant or other instrument
satisfactory to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have been
executed assuring the conservation or recreational use of lands so
designated in the application, except that lots need not be shown
for areas designated for development in a later phase.
(3)
General. The removal from the premises of more than 20 cubic yards
of topsoil, borrow, sod, loam, peat, humus, clay, sand or gravel (but
not rock) in any twelve-month period, except when necessary incidental
to or in connection with the construction at the site or removal of a
building for which a permit has been issued within the past six months
or for grading or otherwise improving the premises of which such
building is part or for road construction within an approved subdivision,
shall not be permitted except in accordance with the Use Regulation
Schedule, Open Uses,23 and with the following conditions and
procedures.
A.
Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written application for a
special permit must be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
following shall be conditions for such issuance:
For above 300 cubic yards the application shall be accompanied by
a plan prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer showing
names and addresses of all abuttors, including those across any
street or way, existing grades in the area from which the above
material is to be removed and in surrounding areas, together with
(1)
B.
23.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-24 ADAMS CODE § 125-25
121:154
the proposed finished grades at the conclusion of the operation,
and the proposed cover vegetation and trees.
For above 500 cubic yards a performance bond in an amount to
be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals has been posted
in the name of the Town assuring satisfactory performance in
the fulfillment of the requirements of this section and such other
conditions as the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose as
conditions to the issuance of its permit.
(2)
Before granting a permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall give
due consideration to the location of the proposed earth removal,
to the general character of the neighborhood surrounding such
location and to the general safety of the public on the public ways
in the vicinity.
(3)
Removal.
Removal shall not take place at any grade less than one foot above
the grade level of any adjacent street or way, or below a level that
would reasonably be considered a desirable grade for the later
development of the area, or below the grades specified on the plan
accompanying the permit application.
(1)
During removal operations no slope shall exceed one foot vertical
rise to 1 1/2 feet horizontal distance or the natural angle of repose
of the material in a dry state, whichever is the lower, except in
ledge rock.
(2)
Provision shall be made for safe drainage of water and for
prevention of wind or water erosion carrying material onto
properties.
(3)
Soil shall not be disturbed within 100 feet of the boundaries of the
premises, excepting at the conclusion of operations if required in
order to improve the overall grading.
(4)
C.
Restoration. Forthwith following the expiration or withdrawal of a
permit, or upon voluntary cessation of operations, or upon completion
of removal in a substantial area, that entire area shall be restored as
follows:
All land shall be so graded that no slope exceeds one foot vertical
rise in three feet horizontal distance and shall be so graded as to
safely provide for drainage without erosion.
(1)
(2) All boulders larger than 1/2 cubic yard shall be removed or buried.
The entire area excepting exposed ledge rock shall be covered
with not less than four inches of good quality loam, which shall
be planted with cover vegetation adequate to prevent soil erosion,
using either grasses or ground cover, depending upon conditions.
(3)
D.
§ 125-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-25
121:155
§ 125-26. Fence regulations.
§ 125-27. Accessory scientific uses.
Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a
matter of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right,
which activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or
Bond shall not be released until sufficient time has lapsed to
ascertain that the vegetation planted has successfully been
established and that drainage is satisfactory.
(4)
Additional conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals may set conditions
in addition to the above, including but not limited to duration of the
permit, hours of the day during which removal may take place, hours
during which vehicles may leave the premises, and trees to be planted.
E.
Permit duration. Permits for soil removal will be issued for one-year
periods only regardless of variances or special permits.
F.
Removal activities prior to this section. Earth removal activities in
lawful operation at the time this section is adopted may continue until
abandoned for more than 24 consecutive months, provided that within
24 months after the effective date of this section the owners of such
premises shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals a plan and
application as required in Subsection B.
G.
No fence or wall within 20 feet of a boundary shall exceed eight feet
in height, except for chain link or similarly open security fences in
industrial districts, and no fence or hedge shall exceed 36 inches in
height within any required front yard area or within 20 feet of the street
line, whichever is the lesser requirement, or within 12 horizontal feet
of a habitable room in an abutting dwelling. Refer to § 125-11D for
specifications for corner lots.
A.
Barbed wire, electrified or similar fencing shall not be permitted except
for agricultural purposes in R-1 or R-2 Districts. Such fencing for
security reasons may be authorized by special permit from the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
B.
C. (Reserved) 24
Temporary security fences shall be allowed in conjunction with valid
building permits for construction and/or demolition at a site. Such
fences shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall be constructed of
materials adequate to prevent unauthorized entry. Said fences will be
allowed for a period of 90 days, with extensions granted for up to one
year upon written request.
D.
24.Editor's Note: Subsection C, deemed inconsistent with the State Building Code, was
disapproved by the Attorney General on October 18, 2004, and has been deleted and
reserved for future use.
§ 125-25 ADAMS CODE § 125-27
121:156
scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon the
issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided
that the granting authority finds that the proposed accessory use does not
substantially derogate from the public good.
§ 125-28. Accessory residential uses in one-family dwellings;
accessory apartments.
An accessory apartment is a second dwelling unit located within a structure
constructed as a detached one-family dwelling, subordinate in size to the
principal dwelling unit and separated from it in a manner that maintains the
appearance of the structure as a one-family dwelling.
Purpose. The provision of accessory dwelling units in owner-occupied
one-family dwellings is intended to:
Increase the number of small dwelling units available for rent in
the Town;
(1)
(2) Increase the range of choice of housing accommodations;
Encourage greater diversity of population with particular attention
to young adults and senior citizens; and
(3)
Encourage a more economic and energy-efficient use of the Town's
housing supply, while maintaining the appearance and character of
the Town's single-family neighborhoods.
(4)
A.
Conditions and requirements.
General.
The owner of the dwelling in which the accessory apartment
is created shall occupy either of the dwelling units in the
structure.
(a)
There shall be no more than one accessory apartment within a
one-family dwelling.
(b)
There shall be no boarders or lodgers within either unit of a
dwelling with an accessory apartment.
(c)
(d) The lot area shall be at least 10,000 square feet.
The net floor area of the dwelling shall have been at least 2,500
square feet as of January 1, 1987.
(e)
The maximum net floor area of the accessory apartment shall
not exceed 30%.
(f)
There shall not be more than two bedrooms in an accessory
apartment.
(g)
(1)
B.
§ 125-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-28
121:157
The Health Officer shall certify that the means of water supply
and sanitary disposal shall be adequate to support both
dwelling units.
(h)
Exterior appearance. The accessory apartment shall be designed
so that the appearance of the structure remains that of a onefamily
dwelling, subject further to the following conditions and
requirements:
All stairways to second or third stories shall be enclosed within
the exterior walls of the dwelling.
(a)
There shall be no enlargements or extensions of the dwelling
in connection with any accessory apartment except for minimal
additions necessary to comply with building, safety or health
codes, or for enclosure of an entryway, or for enclosure of a
stairway to a second or third story.
(b)
Any new entrance shall be located on the side or in the rear of
the dwelling.
(c)
(2)
Off-street parking. There shall be provided at least two off-street
parking spaces for the principal dwelling unit and at least one offstreet
parking space for the accessory apartment. In addition, all
parking spaces shall be subject further to the following conditions
and requirements:
Each parking space and the driveway leading thereto shall be
paved or shall have an all-weather gravel surface. No motor
vehicles shall be regularly parked on the premises other than
in such a parking space.
(a)
There shall be no more than four outdoor parking spaces on
the lot.
(b)
(3)
Procedures. Construction of an accessory apartment shall be permitted
upon issuance of a building permit by the Building Inspector based
upon compliance with the conditions and requirements of this section
and any other applicable codes and regulations.
Acceptance of existing accessory apartments.
Owners of existing second dwelling units in violation may apply
to the Building Inspector for a determination of compliance
before January 1, 1989. Applications shall be accompanied by a
filing fee and by such plans and other documentation related to
the conditions and requirements of Subsection B of this section
as may be required by the Building Inspector.
(a)
Within 90 days the Building Inspector shall issue one of the
following:
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 125-28 ADAMS CODE § 125-28
121:158
A determination of compliance and a certificate of
occupancy.
[1]
A conditional determination of compliance describing
corrective changes needed to bring the second dwelling
unit into compliance, which shall be completed within 90
days of the date of the conditional determination. Upon
successful completion of the required changes, the
Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
[2]
A determination of noncompliance with one or more of the
requirements of Subsection B, together with a listing of
those requirements and conditions with which compliance
cannot be achieved through corrective changes.
[3]
The owner of a second dwelling unit built prior to January 1,
1987, is eligible to apply within 60 days of the date of the
determination to the special permit granting authority (SPGA)
for a special permit for maintenance of an existing
noncomplying apartment, subject to the special conditions in
Subsection C(2).
(c)
Special permit for preexisting nonconforming unit.
Upon presentation of evidence of construction prior to January
1, 1987, the owner may apply to the SPGA for a special permit
for maintenance of an existing noncomplying apartment.
(a)
The SPGA shall ordinarily grant a special permit for the
existing noncomplying second dwelling unit unless specific
evidence is submitted supporting any claim that the unit has
caused a deterioration of the single-family neighborhood or
a decrease in property values or has caused any other
substantial detrimental effect on the public welfare and
convenience. In weighing such claims and evidence, the SPGA
shall consider whether any changes required to bring the
second dwelling unit into compliance are sufficient to
counteract any prior negative impact.
(b)
In granting a special permit, the SPGA may impose such
additional conditions as it may deem necessary to protect the
single-family appearance of the dwelling and to bring the
dwelling as close to conformity with the conditions and
requirements for new accessory apartments in Subsection B as
is feasible.
(c)
If a special permit is granted and corrective changes are
required, they must be completed within 90 days of the date
of granting the permit. When required changes are completed,
the Building Inspector will issue a certificate of occupancy.
(d)
(2)
§ 125-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-28
121:159
§ 125-29. Planned unit resort development.
Planned unit resort developments shall be permitted only under a special
permit from the Planning Board. The special permit criteria contained in
this section shall apply in addition to those contained in § 125-4, Special
permits.
If a special permit is denied, the second dwelling unit shall be
terminated within one year of the date of the denial.
(e)
Purpose. The purpose of planned unit resort development is to permit
greater flexibility in the development of land by requiring few
predetermined standards; to permit a developer to propose a site
development and use plan unique to a particular location; to permit the
use of development standards more detailed than the general standards
elsewhere in this chapter; to provide information for the Town to
evaluate the potential impacts of a proposed development; and to
enable the Planning Board to require adherence to a site development
and use plan (master plan) in the granting of a special permit.
A.
Establishment of planned unit resort development. Planned unit resort
development (PURD) requires a special permit from the Planning
Board. Where development is elected under a PURD special permit,
the requirements of this section shall supersede and replace all
dimensional and use requirements of the zoning district in which the
PURD is proposed.
B.
Minimum development area. The minimum acreage for establishing a
planned unit resort development is 1,000 acres.
C.
Permitted uses. The applicant shall submit as part of the overall master
plan a description of the quality and actual mix of the use elements
proposed to be developed together with a narrative justification of the
suitability of such use elements in the particular location. The following
uses are allowed: inn and conference centers up to 200 guest rooms,
camping and rustic lodging, educational facilities, restaurants, retail
use up to 25,000 total square feet, active and passive recreational
uses (i.e., golf course, clubhouse, tennis courts, fitness center, etc.),
residential uses, agriculture and conservation areas and other related
uses deemed by the Planning Board to be compatible with the overall
resort character.
D.
Preapplication conference. Prior to the submission of an application
for special permit, the applicant is advised to confer with the Town
department heads at a meeting under the direction of the Office of
Community Development to obtain information and guidance before
entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in
the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
E.
Preliminary development plan. An applicant is encouraged but not
required to file a preliminary development plan with the Planning
F.
§ 125-28 ADAMS CODE § 125-29
121:160
Board. Such filing will not be deemed an application for special permit.
The preliminary development plan shall contain the following:
A land use plan of the area proposed for the PURD showing the
uses as permitted and any areas proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for interior circulation, public parks, public buildings, or
open space, or otherwise dedicated or reserved areas;
(1)
A general circulation plan indicating the proposed movement and
relative volumes of vehicles, goods, and pedestrians within the site
and to and from public thoroughfares;
(2)
(3) Tables showing overall density of development by land use type;
A plan demonstrating that all utilities, including water supply and
sewage disposal, will meet the needs of the proposed development;
and
(4)
Approximate locations of environmentally sensitive areas, such as
steep slopes, wetlands and rare and endangered species habitat.
(5)
Master plan.
Project approval will be dependent on an approved master plan
that describes in detail those elements required in a preliminary
plan and in conformance with the criteria established under site
plan approval, § 125-19 of this chapter. This shall include existing
conditions, the boundaries of land use zones, the exact mix of
uses on the site, all dimensional criteria, architectural renderings
and other design treatments, landscaping and environmentally
sensitive areas.
(1)
The master plan shall contain reasonable and enforceable
standards and limitations which the Planning Board determines are
necessary to achieve the goals, protections and controls equivalent
to those achieved by the guidelines contained in this section. The
issuance of a special permit shall authorize the commencement
of the construction and improvements described in such special
permit, subject to the issuance of any required building permit.
(2)
G.
Special permit requirements. The applicant shall submit an application
for a special permit in conformance with MGL c. 40A, § 9, accompanied
by the original master plan plus six copies to the Town Clerk
accompanied by a certified check made payable to the Town of Adams
in the amount of $500 to cover filing fees.
Contents.
The contents of the special permit application shall be in
conformance with the requirements governing the submission
of final plans under Chapter 201, Subdivision Regulations, of
the Town Code and further complying with the requirements
for site plan approval, § 125-19 of this chapter.
(a)
(1)
H.
§ 125-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-29
121:161
Any requirements for environmental review may be satisfied
in whole or in part by a formal submission required under
the Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act (MEPA)25 upon
acceptance by a majority of the Planning Board.
(b)
Public hearing.
Upon receipt of the master plan and an application for special
permit, the Planning Board shall, within 65 days and in
conformance with the requirements of MGL c. 40A, § 9, hold a
public hearing.
(a)
Because of the comprehensive nature of permits to be issued
under this section, where practical, this hearing for a special
permit shall be held simultaneously and in joint session with
other permit granting authorities and requirements, including
but not limited to site plan approval, wetlands and Board of
Health regulations.
(b)
(2)
Special permit approval/denial. Within 90 days of the hearing date,
the Planning Board shall either issue or deny the special permit.
If the Planning Board issues the permit, it shall incorporate the
master plan as a condition of such permit and shall require that
any development under such special permit comply with the
master plan. The special permit may contain such additional
conditions, modifications, restrictions and requirements as the
Planning Board deems appropriate to effectuate the purposes
and requirements of this section.
(a)
If the Planning Board approves the master plan and
subsequently issues a special permit, such issuance shall
constitute a finding that the master plan incorporated therein
complies with this chapter. Additionally such issuance shall
constitute acceptance by the Planning Board of any final
environmental impact report in conformance with MEPA and
approved by the Secretary of the Massachusetts Executive
Office of Environmental Affairs.
(b)
(3)
Special permit criteria for planned unit resort development. In
considering the issuance of a special permit, the Planning Board has
established the following site development guidelines that will govern
the development of the site. In order to receive a special permit, the
applicant must adhere to these guidelines as far as practicable.
I.
Site development guidelines.
(1) Preserve the integrity of the site's natural resources.
J.
25.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30, §§ 61 to 62H.
§ 125-29 ADAMS CODE § 125-29
121:162
Support, amplify and complement the natural features of the
site and surrounding areas.
(a)
Continue to provide the variety of experiences now found on
the site, e.g., open fields, forests, streams, stone walls,
viewsheds, etc.
(b)
A preservation area shall be maintained along the inside of the
site perimeter.
(c)
Design grading/land forms (e.g., golf course) to reflect and
enhance natural topography.
(d)
Preserve and enhance contrasting landscapes by preserving
open fields and wildlife habitat, restoring previously disturbed
or damaged areas, and creating natural areas where
development is prohibited.
(e)
Retain existing vegetation, particularly trees, to provide
wildlife habitat, windbreaks, shading, erosion control, filter
strips, moisture retention and aesthetic benefits.
(f)
(g) Minimize forest fragmentation.
Avoid development in areas affecting rare and endangered
species.
(h)
Avoid direct impact on wetlands. Protect wetlands by
minimizing wetland crossings and activity within the onehundred-
foot buffer zone. Insofar as practical, establish a fiftyfoot
to one-hundred-foot buffer of no disturbance around each
wetland and waterway.
(i)
There should be no significant diversion or damming of
streams that contain rare and endangered species.
(j)
Maintain any forested or shaded areas along those streams
that contain rare or endangered species.
(k)
(l) Post-development runoff should equal pre-development runoff.
Maintain the natural state of watercourses, swales, and
floodways as much as possible.
(m)
(n) Natural drainages should be used where possible.
Avoid development in areas affecting unique assemblages of
organisms.
(o)
(p) Minimize on-site vehicular traffic.
The existing land form shall be preserved in its natural state,
insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal and
the removal or alteration of any unique or historic features.
(q)
§ 125-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-29
121:163
Electric, telephone, cable television and other such lines and
equipment shall be underground. Where appropriate, support
facilities such as storage, refuse disposal, and utility buildings
should be located and screened to make them less visible.
(r)
Arrange land uses in a complementary manner.
The natural character and appearance of the Town shall be
maintained or enhanced. Awareness of the existence of a
development, particularly a higher-density development, shall
be minimized by screening views of the development from
nearby streets, single-family neighborhoods or Town property
by effective use of existing land forms, or alterations thereto,
such as berms, and existing vegetation or supplemental
planting.
(a)
Open space shall be located and designed so as to increase the
visual amenities of the neighborhood as well as for occupants
of the development.
(b)
(c) The higher-density development should not block scenic vistas.
Create interconnected landscapes: contiguous networks within
the site and beyond its boundaries.
(d)
Insofar as possible, service areas and parking should be
screened from view.
(e)
Design for harmonious visual impact. Protect view and
viewsheds within and beyond the site.
(f)
(2)
Encourage and improve connections within the site and the Town
of Adams.
Circulation ways should connect to the Town of Adams to
increase convenience and to decrease construction cost of
roadways.
(a)
(b) Connections should be made to existing trail systems.
A system of routes for pedestrians and bicyclists, creating
minimal conflicts with vehicles, shall be developed.
(c)
On-site circulation corridors should complement and not
interfere with active recreation uses, thus ensuring safety.
(d)
(e) The total parking count should be adequate.
The total parking count need not be constructed at the outset.
It is acceptable to initially build fewer than the total as long
as the total cars are shown on the site plan so they may be
eventually accommodated if the need arises.
(f)
(3)
§ 125-29 ADAMS CODE § 125-29
121:164
Insofar as it is possible, required parking should be on the
periphery of the development cluster (not in a large lot in the
middle of the cluster).
(g)
All parking should be as unobtrusive as possible and in as parklike
a setting as possible. Generous use of trees, shrubs and
landforms should be employed to screen cars and generally
soften their visual impact.
(h)
Special event parking shall be on the shoulders of roads and on
grass fields.
(i)
Buildings and grounds adjoining them shall permit easy access
and operation by emergency personnel and equipment.
(j)
Where applicable, improved access, or the development of
additional links or connectors, shall be made to a Town system
of public facilities and services, such as conservation areas,
recreation facilities, footpaths or bicycle paths, streets,
transportation systems or utility systems.
(k)
A system of routes for pedestrians and bicycles with minimal
conflicts with vehicles shall be developed.
(l)
Building arrangements should reflect the traditional New England
village approach to land use.
Without specifying any particular architectural style, the scale,
massing and detailing of buildings shall be compatible with
those prevalent in the neighborhood. Where a multifamily
development is located adjacent to a neighborhood of singlefamily
dwellings, the massing scheme and the selection of
exterior materials for buildings shall be complementary to a
single-family neighborhood.
(a)
The removal or substantial alteration of buildings of historic
significance, the new use of places of historic significance or
the location of dwellings, or use adjacent to, and compatible
with buildings or places of historic or architectural significance
shall be minimized.
(b)
Buildings shall be located harmoniously with the land form and
other natural features of the site, effectively for solar and wind
orientation and for energy conservation, and advantageously
for views from the buildings while minimizing intrusion on
views from other buildings.
(c)
Structures and parking areas on the site should be clustered to
allow minimal disturbance and to keep the majority of the site
open.
(d)
(4)
§ 125-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-29
121:165
§ 125-30. Solar energy systems. [Added 3-24-2014 STM by Art. 826]
Location of the uses around a village common (open space) is
encouraged. Orientation of the common to take advantage of
the scenic views is also encouraged.
(e)
Open spaces near buildings shall be designed to be pedestrian
friendly. Use of wooden outdoor benches, gazebos,
conservatories, etc., is encouraged.
(f)
To minimize the visual impact on the neighborhood, buildings
shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.
(g)
Buildings shall not exceed three stories, except for a focal
structure which may have a spire or tower up to 60 feet tall.
(h)
Outdoor patios, verandas, gazebos, porches and other such
architectural elements are encouraged.
(i)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
Provide a permitting process for the installation of commercialscale
ground-mounted solar energy systems so that they may be
utilized in a cost-effective, efficient, and timely manner to increase
the use of distributed generation;
(1)
Integrate these solar energy systems into the community in a
manner that minimizes their impacts on the health, safety, and
welfare of residents, the character and appearance of the Town and
its neighborhoods, on property values and on the scenic, historic,
and environmental resources of the Town;
(2)
Provide standards and requirements for regulation, placement,
construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of
commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems; and
(3)
Locate solar energy systems, regardless of scale, in a manner that
mitigates potential negative impacts, such as, but not limited to,
visual nuisance, noise, and falling objects on the general safety,
welfare and quality of life of the Town's neighborhoods and the
broader community.
(4)
A.
Definitions.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system designed to be mounted on a building or other structure. This
definition applies to solar systems or facilities of any capacity that are
designed to be operated in direct contact with a building.
COMMERCIAL-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
— A solar energy system that has solar panels structurally mounted
B.
26.Editor's Note: This article also provided for the renumbering of former § 125-30 as
§ 125-50.
§ 125-29 ADAMS CODE § 125-30
121:166
on the ground and where the primary use is electrical generation to
be sold to the wholesale electricity markets. This includes appurtenant
equipment for the collection, storage, and distribution of electricity to
buildings or to the electric grid.
ON-SITE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar
energy system that has its solar panels structurally mounted on the
ground and is designed, as an accessory use, to generate electricity
to be primarily consumed by the principal use of the property. On-site
ground-mounted solar energy systems may or may not be connected to
an electric power utility.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — All equipment, machinery, and structures
utilized in connection with the conversion of sunlight to electricity. This
includes, but is not limited to, collection, transmission, storage, and
supply equipment, substations, transformers, and access roads.
Building-integrated and on-site ground-mounted solar energy systems.
Building-integrated solar energy systems. Building-integrated solar
energy systems may be located in any zoning district of the Town
of Adams. Building-integrated solar energy systems shall not be
erected, constructed, installed or materially modified without first
obtaining a building permit from the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector may require additional structural analysis or
other information as needed to complete permit review.
(1)
On-site ground-mounted solar energy systems. On-site groundmounted
solar energy systems that are 1/4 acre or larger in size
and designed to primarily generate electricity for on-site use may
be located in any zoning district, subject to site plan approval
by the Planning Board in accordance with § 125-19 of the Adams
Zoning Bylaws. The panels for on-site ground-mounted solar
energy systems shall be limited to a height of five feet, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
(2)
C.
Designated locations for commercial-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems. The location designated by the Town of Adams where
commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems may be sited
as-of-right but subject to site plan approval in accordance with § 125-19
of this chapter is the Industrial (I) District. Commercial-scale groundmounted
solar energy systems may be sited in the Industrial Park (IP)
District, Business (B1) District, Business (B2) District, Business (B3)
District, and the Residential (R1) District if granted a special permit
and subject to site plan approval. Commercial-scale ground-mounted
solar energy systems are prohibited in all other zoning districts within
the Town of Adams. Said locations are shown on a Zoning Map pursuant
to MGL c. 40A, § 4. This map is hereby made part of this Zoning Bylaw
and is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
D.
§ 125-30 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-30
121:167
General requirements. The following general requirements are
established for all proposed installations of commercial-scale groundmounted
solar energy systems consistent with Subsection D:
Special permit required. No commercial-scale ground-mounted
solar energy system in an Industrial Park (IP) District, Business
(B1) District, Business (B2) District, Business (B3) District, or a
Residential (R1) District shall be constructed, installed or
materially modified without first obtaining a special permit from
the Adams Planning Board in accordance with this section and
§ 125-4, Special permits.
(1)
Setbacks. Setbacks from all boundary lines shall be a minimum
of 100 feet for commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems. The special permit granting authority may reduce the
minimum setback distance, as appropriate, based on site-specific
considerations.
(2)
Site control. At the time of application for a special permit, the
applicant shall submit documentation of actual or prospective
control of the project site sufficient to allow for installation and use
of the proposed facility. Documentation shall also include proof of
control over setback areas and access roads, if required. "Control"
shall mean legal authority to prevent the use or construction of any
structure within the setback area.
(3)
Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Town's
emergency services entities, as designated by the Planning Board.
Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate with local emergency
services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of
shutting down the solar energy system shall be clearly marked.
The applicant or facility owner shall maintain a phone number
and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with
inquiries and/or complaints throughout the life of the project.
(4)
Unauthorized access. The solar energy system shall be designed to
prevent unauthorized access. Electrical equipment shall be locked
where possible.
(5)
Emergency response plan. If required by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall prepare an emergency response plan that addresses
construction and operation activities for the solar energy system,
and establishes standards and practices that will minimize the
risk of fire danger, and in the case of fire, provide for immediate
suppression and notification.
(6)
Utility notification. No commercial-scale ground-mounted solar
energy system shall be constructed until evidence, satisfactory to
the Planning Board, has been provided that the utility company has
been informed of the operator's intent to install an interconnected
(7)
E.
§ 125-30 ADAMS CODE § 125-30
121:168
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement.
Operation and maintenance. The applicant shall submit a plan for
the operation and maintenance of the commercial-scale groundmounted
solar energy system, which shall include measures for
maintaining safe access to the installation, stormwater controls,
as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the
installation.
(8)
Siting criteria.
Commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
located so as to minimize the potential impacts on the following:
Visual/aesthetic: Commercial-scale solar energy systems shall,
when possible, be sited off ridgelines to locations where their
visual impact is least detrimental to valuable historic and
scenic areas and established residential areas;
(a)
(b) General health, safety, and welfare of residents;
(c) Diminution of residential property values; and
(d) Safety, as in cases of attractive nuisance.
(1)
The following siting criteria for commercial-scale solar energy
systems are ranked in order of preference:
The use of business-zoned land and industrial-zoned lands,
which comply with other requirements of this section and
where visual impact can be minimized and mitigated, shall be
encouraged.
(a)
The use of land distant from higher-density residential
properties and where visual impact can be minimized and
mitigated shall be encouraged.
(b)
(2)
F.
Design standards. The following design standards are established for
all proposed installations of commercial-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems:
Lighting. No lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation is
permitted. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as
appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety
and operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from
abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting shall be directed
downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to minimize any
light pollution from the project.
(1)
Landscaping/buffer requirements. Appropriate landscaping and
vegetative buffer shall be installed adequate to visually screen the
solar energy system from the boundary of any abutting residential
(2)
G.
§ 125-30 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-30
121:169
properties that would have a direct view of the proposed
installation. The landscaped buffer must be sufficiently dense to
block the view of the project from all dwellings abutting the
property. The applicant shall submit a landscape plan as required
in Subsection H ("Application requirements") as part of the special
permit and/or site plan approval application. The Planning Board
may waive the landscaping and buffer requirements applying to the
project site where it deems advisable.
Fencing. The entire perimeter of the commercial-scale solar energy
system shall be fenced and gated for security to a height of six feet
or higher as required by the National Electrical Code. Use of razor
wire is not permitted.
(3)
Signage. Signs for commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall comply with the sign requirements of the Adams
Zoning Bylaws. A sign no greater than four square feet indicating
the name of the facility owner(s) and a twenty-four-hour emergency
telephone number shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In
addition, "no trespassing" or other warning signs may be posted
on the fence, as approved by the Planning Board during site plan
review. Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any
component of the solar energy system.
(4)
Utility connections. As determined by the Planning Board, all
reasonable efforts shall be made to install all cable connections
underground for the commercial-scale solar energy system,
depending on soil conditions, topography, and any other
requirements of the utility provider. Electronic transformers for
utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the
utility provider.
(5)
Appurtenant structures. Equipment shelters and accessory
buildings shall be designed to be architecturally similar and
compatible with each other and shall be no more than 12 feet high.
The buildings shall be used only for housing of equipment related
to the particular site. Whenever possible, buildings shall be joined
or clustered so as to appear as one building.
(6)
Application requirements; provisions for independent consultants.
Solar energy systems requiring a special permit. Special permit
applications for commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems, where required, shall include the following information in
addition to requirements under § 125-4 ("Special permits"):
Lease/contract. An applicant requesting a permit for a
commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall
provide a copy of the existing lease/contract with the
underlying landowner.
(a)
(1)
H.
§ 125-30 ADAMS CODE § 125-30
121:170
Landscaping plan. For commercial-scale projects, the applicant
shall submit a landscaping plan as part of site plan approval.
The landscaping plan shall detail the following:
All proposed changes to the landscape of the site,
including temporary and permanent roads and/or
driveways, grading, area of vegetative clearing, all
proposed vegetative planting and screening, and/or
fencing;
[1]
Planting design shall include details of the types and size
of plant materials. Landscaping shall be designed in an
environmentally sensitive manner with noninvasive
drought-tolerant native plants, so as to reduce irrigation
needs; and
[2]
All landscaping and required buffer areas shall be properly
maintained. Landscape plants shall be monitored for at
least two growing seasons.
[3]
(b)
Technical documentation. The applicant shall, at a minimum,
submit the following technical documentation regarding the
proposed solar energy system:
Solar energy system technical specifications, including
documentation in the form of shop drawings or catalogue
cuts of the major system components to be used, including
the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
[1]
Drawings of the proposed solar energy system stamped
by a professional engineer licensed in Massachusetts
showing the proposed layout of the system, proposed
topographic and other changes to the existing landscape,
and any potential clearing of vegetation;
[2]
Electrical diagram detailing the solar energy system
installation, associated components, and electrical
interconnection methods, with all National Electrical Code
compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
[3]
(c)
Visualizations for commercial-scale projects. The Planning
Board may select up to three sight lines, including from the
nearest building with a view of the proposed solar energy
system, for pre- and post-construction view representations.
View representations, if required, shall have the following
characteristics:
View representations shall be in color and shall include
preconstruction photographs and accurate postconstruction
simulations of the height and extent of the
proposed solar installation;
[1]
(d)
§ 125-30 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-30
121:171
All view representations will include existing and proposed
buildings and/or tree coverage; and
[2]
Include a description of the technical procedures followed
in producing the visualization (distances, angles, lens,
etc.).
[3]
Upon submission of an application for a special permit under this
section, the Planning Board may engage independent technical
consultants, whose services shall be paid for by the applicant(s).
These consultants shall each be qualified professionals with a
record of service to municipalities in one of the following fields:
(a) Solar PV engineering;
(b) Structural engineering; and
(c) Others as determined necessary by the Planning Board.
(2)
Applicants for any special permit under this section shall obtain
permission from the owner(s) of the proposed property and/or
facility site for the Town's independent consultants to conduct any
necessary site visits.
(3)
Expiration. A special permit issued pursuant to this article shall
expire if: (a) The solar energy system is not installed and
functioning within 24 months from the date the permit is issued;
or (b) The solar energy system is abandoned. The Planning Board
may extend the special permit if it deems there are unique
circumstances that justify a delay in the installation and/or
functioning of the solar energy system.
(4)
Financial surety. Applicants seeking to construct and operate a
commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall provide a
form of surety to cover the cost of removal and restoration of the site
in the event the site is abandoned. The amount and form of surety shall
be determined by the Planning Board, but in no event shall the amount
exceed 125% of the cost of removal. Applicants shall submit a fully
inclusive cost estimate, which accounts for inflation and other causes
over the life of the system, of the costs associated with the removal
of the commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy system prepared
by a qualified engineer. All subsequent owners/operators of the system
shall continue to provide a form of surety acceptable to the Town
until the commercial-scale solar energy system has been removed. The
surety account or bond will be managed by the Town Treasurer's office.
I.
Operation, monitoring and maintenance.
Facility conditions. The commercial-scale ground-mounted solar
energy system's owner or operator shall maintain the facility in
good condition. Maintenance shall address all elements of the
project, including but not limited to structural repairs, landscaping
(1)
J.
§ 125-30 ADAMS CODE § 125-30
121:172
and screening, fencing and other security measures, stormwater
management, and access. The project owner shall be responsible
for the cost of maintaining the solar energy system and any access
road(s), and the cost of repairing any damage occurring as a result
of operation and construction.
Operation and maintenance plan. The project applicant shall
submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the
commercial-scale solar energy system as part of the special permit
application. This plan shall include measures for maintaining safe
access to the installation, stormwater management control, and
general procedures for operational maintenance of the facility.
(2)
Modifications. All material modifications to a solar energy facility
made after issuance of the permit shall require approval by the
special permit granting authority as provided in this article.
(3)
Removal, decommissioning, and abandonment.
Removal requirements. Any commercial-scale ground-mounted
solar energy system which has reached the end of its useful life
or has been abandoned shall be removed. When the solar energy
system is scheduled to be decommissioned, the owner or operator
shall notify the Town by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal. The owner/operator
shall physically remove the solar system installation no more than
six months after the date of discontinued operations. At the time
of removal, the solar system site shall be restored to the state it
was in before the system was constructed or to any other legally
authorized use, subject to all Town approvals. More specifically,
decommissioning shall consist of the following:
Physical removal of all solar photovoltaic installations,
including structures, equipment, security barriers, and
transmission lines, from the site;
(a)
Any utility connections shall be disconnected to the
satisfaction of the Adams Fire District and the Town's Wiring
Inspector;
(b)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local and state waste disposal regulations and standards; and
(c)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner/
operator to leave landscaping or any designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
(d)
(1)
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
a commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall be
(2)
K.
§ 125-30 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-30
121:173
§ 125-31. through § 125-34. (Reserved)
§ 125-35. Licensed marijuana establishments. [Added 3-5-2018
STM by Art. 5]
considered abandoned when it ceases to operate for more than
12 months, without written consent of the Planning Board. "Cease
to operate" is defined as not performing the normal functions
associated with the commercial-scale solar energy system and its
equipment on a continuous and ongoing basis for a period of one
year. The Building Inspector shall confer with the Planning Board
and provide written notification of abandonment to the owner/
operator. If the owner/operator fails to remove the solar energy
system in accordance with the requirements of this section within
six months of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town shall have the authority to enter the
property and physically remove the solar energy system.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the placement
of Licensed Marijuana Establishments in suitable locations in Adams,
in recognition of and in accordance with "The Regulation and Taxation
of Marijuana Act," MGL c. 94G, in order to minimize potential adverse
impacts of marijuana establishments. The specific purpose of this
section is to safeguard the built environment by permitting compliance
with state law in a manner consistent with community and
neighborhood concerns, while also ensuring that those entities
permitted to operate a licensed marijuana establishment, as defined
herein, comply with all of the provisions of Chapter 334 of the Acts of
2016.
A.
Definitions.
LICENSED MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana cultivator,
independent marijuana testing laboratory, marijuana product
manufacturer, marijuana retailer, or any other type of marijuana-related
business licensed by the Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate, process,
and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana
establishments, and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments but not consumers.
MARIJUANA INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY — A laboratory
licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission and qualified to test
marijuana in compliance with regulations promulgated by the
Commission, as amended.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed to
obtain, manufacture, process, and package marijuana and marijuana
products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana
establishments, and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to
other marijuana establishments but not consumers.
B.
§ 125-30 ADAMS CODE § 125-35
121:174
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS — Products that have been manufactured and
contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated
forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other
ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible
products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils, and tinctures.
MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed to purchase and deliver
marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and
to deliver, sell, or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products
to marijuana establishments and to consumers.
Designated locations for marijuana establishments. The locations
designated by the Town of Adams where licensed marijuana
establishments may be sited are as follows:
Licensed marijuana establishments may be sited as-of-right in the
Industrial (I) District, as shown on the Zoning Map pursuant to
MGL c. 40A, § 4, subject to site plan approval in accordance with
§ 125-19 of this chapter.
(1)
Marijuana retailers, as defined in this bylaw, may be sited in the
Business (B-2) District as shown on the Zoning Map pursuant to
MGL c. 40A, § 4, if granted a special permit and subject to site
plan approval. The special permit granting authority is the Adams
Planning Board.
(2)
Marijuana independent testing laboratories, as defined herein, may
be sited in the Industrial Park (IP) District shown on the Zoning
Map pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 4, if granted a special permit and
subject to site plan approval.
(3)
Licensed marijuana establishments, both medical and nonmedical
marijuana establishments, are prohibited in all other zoning
districts within the Town of Adams.
(4)
C.
General requirements. The following general requirements are
established for all proposed operations of licensed marijuana
establishments, consistent with Subsection C.
Permanent location. Each licensed marijuana establishment and
any part of its operation, including, but not limited to, cultivation,
processing, packaging, and sales, shall be operated from a fixed
location within a fully enclosed building and its operations shall
not be visible from the exterior of the premises. No marijuana
establishment, including any medical or nonmedical retailer, shall
be permitted to operate from a movable, mobile or transitory
location.
(1)
Outside storage. No outside storage of marijuana, marijuana
products, related supplies, or educational materials is permitted.
(2)
Hours of operation. A marijuana retailer may open no earlier than
8:00 a.m. and shall close no later than 8:00 p.m. the same day,
(3)
D.
§ 125-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-35
121:175
Monday through Saturday, and from 10:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on
Sunday unless other hours of operation are set by the Planning
Board as part of site plan approval. Hours of operation shall apply
to all sales, delivery, and dispensing activities for the business.
There shall be no hourly restrictions on marijuana testing facilities
or marijuana manufacturers, unless imposed by the Planning Board
as part of site plan approval.
Signage. All signage and advertising for licensed marijuana
establishments shall comply with all applicable state laws, as well
as the provisions of § 125-15 of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this Code and any relevant regulations promulgated
by the Cannabis Control Commission.
(4)
On-site consumption of marijuana. The use, consumption, ingestion
or inhalation of marijuana or marijuana products on or within the
premises of any licensed marijuana establishment is prohibited.
(5)
Visibility of activities. All activities of any licensed marijuana
establishment, including any marijuana retailer or marijuana
manufacturer, shall be conducted indoors.
(6)
Paraphernalia. Devices, contrivances, instruments and
paraphernalia for inhaling or otherwise consuming marijuana,
including, but not limited to, rolling papers and related tools, water
pipes, and vaporizers, may lawfully be sold at a marijuana retailer.
No retail marijuana, marijuana products, or paraphernalia shall be
displayed or kept in a retail marijuana store so as to be visible from
outside the licensed premises.
(7)
Control of emissions. Sufficient measures and means of preventing
smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting
a licensed marijuana establishment must be provided at all times.
In the event that any odors, debris, dust, fluids or other substances
exit a retail marijuana store or marijuana manufacturing or testing
facility, the owner of the subject premises and the licensee shall be
liable for such conditions and shall be responsible for immediate,
full clean-up and correction of such condition. The licensee shall
properly dispose of all such materials, items and other substances
in a safe, sanitary and secure manner and in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
(8)
Any violation will be corrected within 30 days and if not corrected
within the required time, all operations of the licensed marijuana
establishment shall be suspended until the violation is corrected.
(9)
Special permit required. No licensed marijuana retailer in a Business
(B-2) District shall be operated without first obtaining a special permit
from the Adams Planning Board in accordance with this section and
§ 125-4, Special permits. Similarly, no marijuana independent testing
laboratory in an Industrial Park (IP) District shall be operated without
obtaining a special permit from the Planning Board.
E.
§ 125-35 ADAMS CODE § 125-35
121:176
No licensed marijuana retailer within a B-2 District may be located
closer than 250 feet from any school, daycare center, or other
similar facility where minors commonly congregate and are the
primary population served by the facility.
(1)
The setback distance is to be measured in a straight line from
the nearest point of the property line of the proposed marijuana
retailer and the nearest point of the property line of the protected
uses stated above.
(2)
As part of the special permit process, the Planning Board may
reduce the required minimum setback distance within a B-2
District if it finds site-specific circumstances or barriers adequately
separate the proposed marijuana retailer and a protected use. The
burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that reducing the
minimum setback will serve the purpose of this section and address
the concerns of the Planning Board.
(3)
A special permit shall only be valid for use by the applicant and will
become null and void upon the sale or transfer of the license of a
marijuana establishment operating under a special permit or upon
a change in the location of the business.
(4)
In the event that the Commonwealth's licensing authority suspends
the license or registration of a licensed marijuana establishment
operating under a special permit, the special permit shall be so
suspended by the Town until the matter is resolved to the
satisfaction of said licensing authority.
(5)
Site plan required. All proposed uses under this section shall be subject
to the Town's site plan review process as set forth in § 125-19. In
addition to the standard application requirements for site plan
approval, such applications for licensed marijuana establishments shall
include the following:
(1) The name and address of each owner of the facility/operation.
A copy of the license or registration as a licensed marijuana
establishment from the Massachusetts Cannabis Control
Commission or documentation that demonstrates that said facility
and its owner/operators qualify and are eligible to receive a
certification of registration and meet all of the requirements of
a licensed marijuana establishment in accordance with the
regulations adopted by the Commission, as amended.
(2)
Evidence that the applicant has site control and the right to use the
site for a licensed marijuana establishment.
(3)
As part of the applicant's site plan, details showing all proposed
exterior security measures for the premises, including lighting,
fencing, gates and alarms, etc. ensuring the safety of employees,
(4)
F.
§ 125-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-35
121:177
patrons, and the public and to protect the premises from theft or
other criminal activity.
A letter from the Adams Police Chief certifying the Department
has reviewed and deemed acceptable the applicant's full security
plan for the proposed facility. Should the Police Chief recommend
additional security provisions, the Planning Board may incorporate
additional recommendations as part of site plan approval. The
Building Commissioner shall not issue a certificate of occupancy
until the Police Chief has inspected the premises and certified that
all security measures have been implemented per the approved
plan.
(5)
The proposed plan shall provide appropriate landscaping and
urban design features to harmonize the proposed project with
abutting uses so as to protect and enhance the aesthetics and
architectural look and character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(6)
The Planning Board may require a traffic study that includes an
analysis of on-site circulation and parking demand to justify the
number of proposed parking spaces and the optimum configuration
for site ingress and egress.
(7)
Discontinuance of use. Any licensed marijuana establishment under this
section shall be required to remove all material, marijuana products,
equipment, signs, and other paraphernalia in compliance with
regulations established by the Cannabis Control Commission prior to
expiration of its license or immediately following revocation or voiding
of its licensure and/or registration. If the license holder discontinues
use, the licensed marijuana establishment shall immediately notify the
Adams Select Board, the Adams Police Chief, and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
G.
Other laws remain applicable.
Business license required. At all times while a permit is in effect
the licensee shall possess a valid business license as required by
the Adams Town Code.
(1)
To the extent the state has adopted or adopts in the future any
additional or stricter law or regulation governing the sale,
distribution or testing of retail marijuana or retail marijuana
products, the additional or stricter regulation shall control the
establishment or operation of any marijuana retailer in the Town.
Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be
deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of any
license under this chapter, and noncompliance with any applicable
state law or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or
suspension of any license issued hereunder.
(2)
Any licensed marijuana establishment may be required to
demonstrate, upon demand by law enforcement officers of the
(3)
H.
§ 125-35 ADAMS CODE § 125-35
121:178
§ 125-36. through § 125-49. (Reserved)
Adams Police Department and/or the local licensing authority, that
the source and quantity of any marijuana found upon the licensed
premises are in full compliance with any applicable state law or
regulation.
The issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter shall not be
deemed to create an exception, defense or immunity to any person
in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for
the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of marijuana.
(4)
Prior to the issuance of a special permit or site plan approval, the
licensed marijuana establishment must have entered into a host
community agreement with the Town. If, upon review by the Board
of Selectmen, the licensed marijuana establishment is found to
not be fully in compliance with the host community agreement,
the special permit and/or the local license may be suspended or
rescinded.
(5)
§ 125-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-36
121:179

ARTICLE V
Definitions
§ 125-50. Word usage and definitions.
In this chapter the following terms, unless a contrary meaning is required
by the context or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following
meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the
plural includes the singular; the word “lot” includes the word “plot”; the
word “building” includes the word “structure”; the word “shall” is intended
to be mandatory; and “occupied” or “used” shall be considered as though
followed by the words “or intended, arranged or designed to be used
or occupied.” The word “person” includes a corporation as well as an
individual.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or use customarily incidental
to and located on the same lot with the principal building or use, except that
if more than 30% of the floor area or 50% of the lot area is occupied by such
use, it shall no longer be considered accessory.
ACCESSORY RETAIL — General retail or concession, such as a newsstand,
gift shop, lunch counter, drugstore, etc., constructed in conjunction with
some other use, such as office or industrial, which is principally for the use
or convenience of the employees, clients, customers, or other visitors to the
principal use but is open to the general public and does not exceed 5% of
the total floor area of the principal use.
ADEQUATE CAPACITY — Capacity is considered to be adequate if the grade
of service is p.05 or better for a worst-case day in a preceding month, based
on the Erlang B Tables, prior to the date of application, or as measured
using direct traffic measurement of the personal wireless service facility in
question for existing facilities requesting major modification, and where the
call blocking is due to frequency contention at the antenna(s).
ADEQUATE COVERAGE — Coverage is considered to be adequate within
that area surrounding a base station where the predicted (by radial plot)
or measured (by actual field measurements) median field strength of the
transmitted signal for at least 75% of the covered area is greater than —95
dbm. It is acceptable if there are holes within the area of adequate coverage
where the signal is less than —95 dbm, as long as the signal regains its
strength to greater than —95 dbm farther away from the base station.
For the limited purpose of determining whether the use of a repeater is
necessary or desirable, there shall be deemed not to be adequate coverage
within said holes. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage,
however, is that location past which the signal does not regain a strength of
greater than —95 dbm.
ANIMAL KENNEL OR HOSPITAL — A structure or parcel of land used for
the harboring and/or care of more than three dogs that are more than six
months old, whether commercially operated or not.
APARTMENT, MULTIFAMILY — Dwelling in a multifamily structure
accommodating three or more dwelling units.
§ 125-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-50
121:181
BASE STATION — The primary sending and receiving site in a wireless
telecommunications network.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A dwelling in which the person resident therein
provides eating and/or sleeping accommodations in not more than four
guest rooms which are not provided with separate cooking facilities and
whose guests use the cooking facility ordinarily used by the resident family.
There shall be one bathroom for every two guest rooms.
BOARDING, LODGING OR TOURIST HOME — A building used for lodging,
with or without meals, for compensation, for between five and 20
individuals.
BUILDING — A structure enclosing useful space.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the mean finished grade
of the ground adjoining the building to the highest point of the roof or
parapet for flat or shed roofs, to the deckline for mansard roofs, and to the
mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Not included are spires, cupolas, television antennas, or other parts of
structures which do not enclose potentially habitable floor space.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street line, between which and the
street line no part of any structure is located.
DBM — Unit of measure of the power level of an electromagnetic signal
expressed in decibels referenced to one milliwatt.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living
and sleeping, cooking and sanitation.
EMF — Electromagnetic frequency radiation.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals related by blood or marriage or not
more than four persons not so related living and cooking together in a single
housekeeping unit.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission, the federal government
agency responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors
of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, including the area
of basements not more than 50% below grade, roofed porches and roofed
terraces, excluding areas with less than six feet floor-to-ceiling height. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
HEALTH CLUB — Includes but is not limited to gymnasiums (except public),
private clubs (athletic, health, or recreational), reducing salons, and weight
control establishments.
HEDGE — A contiguous row of shrubs or trees serving the purpose of a
fence.
§ 125-50 ADAMS CODE § 125-50
121:182
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or profession engaged in within a
dwelling or permitted accessory structure by a resident thereof as a use
accessory thereto.
HOTEL, MOTEL or MOTOR INN — A structure providing accommodations
for compensation for 20 or more persons, exclusive of employees domiciled
on the premises, and in some cases including rooms for public assembly and
dining.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A parcel of 10 acres or more oriented towards
corporate business and/or light industrial uses with quality facilities and
landscaping developed in conformance with the Use Regulation Schedule
and § 125-16E.
JUNK — Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out, cast
off, or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been collected or
stored for salvage or conversion. Any article or material which, unaltered or
unchanged and without further reconditioning, can be used for its original
purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
JUNKYARD — Premises, whether licensed or not, where waste or scrap
articles or materials are abandoned, stored, sorted, packed, bought or sold,
except where such activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed
building or within an open area of less than 200 square feet.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Research or testing laboratory, printing plant,
manufacturing establishment, or other assembly, packaging, finishing or
processing use, provided that all operations shall be such as to confine
disturbing smoke, fumes, dust, odors, vibrations and noise to the premises.
LIVESTOCK — Any number of fur-bearing animals, hogs, animals for hire,
horses, cows, goats, sheep, or poultry other than customary household pets
and as further qualified in the Use Regulation Schedule; private stable and
dog kennel.
LOT — An area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries
ascertainable by recorded deed or plan and used or set aside and available
for use as the site of one or more buildings or for any other definite purpose.
LOT AREA — The horizontal area of a lot exclusive of any area in a street
or way open to public use. Not more than 10% of the lot area required
for zoning compliance shall be area under water nine months or more in a
normal year.
LOT, CORNER — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at
the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting a curved street shall
be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the point of
intersection of the side lot lines intersect with an interior angle of less than
105°.
LOT COVERAGE — Percentage of total lot area covered by structures or
roofed.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot fronting upon and having access
to a street or public way, to be measured continuously along one street line
§ 125-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-50
121:183
between its side lot lines and their intersection with the street line or, in the
case of a corner lot, to the point of intersection of street side lines extended.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
parallel to the lot frontage at the proposed building line.
MOBILE HOME — A movable or portable dwelling built on a chassis,
designed for connection to utilities when in use, and designed without
necessity of a permanent foundation for year-round living.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Premises which have been planned and improved
for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use.
MONITORING — The measurement by the use of instruments in the field
of the radiation from a facility site as a whole or from individual personal
wireless service devices, towers, antennas, or repeaters.
MONITORING PROTOCOL — The testing protocol, initially the Cobbs
Protocol, which is to be used to monitor emissions from existing and new
personal wireless service facilities and repeaters. The Planning Board may,
as the technology changes, require by written regulation the use of other
testing protocols. A copy of the Monitoring Protocol shall be on file with the
Board of Selectmen.
NONCONFORMING USE OR BUILDING — A lawfully existing use or
building which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which
such use or building exists.
NURSERY SCHOOL — School licensed by the Massachusetts Department of
Education for daytime care and instruction of preschool children.
NURSING, CONVALESCENT OR REST HOME or HOSPITAL — Any
institution licensed by the Department of Public Health as a nursing,
convalescent or rest home, charitable home for the aged, hospital or
sanitarium pursuant to MGL c. 111, §§ 51 and 71.
OPEN SPACE — Lot area not covered by any structure, drives, parking or
storage, but including swimming pools, decks, patios, balconies and any
roof area developed for recreation.
PARKING SPACE — Space adequate to park an automobile, not less than
8 1/2 x 20 feet, plus means of access. Where spaces are not marked, each
space shall be assumed to require 350 square feet.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE DEVICE — Any antenna, appurtenance,
wiring, or equipment used in connection with the reception or transmission
of electromagnetic radiation that is attached to a structure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — A general term to include
wireless communication building, personal wireless service device, and
personal wireless service structure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity, licensed by the
FCC, to provide personal wireless services to individuals or institutions.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile devices,
unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access
§ 125-50 ADAMS CODE § 125-50
121:184
services. These services include cellular services, personal communications
services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services, and paging services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE STRUCTURE — Any structure or tower
intended to support equipment used for the transmission and reception of
electromagnetic radiation, including the antennas, wiring or other devices
attached to or mounted on a structure.
PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION — An endowed or charitably supported
nonprofit religious or nonsectarian activity maintained for a public or
semipublic use.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE — Entrance to a building or structure observable and
accessible from a public way, public parking or accessory parking area.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Electrical, gas, steam, water, communication or
transportation systems and their appurtenances.
PUBLIC UTILITY — ESSENTIAL FACILITY -- Underground or overhead gas,
electric, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals,
hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utility.
QUARRYING — The extraction and processing of rock.
REPEATER — A small receiver/relay transmitter of not more than 20 watts'
output designed to provide service to areas that are not able to receive
adequate coverage directly from a base station.
RESTAURANT — Establishment for the sale of prepared food, more than
half of which is consumed on the site.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Establishment for the sale of prepared food,
some of which but less than half of which is consumed on the site.
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT — Establishment for the sale of prepared food,
none of which is consumed on the site.
SIGN — Any device to inform or attract the attention of persons not on
the premises on which the sign is located, including window signs and
any building surfaces which are internally illuminated or decorated with
gaseous tube or other lights; provided, however, that the following shall not
be included in the application of the regulations of this chapter:
Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property
numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
A.
Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
B.
Legal notices; identification, informational or directional signs erected
or required by governmental bodies.
C.
§ 125-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-50
121:185
SIGN, AREA OF — The entire area within a regular geometric form or
combinations of regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area
of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed.
One side only of signs with faces at 180° to each other shall be counted.
Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be
included in computation of sign area unless those elements are internally or
decoratively lighted.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign erected or affixed to the land and not
attached to a building.
SIGN, NONACCESSORY — Any billboard or sign not an accessory sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which, by its inherent nature, can be expected
to remain in place for less than a year, such as real estate signs or signs
inside display windows.
STATE HIGHWAY — A highway owned by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or one designated as a state numbered highway by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works.
STORE, TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR — Any retail establishment open longer
than normal business hours, 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., or with a third shift of
employees.
STORY — That portion of a building between the top of any floor and the
top of the floor or roof next above, counting as a half story such portion if
more than half its exterior wall area is below grade or if directly under a
sloping roof in which more than half the exterior wall perimeter has less
than three feet floor-rafters interior dimension, and excluding cellar or attic
spaces used solely for utilities and storage.
STREET — A way providing legally sufficient frontage for subdivision of
land under the requirements of MGL c. 41, § 81L.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street, assumed to be 20 feet
from the center of the traveled roadway where no such right-of-way line has
been established or can be readily determined.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
fixed location on the ground or attachment to something located on the
ground, including all buildings with floor area exceeding 75 square feet,
mobile homes, billboards, certain swimming pools (see below), tanks, or the
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights.
D.
Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but
bearing no advertising matter.
E.
Signs on or in the rolling stock, stations, or structures of or used by
common carriers except on bridges or viaducts or abutments thereof.
F.
Standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form the
name, type, and price of gasoline.
G.
§ 125-50 ADAMS CODE § 125-50
121:186
like, or part thereof, but not including smaller buildings, paving, usual lawn
accessories, or retaining walls or fences.
SWIMMING POOL — Any constructed pool, located above or below the
ground, whether portable or fixed, used or capable of being used for
swimming, wading, or bathing purposes. Pools having a depth of two feet
or more and having a capacity of 200 cubic feet or more in volume shall be
considered structures.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Tent, construction shanty, or trailer, or
similarly portable or demountable structure intended for continuous use for
not longer than one year.
TEMPORARY USE — Use, occupation or occupancy of a parcel of land,
building or structure for a period not to exceed one calendar year.
TRACT — An area of land which may be subdivided or otherwise allocated
to accommodate a use or uses on finished lots which may be sold separately
or retained in one or common ownership.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle required to be
registered by law of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for operation on
public ways, not so registered.
VEHICLE, HEAVY COMMERCIAL — A bus or truck having capacity in
excess of the limits for a light commercial vehicle, or motorized construction
equipment other than trucks.
VEHICLE, LIGHT COMMERCIAL — A taxi; a bus with capacity not
exceeding 10 passengers; or a truck with gross vehicle weight (GVW) rating
not exceeding 14,000 pounds and enclosed cargo area not exceeding 400
cubic feet.
VEHICULAR EXIT LINE — Either edge of a driveway or curb cut used for
the exit of motor vehicles, whichever is more restrictive.
YARD — A required open space, unobstructed with buildings and structures,
other than permitted signs, fences, or other customary yard accessories.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between lot side lines across the front of
a lot adjacent to each street it adjoins.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard
to the rear lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner
side yard lines.
§ 125-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 125-50
121:187
Part II: Rules and Regulations
Chapter 200
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 4.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 70.
Personnel — See Ch. 80.
Police Department — See Ch. 86.
§ 200-1. General provisions.
Authority. These regulations are promulgated in accordance with the
authority granted by Chapter 80, Personnel, of the Code of the Town of
Adams, as amended.
A.
Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to establish in writing the
Town's policies and procedures governing employment with the Town
to ensure their consistent application to all employees and facilitate
uniform and efficient administration of said policies and procedures.
B.
Application. These regulations do not apply, unless otherwise noted,
to elected officials or any other employees who may be specifically
exempt by law. Employees covered by union contract are subject only to
those provisions which are not specifically regulated by union contract.
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to limit any rights of
employees pursuant to MGL c. 150E.
C.
Administration. These regulations shall be administered by the Town
Administrator. The Administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that
Adams is an equal opportunity employer.
D.
Equal employment opportunity statement. The Town of Adams shall
not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, color, religion, sex, age, mental or physical handicap,
national origin, ancestry or sexual orientation. [Added 7-6-1994]
E.
Rules of interpretation.
These regulations are intended to be in accordance with all
applicable state and federal laws. In the event of any conflict, the
applicable state and federal laws shall apply.
(1)
(2) The word “he” or “his” shall also mean “she” or “hers.”
(3) The word “Town” shall mean the Town of Adams.
(4) “Employee” shall mean an employee of the Town of Adams.
F.
§ 125-50 ADAMS CODE § 200-1
200:188
“Town Administrator” shall mean the Town Administrator of Adams
or his designee.
(5)
Amendment. Amendment of these regulations shall be in accordance
with § 80-8 of Chapter 80 of the Code of the Town of Adams. The
Town Administrator shall develop and make deletions, amendments or
changes to these regulations, subject to the majority approval of the
Board of Selectmen. Employees shall be notified in writing seven days
prior to any change taking effect.
G.
Definitions. As used in these rules and regulations, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BREAK IN EMPLOYMENT — Occurs in the following instances:
CONTINUOUS SERVICE — Employment by the Town without a break
in employment.
EMERGENCY EMPLOYEE — A noncompetitive appointment to a
position for a period of time, as determined with biweekly reviews, to
prevent stoppage of public business or hazard or serious inconvenience
to the public.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee that works on an irregular
basis determined by the work load in the department throughout the
year.
PERMANENT FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee having
established hours of work consisting of a minimum of 35 hours per
week for 52 weeks per year.
PERMANENT PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee having
established hours of work consisting of less than 35 hours per week for
52 weeks per year.
SENIORITY — The length of continuous service of an employee in Town
employment.
TEMPORARY/SEASONAL EMPLOYEE — An employee that is appointed
for a fixed period of time, not to exceed eight months, to replace
If an employee shall terminate employment with the Town of his
own accord;
(1)
(2) If an employee shall be discharged;
If an employee shall be absent in excess of five consecutive working
days without obtaining approval for such absence;
(3)
If, after a layoff of less than two years, an employee shall not return
to work within 10 days after receipt of notice from the Town that
he will be rehired; or
(4)
If an employee shall be absent due to a layoff of more than two
years.
(5)
H.
§ 200-1 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-1
200:189
§ 200-2. Recruitment and selection.
Coverage: All employees.
employees who might be absent for extended periods or conditions
caused by increased work load.
General policy. The Town will make every effort to attract and hire the
most qualified persons, consistent with the Town's affirmative action
goals. Every individual, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, age,
mental or physical handicap, national origin, ancestry or sexual
orientation, applying for employment with the Town will receive equal
treatment. Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area as
wide as necessary to assure obtaining well-qualified candidates for
various types of positions. The recruitment, selection and promotion of
employees will be based solely on job-related criteria as established by
the Town Administrator with the recommendation of the department
head or elected official in accordance with § 200-7 of these regulations.
A.
Responsibility. The Town Administrator shall be responsible for the
recruitment and selection of all positions in the Town (except as noted
above). The qualifications, classification and salary range for open
positions shall be established by the Town Administrator with the
recommendation of the department head or elected official in
accordance with there rules and regulations.
B.
Posting.
Internal. All vacancies will be posted internally for a minimum
of seven days before any external recruiting, to allow qualified
employees an opportunity to submit an employment application.
Notice of any vacancies shall be posted in the Town Hall, Police
Station, Adams Free Library, Highway Garage, Wastewater
Treatment Plant, Adams Community Center, and any other place
required by the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws. Each
job posting will include the job title, a brief job description,
minimum qualifications, salary range, means for obtaining an
employment application form, and due date and place for
applications. The Administrator shall approve content of all job
postings. Town employees, when fully qualified for a position, shall
receive first consideration with respect to filling any vacancies over
all other applicants (to the extent that this is possible in accordance
with the Town's affirmative action goals).
(1)
External. External recruitment may include but not be limited to
notice of vacancies to job banks and community organizations and
associations, advertisement in newspapers, professional journals
and newsletters, and other appropriate means in accordance with
the Town's affirmative action goals. The level of external
recruitment will be determined by the Town Administrator.
(2)
C.
§ 200-1 ADAMS CODE § 200-2
200:190
§ 200-3. Appointment.
Coverage: All employees.
Applications. All candidates applying for employment in the Town must
complete an official employment application form and return it to the
designated place prior to the end of the working day of the closing date
specified for a position in the announcement. Each applicant shall sign
the form, and truth of all statements shall be certified by the applicant's
signature. All candidates who accurately and honestly complete the
application form will be reviewed fairly and equally for the position by
the designated authority.
D.
References. Applicants' former supervisors, employers, and other
references may be contacted as part of the selection process.
References and other checks shall be documented and made part of the
applicant's file and shall be completed prior to an offer of employment.
E.
Examinations. Examinations may be required as one part of the
selection process. Examinations may be written, oral, practical,
physical or any combination of all four and shall be relevant to the
requirements of the position and reflective of the essential functions of
the position.
F.
Maintenance of records.
All employment applications and related documents, including the
results of reference checks and examinations, shall be maintained
by the Town Administrator for the period of time required by law.
The Town acknowledges its legal and moral obligation to protect
the privacy of all employees and applicants by exercising all due
consideration with respect to personnel records and applications
and will to the extent possible maintain the confidentiality of
applicants.
(1)
All findings from a medical examination are to be treated as
confidential and maintained on separate forms. Only supervisors,
managers, first aid safety personnel, local legal counsel, and
government compliance investigators may have access to this
information.
(2)
G.
Appointing authority.
The Town Administrator will make final approval regarding
employment, starting salary, employment transfer, promotion or
demotion (subject to § 10 of the Act Establishing a Selectmen-
Administrator Form of Government in the Town of Adams and other
exceptions as noted) of any individual, with the recommendations
of the department head, policies of the Town and applicable state
and federal laws.
(1)
A.
§ 200-2 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-3
200:191
The Town Administrator will notify the department head and the
individual to be employed, promoted, transferred or demoted of the
starting date, time and place and starting salary.
(2)
All vacancies shall be filled by permanent appointment, temporary
appointment, promotion, transfer or demotion as defined.
(3)
The Chairman of the Board of Selectmen is assigned the obligation
of appointing a legislative subcommittee with the following charge:
To work closely with the Town Administrator to review pending
legislation for its effect on the Town;
(a)
To make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen
regarding official positions on same; and
(b)
To take a proactive role in voicing the Town's position, in favor
or opposition, directly to our state and federal representatives.
(c)
(4)
Medical examinations. Every individual selected for employment with
the Town shall, after being notified by the Town Administrator and
prior to the starting date, undergo a physical exam as a condition
of employment. The examination shall be at the expense of the Town
by a physician appointed by the Town Administrator. The examining
physician shall advise as to whether or not, in his opinion, the applicant
is physically qualified to perform the essential functions of the position
for which application has been made. Upon failure to undergo a
physical exam or upon the written recommendation of the physician
that the applicant is not able to perform the essential functions of the
position, the Town Administrator may withdraw the employment offer.
Seasonal employees must have a physical every three years.
B.
Failure to report to work. An applicant who accepts an appointment and
fails to report to work within three days after the date set by the Town
Administrator shall be deemed to have declined the appointment and
the offer of employment shall be withdrawn.
C.
Conflicts of interest involving approval/appointment. The Charter and
Chapter 80, Personnel, of the Town Code clearly provide that the
responsibility for hiring, promotion, demotion, and dismissal of
employees is the Town Administrator's and that those actions are
subject to other approval of the Board of Selectmen. This chapter
adequately describes the process that the Administrator is to follow in
carrying out those functions.
It is noted that the existing policy requires that the Administrator
recruit from an area wide enough to assure well-qualified
candidates. It is understood to mean beyond the borders of Adams
and further indicates that selection will be based solely on jobrelated
criteria.
(1)
D.
§ 200-3 ADAMS CODE § 200-3
200:192
§ 200-4. Orientation.
Coverage: All employees.
The provisions of MGL c. 268A adequately address the issue of
nepotism. Those persons directly responsible for appointments are
prohibited under law from:
(a) Hiring an immediate family member (IFM) as defined above.
(b) Any involvement in the hiring process of an IFM.
Any involvement in the reappointment, promotion,
reclassification, demotion or firing of a family member.
(c)
Determining an IFM's salary, including “automatic” increases
such as annual step increases.
(d)
(e) Conducting a job performance review of an IFM.
(f) Day-to-day supervision of an IFM.
(g) Delegating the task of dealing with an IFM to a subordinate.
(2)
The Town Administrator and the Board of Selectmen are subject to
these limitations for all appointments they make. The issue most
often encountered is the appointment of a relative of Selectmen by
the Town Administrator. This does not appear to create a problem
under the statue because the Selectmen are not involved in the
selection process. The Town Administrator will not discuss the
applicants for a position with Board members prior to their
appointment so as to avoid potential conflicts, except that the
Administrator may contact them as a reference if they are listed
on the employment application. When the Selectmen are presented
with an appointee for ratification or when the appointment is made
directly by the Board, members may abstain to avoid conflict.
(3)
If a candidate is a relative of a department head, the department
head does not participate in the process.
(4)
General policy. It is the policy of the Town to ensure that all employees
are adequately informed of the rights and responsibilities of the Town
and the employee as they relate to employment with the Town.
A.
Orientation procedure.
Every individual selected for employment will be notified of the
starting date and time and shall report to the Town Administrator's
office. If the employee has been hired under the provisions of a
collective bargaining agreement, a copy of the agreement shall be
give to the employee.
(1)
The Town Administrator shall thoroughly explain all of the benefits
and options the employee is entitled to and shall assist the
(2)
B.
§ 200-3 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-4
200:193
§ 200-5. Probation.
Coverage: All employees.
§ 200-6. Classification Plan.
Coverage: All employees.
employee with the appropriate forms pertaining to income tax
deduction, life insurance, group health insurance, retirement and
others as applicable. The Town Administrator shall also explain
these rules and regulations as they affect the employee.
The department head will be responsible for on-site training and
orientation regarding specific rules, regulations, policies and
procedures of the employee's assigned department, including the
safety policies and procedures.
(3)
General policy. All newly appointed or promoted employees shall be
required to complete successfully a probationary period to begin
immediately upon the employee's starting date and to continue for six
months and to be extended by the number of days the employee is
absent from work. The Town Administrator and department head shall
utilize the probationary period to help all new or promoted employees
to achieve effective performance standards. They shall also use the
probationary period to observe and evaluate the employee's attitude,
conduct and work habits and to reject any employee whose
performance does not meet the required work standards or who is
not able to perform the essential functions of the position. When the
employee's probationary period expires, the respective department
head will notify the Town Administrator in writing that:
The employee's performance was satisfactory and the individual
will be retained in the position as a permanent employee;
(1)
An extension of the probationary period is desired, not to exceed
three months, for additional observation due to specific
extenuating circumstances; or
(2)
The employee's performance, ability to perform the essential
functions of the position, attitude or conduct was unsatisfactory,
stating the specific reason why, and removal is proposed as of a
specific date upon the approval of the Town Administrator.
(3)
A.
Removal during probationary period. An employee may be removed
during the probationary period by the department head with the
approval of the Town Administrator.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform and
objective system for classifying all positions in the Town and to
establish proper relationships between positions based on difficulty
of duties performed, level of responsibilities assumed and minimum
A.
§ 200-4 ADAMS CODE § 200-6
200:194
qualifications required so that the same schedule of compensation may
be equitably applied to each class, thus ensuring equal pay for equal
work.
Content of the plan. The Classification Plan shall consist of:
Position descriptions for positions which are basically similar in
essential functions of the position, degree of difficulty and levels
of responsibility so that each position in the class can be given
the same job title; requires essentially the same training and
experience; can be filled by substantially the same methods of
selection; and is of relative value and therefore deserves the same
range of compensation.
Each position shall have a written description consisting of a
statement describing the essential functions of the position,
examples of typical duties, the required minimum knowledge,
skills, training, abilities, and experience and any necessary
special qualifications.
(a)
Position descriptions are intended to be representative of the
positions in the class and provide illustrations of the type of
work performed/essential functions of the position and do not
necessarily include all the duties performed. Particular phrases
or examples of typical duties are not to be singled out and used
solely for determining the job class.
(b)
Position descriptions are not intended to be restrictive. The use
of (or absence of) a particular illustration of duties shall not be
held to exclude or limit the authority of a department head to
assign other duties to employees in any class.
(c)
Qualification statements in each position description establish
desirable minimum requirements to perform the essential
functions of the position that should be met by an individual
before being considered for appointment, transfer, or
promotion to a position in the class. Alternative combinations
of education, training and experience are generally indicated
in the positions descriptions but do not preclude other
combinations deemed equivalent by the Town Administrator.
(d)
(1)
Position titles. The title of each class of position shall be the official
title of every position allocated to the class and shall be used
for administrative purposes, such as payroll, budget, financial and
personnel forms and records. No person shall be appointed or
promoted to any position in the Town under a title not included in
the Classification Plan.
(2)
B.
C. Administration of Classification Plan.
§ 200-6 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-6
200:195
The Town Administrator shall have the primary responsibility for
the administration and day-to-day maintenance of the Classification
Plan and is authorized to:
Complete studies of proposed new positions and make
allocations to existing classes, reestablish a former class,
establish a new class of positions, or delete a class of positions;
(a)
Provide for studies of existing positions when there has been
a substantial change in the duties and responsibilities which
justify consideration of possible reclassification;
(b)
Conduct periodic studies and request such assistance as may
be needed to assure the Classification Plan remains uniform
and current;
(c)
Require the submission of position questionnaires or any other
related information when considered necessary for the proper
maintenance of the plan;
(d)
Develop forms and procedures to determine the proper
classification of each position; and
(e)
Make routine revisions to class description content, such as
additions and deletions of illustrative tasks, qualification
requirements and other such changes; provided, however, that
changes in compensation grades shall not be accomplished
under this subsection.
(f)
(1)
The Town Administrator shall have custody of and maintain the
master set of all approved position descriptions and their
authorized compensation grades, which shall contain the date
adopted, revised or amended.
(2)
The Town Administrator shall also maintain and administer a
record of those positions which are authorized to be filled.
(3)
All employees will be given a copy of their appropriate position
description and will be furnished new ones if their positions are
reallocated. Copies of class specifications for all Town positions are
maintained in the Town Administrator's office and may be reviewed
by any employee.
(4)
Classification of new positions. Department heads proposing to
establish new positions shall first provide the Town Administrator with
a description of duties, skills, knowledge, abilities and other work
performance requirements in sufficient detail, and in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, which may be necessary to properly
classify the position.
Department heads shall promptly notify the Town Administrator
of the need for new positions and allow sufficient time for the
required classification study.
(1)
D.
§ 200-6 ADAMS CODE § 200-6
200:196
Upon completion of the classification study, the Town Administrator
shall allocate the position(s) to an existing class or, if a suitable
class does not exist, shall establish a new class in the Classification
Plan.
(2)
There shall be no action to fill any new position in the Town until it
has been approved and budgeted for by the Town Administrator.
(3)
Allocation of new positions to pay plan. The Town Administrator, with
the recommendation of department heads, shall assign all newly
established positions to the appropriate job class and compensation
grade on the Compensation Plan, with regard to the internal
relationship these classes have to one another in accordance with that
plan.
E.
Allocation reviews. Any employee or department head having facts
which would indicate a position has been allocated to an improper class
may request a review of the allocation by the Town Administrator. The
decision of the Town Administrator in the allocation of positions to the
various classes shall be final.
F.
Reclassification of positions. Positions may not be reclassified without
position review conducted by the Town Administrator in conjunction
with the department head.
Established positions may be reclassified from one class to a
different class when:
There have been significant changes in the actual duties and
responsibilities through a natural redistribution of the work
load;
(a)
The changes in duties and responsibilities are of a permanent
nature; or
(b)
The reclassification is based upon new or added elements in
the job and not on the performance of the individual.
(c)
(1)
Reclassifications shall not be effected when:
The added duties and responsibilities are minor in nature and
would be a logical function of the class;
(a)
The added duties and responsibilities are to be performed for
a period of six months or less;
(b)
The only change involved is an increase in the employee's work
load; or
(c)
(d) The primary purpose is to raise the employee's salary.
(2)
Reclassifications shall only be accomplished after review by the
Town Administrator and department head.
(3)
G.
§ 200-6 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-6
200:197
An employee whose position is reclassified to a higher-level
position may be promoted into the position provided that the
employee meets the minimum qualifications of the position.
(4)
Reclassification of a position shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure.
(5)
Classification Plan. [Amended 9-20-1995; 11-24-1998]
Hourly Rate Personnel - Nonexempt FLSA Grade
Animal Control Officer 4
Administrative/Financial Assistant I 5
Administrative/Financial Assistant II 6
Administrative Assistant III 7
Assistant Building Inspector 11
Dispatcher 5
Library Aide 2
Library Cataloger 4
Reserve Patrolman 7
Social Day Care Assistant 5
Social Day Care Director 6
Van Driver - Council on Aging 5
Salaried Rate Personnel - Nonexempt FLSA Grade
Assistant Library Director 7
Children's Librarian 5
Custodian 4
Rehab Program Manager 9
Rehab Specialist 7
Social Day Care Assistant 5
Social Day Care Director 6
Salaried Rate Personnel - Exempt FLSA Grade
Director, Community Development 14
Director, Council on Aging 8
Director, Library 10
Director, Public Works 14
Director, Veteran Services 7
Grants Manager 10
Police Chief 15
Town Accountant 12
H.
§ 200-6 ADAMS CODE § 200-6
200:198
§ 200-7. Compensation.
Coverage: All employees.
Salaried Rate Personnel - Exempt FLSA Grade
Town Administrator 16
Town Planner 10
Superintendent, Highway Division 10
Superintendent, Parks and Grounds Division 10
Superintendent, Wastewater Treatment Plant 10
Unclassified -- Compensation as set by Town Meeting
Board of Health Inspector
Forest Warden
Inspector of Gas Piping and Appliances
Inspector of Plumbing
Inspector of Wires
Registrar of Voters - Chairman
Registrar of Voters - Member
Registrar of Voters - Clerk
Sealer of Weights and Measures
Town Counsel
Election Workers
Laborer - DPW - Seasonal
Establishment of Compensation Plan. The Town Administrator shall
annually establish a Compensation Plan for the existing Classification
Plan. The Compensation Plan shall be directly related to the
Classification Plan with appropriate consideration being given to:
The relative difficulties and responsibilities existing between
various classes of work;
(1)
Compensation rates for comparable types of work found in public
and, if appropriate, private industry;
(2)
(3) Availability of qualified candidates for recruitment to the Town;
(4) Prevailing economic conditions is the labor market;
(5) Fiscal policies of the Town; and
(6) Ratified labor agreements.
A.
Content of the Compensation Plan. The Compensation Plan shall consist
of:
B.
§ 200-6 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-7
200:199
The compensation grades, a vertical grouping of position classes
for compensation purposes, based not only on responsibility and
difficulty but on the relative worth of the work as determined by
consideration of all the factors bearing upon the proper payment
and compensation for such services; and
(1)
The compensation range, from the lowest to the highest rate of
compensation for each grade.
(2)
Administration of Compensation Plan.
All employees shall be employed and paid in accordance with the
rates established in the Compensation Plan for the position
classification to which the appointment is made.
(1)
The Town Administrator shall have the responsibility for day-today
administration of the Compensation Plan, including approval
of all hiring rates, merit increases, adjustments, and other payroll
changes in accordance with the provisions of these rules.
(2)
C.
New appointment starting rates. New appointments to positions shall
normally be paid at the minimum or entry rate of the compensation
grade established for the position class. The Town Administrator may,
however, compensate new appointments at a higher rate on the basis
of exceptional qualifications of the appointee or a lack of qualified
applicants available at the minimum rate.
D.
Merit increases.
Within 30 days of implementation of these regulations, the Board
of Selectmen may appoint a committee to investigate an employee
performance review system.
(1)
Progression of an employee along pay increments, or steps, within
the compensation range shall be based on the following:
Upon satisfactory completion of each year of service, a
permanent employee is eligible for the next higher step in the
applicable grade;
(a)
All permanent employees shall be eligible for a merit increase
on the first day of the quarter following their anniversary date
(i.e., January 1, April 1, July 1 or October 1);
(b)
A merit increase shall not cause an employee to be paid more
than the maximum rate of compensation for the range
established for the class; and
(c)
A department head may certify, in writing, to the Town
Administrator, that the employee's service does not merit such
an increase. An employee who does not receive an increase
because of unsatisfactory service may subsequently receive
such increase upon recommendation by the department head
(d)
(2)
E.
§ 200-7 ADAMS CODE § 200-7
200:200
to the Town Administrator. The recommended increase shall
not take effect until the first day of the quarter following
the recommendation and shall become the employee's new
anniversary date for merit increases.
Pay upon classification. When the grade of an existing class of positions
is changed, the rate of compensation of all employees in the affected
class shall be adjusted in the following manner:
Employees whose grade has been reclassified upward shall be
adjusted into the new minimum or, if the current rate of
compensation is above the new minimum, to the rate in the new
range that most closely corresponds to the current rate but no
lower;
(1)
An upward grade adjustment shall not place an employee's salary
above the maximum rate of pay established for the job class;
(2)
When the grade of a job class has been adjusted downward, the
employee shall continue to receive his current rate of
compensation until such time that the maximum rate of
compensation meets or exceeds the current rate of compensation;
(3)
Should the effective date of a grade adjustment coincide with the
date an employee has been approved for a merit increase, the
employee will first be adjusted into the new grade followed by the
awarding of the merit increase; and
(4)
In those instances where the total Compensation Plan has been
revised, implementation and adjustments will be made as
determined by the Town Administrator.
(5)
F.
Special pay adjustments. Should unusual conditions arise which would
justify an increase not provided for elsewhere under these rules, the
Town Administrator is authorized to provide a special increase for an
employee within the Compensation Plan. Any such adjustment shall
not exceed the maximum compensation rate established for the job
classification and must be justified by written statement.
G.
Across-the-board adjustments. Subject to appropriation, the Town
Administrator may, from time to time, declare an across-the-board
adjustment. Such adjustment, when approved by the Board of
Selectmen and the Town Meeting, shall be applied automatically to all
employees.
Should the effective date of an across-the-board adjustment
coincide with the date an employee has been approved for a step
increase, the employee will first be granted the across-the-board
adjustment followed by the awarding of the merit increase.
(1)
Across-the-board adjustments shall not affect the employee's
normal merit increases.
(2)
H.
§ 200-7 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-7
200:201
Pay upon demotion. If an employee is demoted to a lower job
classification he may not be paid more than the maximum rate of the
lower class.
I.
Pay upon promotion.
An employee who receives a promotion shall have his rate of
compensation increased at least to the minimum rate of the class
to which the promotion is made.
(1)
If the employee's rate of compensation before promotion is at or
above the minimum rate of the higher class, the employee shall be
granted an increase rounded up to the nearest step, provided that
the increase does not exceed the maximum rate for the class to
which the promotion is made.
(2)
J.
Pay upon transfer. Any employee who is laterally transferred shall
remain in the same grade and step and shall not be eligible for a
increase upon such transfer.
K.
Temporary assignment outside classification. When an employee is
temporarily assigned via personnel action to a position in a class with
a higher minimum rate of compensation for periods of 30 working days
or more, he shall receive a rate of compensation in accordance with
Subsection G (special pay adjustments) of this section for the duration
of the temporary assignment.
L.
Sunday work. An employee who shall be required to work or to render
service on a Sunday shall be paid the rate of 1 1/2 times his regular rate
of compensation for all hours worked on said Sunday. This provision
shall not apply to the employees of any department engaged in
continuous or shift operations or whose duties or working schedule
regularly requires service to be performed on Sunday.
M.
Overtime pay. Town employees may be called upon and required to
work overtime if, in the opinion of the department head, this is
necessary to meet the demands of the job being performed. Except for
emergency situations, all overtime work must be approved in advance
by the department head. In emergency situations, a statement
describing the nature of the emergency and the reasons why the
employee's services were required shall be attached to the request
for overtime payment and must be approved by the department head.
Employees who repeatedly refuse to work overtime without valid
justification may be subject to disciplinary action.
Employees eligible for overtime pay. All hourly wage employees
are eligible for overtime and shall be paid at 1 1/2 times the
employee's regular rate of compensation for all time worked in
excess of eight hours per day or 40 hours in any one payroll period.
At the discretion of the department head, with notification to the
employee, compensatory time may be given in lieu of overtime
payment, in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
(1)
N.
§ 200-7 ADAMS CODE § 200-7
200:202
Employees ineligible for overtime pay. Executive, administrative
and professional employees shall not be eligible to receive overtime
pay.
(2)
Compensatory time. Employees may substitute, in lieu of overtime pay,
compensatory time, to be calculated in the same manner as overtime
pay. Compensatory time shall be granted in accordance with the Fair
Labor Standards Act.
Requests for compensatory time must be submitted in writing and
must be approved in advance by the department head.
(1)
Approved compensatory time must be used as soon as possible and
in no case later than 90 days from the date the compensatory time
was earned.
(2)
It shall be the responsibility of the department head to maintain
complete compensatory records on all employees and to accurately
record dates and hours of overtime worked and the time
compensatory time is taken. Such information must be attached to
the payroll time sheet of the pay period in which the overtime was
worked and/or compensatory time taken.
(3)
Time sheets shall be signed by each employee as required by the
Town Administrator.
(4)
Department heads and administrators. Department heads and
administrators are expected to work beyond ordinary work
schedules as part of their normal duties. However, compensatory
time may be granted for unusual circumstances, based upon
considerations such as the number of evening or weekend meetings
required, extended periods of out-of-town commitments, or
unusually long days. Compensatory time shall be used as soon as
possible after it is earned. Compensatory time taken in excess of
two hours in one calendar week shall be at the discretion of the
administrator.
(5)
O.
Effective date of payroll changes. The Town uses a work week from
Sunday to Saturday. All Town employees will receive paychecks on
Thursday of each week unless unforeseen complications prohibit
payment (snow, storms, etc.). In this instance, paychecks will be issued
to employees at the earliest possible date. If a holiday should fall on
Thursday, employees will receive paychecks on Wednesday.
P.
Payroll deductions. The Town agrees to deduct items authorized under
MGL c. 180, §§ 17A and 17B, as amended, from time to time and other
items (i.e., union dues and annuities) subject to the approval of the
Town Administrator. An employee who wishes any such deduction to
be made shall submit written authorization directing the Town to make
such deduction and containing all other necessary information.
Q.
§ 200-7 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-7
200:203
§ 200-8. Promotions, transfers and demotions.
Coverage: All employees.
Pay upon termination. Employees terminating from Town employment
will normally receive their final paycheck on the next regularly
scheduled payday following the date of termination. Final paychecks
shall include any unused leave which may be due to employee as is
provided for elsewhere in these regulations.
Final pay shall be withheld until all Town property issued to the
employee has been returned or accounted for to the satisfaction
of the Town Administrator. Money or Town property due the Town
because of shortages shall be collected through appropriate action.
(1)
In the event of the death of an employee, all wages, including any
unused leave benefits and travel expenses to which the employee
is entitled, shall be paid in accordance with law.
(2)
R.
Budget limitations. All actions concerned with the payment of salaries,
wages and/or benefits in accordance with these rules shall be subject
to adequate funds being available or any limitations as may be imposed
by the Town or Town Administrator with majority approval of the Board
of Selectmen.
S.
Promotions.
Definition. A promotion occurs when an employee is moved from a
position in one class to another position in a different class which
has a higher maximum salary.
(1)
General policy. The Town encourages employees to develop skills,
attain greater knowledge of their work and make known their
qualifications for promotion to more responsible and difficult
positions. No supervisors shall deny an employee permission to
apply for a promotion opportunity in any Town office or
department.
Whenever practical, vacancies in higher positions in the Town
shall be filled internally. Promotions shall be made in
accordance with merit principles, giving appropriate
consideration to the candidate's experience, training,
performance and length of service. Greater weight shall be
placed on performance rather than length of service.
Competitive, job-related examinations may be given prior to
promotions.
(a)
No person shall be recommended for promotion on the basis
of personal friendships or political affiliations, and selection
shall be made from the best qualified candidates, without
discrimination.
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 200-7 ADAMS CODE § 200-8
200:204
Promotional trial period. A promoted employee shall serve a
promotional trial period for up to 90 days from the date of
promotion. The department head is responsible for completing an
evaluation of the promoted employee for such period to assure
that the employee can satisfactorily perform the duties of the new
position.
The promotional trial period may be extended for a period
of up to 90 additional days upon the mutual agreement of
the Town Administrator and supervisor. The employee shall be
advised of any such extension within five days.
(a)
In the event the department head neglects to complete an
evaluation of the promoted employee within the specified trial
period, the employee's performance will be assumed to have
been satisfactory and the employee's promotion to the position
officially confirmed.
(b)
If, during a promotional trial period or any extension thereof,
an employee is, in the opinion of the department head or
appropriate supervisor, found to be unqualified or incompetent
in performing the essential functions of the new position, the
employee shall be returned to his former position, without
appeal, provided a vacancy exists. If the former position is
no longer available, every effort will be made to place the
employee in a comparable position. However, if a vacancy in
the same or a comparable position does not exist, the employee
will be returned to his former position and the provisions of
§ 200-31, Layoff procedure, shall apply.
(c)
(3)
Nongrievance matter. Promotion of employees to positions outside
the bargaining unit or organizational unit shall be within the sole
discretion of management and shall not be the subject of grievance
or appeal.
(4)
Compensation. In the event that an employee is assigned or
promoted to the next higher grade, he shall receive the entrance
rate of the new position or one step above his present rate,
whichever is the greater.
(5)
Transfers.
Definition. A transfer occurs when an employee is moved into
another position in the same job classification or to another job
classification with the same grade.
(1)
Voluntary transfers.
An employee may initiate a request for a transfer to a different
department through his department head or other appropriate
supervisor. The Town Administrator shall have the final
authority regarding requests for transfers.
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 200-8 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-8
200:205
§ 200-9. Vacation.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
An employee shall in no way be penalized for submitting a
request for transfer as it is the practice of the Town to allow
transfers when in the best interests of the Town and the
employee and thus encourage employees to enhance their
personal development and add to their overall contribution to
the Town's service.
(b)
Involuntary transfers. The Town Administrator, with the Board of
Selectmen's approval and for the good of the Town, may transfer
an employee to a different work location or department under his
jurisdiction.
(3)
Nongrievance matter. Denials of requests for transfers and
involuntary transfers shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure.
(4)
A transfer shall not change an employee's grade, rate of
compensation or permanent status with the Town.
(5)
Demotions.
Definition. A demotion occurs when an employee is moved from a
position in one class to another position in a different class which
has a lower maximum rate of compensation.
(1)
General policy. The Town Administrator may demote an employee
for any of the following reasons:
Inability of an employee to perform satisfactorily the required
duties and responsibilities/essential functions of the position
after promotion to a higher position;
(a)
(b) In lieu of layoff during a reduction in force;
Upon job evaluation which determines that the employee is
performing at a lower level of duties and responsibilities than
called for in the classification descriptions;
(c)
(d) When the employee voluntarily requests such a demotion; or
Inability of an employee to perform the duties/essential
functions of the current position for health reasons, the loss of
a job requirement, or other reasons.
(e)
(2)
C.
Length of vacation. No vacation shall be used until the completion of
180 days of continuous service.
Full-time permanent employees. Vacations shall be granted as
indicated in the following table:
(1)
A.
§ 200-8 ADAMS CODE § 200-9
200:206
Less than 1 year 5/6 day
1 year but less than 5 10 days
5 years but less than 10 15 days
10 years but less than 15 20 days
15 years but less than 20 22 days
20 or more years 25 days
Full-time permanent employees hired after June 30, 1997.
Vacations shall be granted as indicated in the following: [Amended
6-30-1997]
For the first year of employment: one day for each thirtyday
period worked, to a maximum of 10 working days, to be
credited on January 1.
(a)
(b) Two years but less than seven: 10 days.
(c) Seven years but less than 13: 15 days.
(d) Thirteen or more years: 20 days.
(2)
Part-time permanent employees. For part-time permanent
employees, one day of vacation as used in the above table shall
mean the number of hours actually worked during the previous
year divided by the number of workdays in the previous year or
the number of hours scheduled to work during the previous year
divided by the number of workdays in the previous year, whichever
is greater. [Amended 11-24-1998]
(3)
Additional vacation. For the purposes of recruiting experienced
staff, the Town Administrator may authorize an additional five days
for a new employee who has a minimum of four years' related
experience.
(4)
Crediting of vacation days. Vacation days will be credited as of
January 1 of each year. [Added 11-24-1998]
(5)
Scheduling.
Vacation must be taken in the calendar year in which it was earned,
except that with the advance approval of the Town Administrator,
upon request by the department head, vacation may be carried
over into the following calendar year for unusual or valid reasons
provided that it does not extend beyond the fiscal year.
(1)
Vacation shall be scheduled with the prior approval of the
department head. Normally vacations shall be scheduled in oneweek
blocks, but no vacation will be scheduled in blocks of time
less than one hour.
(2)
B.
§ 200-9 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-9
200:207
§ 200-10. Sick leave.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
Employees entitled to more than two weeks' vacation may
generally take only two weeks consecutively. However, with the
approval of the department head, exceptions may be made to allow
longer periods of time.
(3)
Vacation pay advance. An employee who schedules vacation of at least
one week may receive advance pay for such vacation, provided that
the employee has requested, in writing to the Town Accountant's office,
such pay at least 14 days prior to the commencement of said vacation.
C.
Notice to employees. Within 10 days of the end of each month, the
Town shall issue a statement of vacation earned and taken during the
preceding month.
D.
Termination. Whenever employment is terminated by dismissal through
no fault or delinquency on the part of the employee, or by resignation
with reasonable notice (two weeks), retirement or death, without the
employee having been granted entitled vacation, the employee or, in
the case of death, the estate of the deceased employee shall be paid at
the regular rate of compensation at the time of termination an amount
equal to vacation pay earned but not paid to the employee at the time
of his termination.
E.
F Sickness while on vacation. An employee who becomes ill while on
vacation may not charge such illness to sick leave unless the employee
has a physician's certificate describing the nature of the illness and
submits it to his department head for approval within five days of
returning to work.
F.
General policy.
Permanent full-time employees shall earn 1 1/4 days of sick leave
with pay for each calendar month of service, not to exceed 15 days
per calendar year.
(1)
For part-time permanent employees, one day of sick leave shall
mean the number of hours actually worked during the previous
year divided by the number of workdays in the previous year or
the number of hours scheduled to work during the previous year
divided by the number of workdays in the previous year, whichever
is greater. [Amended 11-24-1998]
(2)
For those persons employed prior to the 16th of the month, sick
leave shall accrue from the first of the month. For those persons
employed on or after the 16th of the month, sick leave shall accrue
from the first of the succeeding month.
(3)
A.
§ 200-9 ADAMS CODE § 200-10
200:208
Accruals will be earned as of the last working day of each month
and will be posted accordingly. No accrual will be recorded for a
portion of a month upon termination of employment.
(4)
New employees must satisfactorily complete the probationary
period of service before qualifying for use of sick leave, but sick
leave shall accrue during the probationary period.
(5)
Unused sick leave will accumulate from year to year to a maximum
of 210 days.
(6)
Within 10 days of the end of each month, the Town shall issue
a statement of sick leave earned and taken during the preceding
month.
(7)
Use of sick leave.
Sick leave with pay shall be granted to employees only when they
are incapacitated for the performance of their duties by their
personal sickness, injury, disability, doctor's appointments or a
quarantine by public health authorities, but no sick leave will be
granted in blocks of time less than 1/2 hour.
(1)
At the discretion of the Town Administrator, sick leave with pay
may also be granted for serious incapacitation of the employee's
spouse or serious injury or illness of a member of the employee's
family, including children, parents, brothers or sisters.
(2)
B.
Notification.
Sick leave will commence on the date and time that notification
of the employee's sickness, injury, disability or quarantining is
given to the department head by the employee, his family or his
physician. Notification should be given as soon as possible but in
any case within one hour after the regularly appointed starting
time of the employee in order to entitle the employee to sick leave
credit for that day.
(1)
Notification should include the general nature of the illness, injury
or disability, length of anticipated absence, and expected date of
return.
(2)
C.
Use of vacation leave. At the discretion of the department head, an
employee's absence on account of illness, injury or disability in excess
of accrued sick leave may be charged to vacation leave. This does not
apply to illness, injury or disability for which the employee is entitled to
workers' compensation.
D.
Extended sick leave. Extended sick leave with pay may be granted
by the Town Administrator after all of an employee's sick leave and
vacation leave have been used. Such advance of sick leave will only be
made when there is every expectation of return to active employment
with the opportunity of earning repayment credits.
E.
§ 200-10 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-10
200:209
§ 200-11. Holidays.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
F. Sickness while on vacation leave. See § 200-9F.
Evidence of illness. The department head or Town Administrator may
require medical substantiation from the employee for any sick leave.
If the cause of the sick leave is not substantiated to the satisfaction
of the Town Administrator, such absence will not be paid as sick leave
and absence will be considered unauthorized leave. Any medical
confirmation of this shall be confidential.
G.
Workers' compensation. Employees injured on the job and receiving
workers' compensation shall, upon request, be granted sick leave pay
(provided they have sick leave credits available) in an amount that,
when added to the amount of workers' compensation payment, will
result in payment of their full salary. In this case, the Town
Administrator shall debit the employee's sick leave accrual by such
amounts as he deems equitable.
H.
Retirement. Upon an employee's retirement in accordance with MGL c.
32, the employee shall be paid, lump sum, for accumulated sick leave
up to 60 days or 50% of his total accumulated sick leave, whichever
is greater. The rate of compensation is the prevailing base rate of
compensation at the time of retirement. If termination is caused by
death, accumulated sick leave up to 60 days shall be paid in a lump sum
to the employee's spouse or, if there is none, his heirs. For employees
hired after June 30, 1997, the employee shall be paid for accumulated
sick leave up to 30 days or 25% of his total accumulated sick leave,
whichever is greater. [Amended 6-30-1997]
I.
Attendance incentive.
As an incentive to minimize the impact of sick leave usage, an
employee may exchange unused sick leave earned during the
calendar year in accordance with the following schedule:
If no sick time is used during a given quarter, one day may be
exchanged at the rate of $30 per day.
(a)
If four days have been exchanged in a given calendar year, the
employee is entitled to exchange one additional day at the rate
of $60 per day.
(b)
(1)
An employee must elect to participate by notifying the Town, in
writing, at the beginning of the calendar year. Payment will be
made by the 30th of the month following the end of each quarter.
(2)
J.
Recognized holidays. The following holidays shall be recognized by
the Town on the day on which they are legally observed by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and on these days employees shall
A.
§ 200-10 ADAMS CODE § 200-11
200:210
§ 200-12. Maternity leave.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
be excused from all duty except in cases where the department head
determines that the employee is required to maintain essential Town
services:
New Year's Day
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Washington's Birthday
Patriots Day
Memorial Day
July 4
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Compensation for holidays.
For each holiday, full-time and part-time permanent employees
shall be compensated at a rate of the number of hours scheduled
to work on which the holiday lands times their base rate of
compensation.
(1)
Payment shall be withheld by the department head if the eligible
employee did not work his last regularly scheduled working day
prior to such holiday or his next regularly scheduled working day
following such holiday, unless such days were previously approved
absence days in accordance with other provisions of these rules
and regulations.
(2)
B.
Work on a holiday. An employee who is required to work on a holiday
shall receive, in addition to the regular holiday pay, an amount equal to
1 1/2 times his regular rate of compensation for all hours worked.
C.
Vacation or sick leave on a holiday. Any employee on approved vacation
or sick leave shall not be charged for leave time.
D.
General policy. [Amended 11-24-1998]
Maternity leave without pay shall be granted to an employee for
a period not to exceed eight weeks (or, if qualified under FMLA,
12 weeks) for the purpose of giving birth to a child or adoption
of a child under 18 years of age. The employee shall notify the
appointing authority at least two weeks prior to the anticipated
(1)
A.
§ 200-11 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-12
200:211
§ 200-13. Jury duty.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
§ 200-14. Leave of absence.
Coverage: All employees.
date of departure and of the intention to return. The employee shall
be restored to the same or similar position with the same status,
pay and seniority as of the date of the leave.
Maternity leave shall be granted in accordance with MGL c. 149,
§ 105D, c. 151B, § 4, and the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act
of 1993.
(2)
General policy. All employees will be granted leave to fulfill required
jury duty. Permanent full-time and part-time employees shall be paid
their regular rate of compensation, less the jury fees (exclusive of travel
allowances) received, during the period required for the jury service.
It is the employee's responsibility to present to his supervisors written
evidence of the fees received for jury duty. As a condition to receiving
payment from the Town, an employee must report to work if during
such duty he is discharged for the day or major portion thereof during
regular work hours.
A.
Jury duty on a holiday. A holiday occurring during jury duty shall
not entitle an employee to an additional day of leave or additional
compensation for the holiday.
B.
Retention of jury fees. Employees may retain any jury fees received
for jury duty on nonscheduled workdays (i.e., Saturdays, Sundays or
holidays).
C.
General policy.
The Town Administrator may grant leaves of absence without pay
to all employees who have satisfactorily completed their
probationary period. In reviewing requests for leave, consideration
shall be given to:
(a) The nature of the reason;
(b) The employee's work record; and
(c) The impact on operation of the Town.
(1)
Leave will not be granted if there is any indication that the
employee plans to seek or accept work elsewhere during the time
of leave. The leave will be immediately canceled if the employee
accepts other work.
(2)
A.
§ 200-12 ADAMS CODE § 200-14
200:212
Procedure for requesting and approving. All requests for leave must be
in writing. Requests for leaves of two or less weeks may be approved
by the department head, with the exception of medical leaves, which
must be approved by the Town Administrator. Leaves for longer than
two weeks must be approved by the Town Administrator.
B.
Medical illness.
An employee unable to work due to sickness or injury shall be
covered in accordance with the sick leave policy. Once an employee
has exhausted all accrued and advanced sick leave and vacation
time, he may request a medical leave of absence.
(1)
During a medical leave of absence it shall be the responsibility
of the department head to be satisfied that a disabling condition
does in fact prevent the employee from discharging regular duties
consistent with the sick leave policy.
(2)
C.
Status upon return to work.
The period of absence, if less than 30 days, shall be included in an
employee's time of continuous service. An employee's anniversary
date will be adjusted if a leave of absence exceeds 30 days or if two
or more leaves of absence in one calendar year total 30 or more
days.
(1)
The rate of compensation for an employee returning from a leave
of absence shall be the rate of compensation which the employee
was receiving immediately prior to the leave, if the employee is
returning to the same position.
(2)
D.
Sick leave/vacation. Benefits will not accrue during the period of the
leave.
E.
Health or life insurance. The Town will not make any payments towards
an employee's health or life insurance plans for the period of the
leave in excess of 30 days. Employees have the option, however, of
maintaining their coverage after the thirty-day period by paying the full
premium cost. The Treasurer's office must be notified by the employee
if coverage is desired, so that the premium cost can be billed directly to
the employee for the period of the leave.
F.
Pension.
In accordance with the Adams Retirement Board rules and
regulations, contributions to the pension system cannot be made by
an employee for the period of the leave. Employees on a leave for
up to 30 days per calendar year will receive full creditable service.
Cumulative leave in excess of 30 days will result in the reduction of
creditable service by like amount.
(1)
G.
§ 200-14 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-14
200:213
§ 200-15. Absence without leave.
Coverage: All employees.
§ 200-16. Military leave.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
§ 200-17. Bereavement leave.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
In accordance with the Adams Retirement System's rules and
regulations, an employee on an approved leave cannot withdraw
moneys from the pension system.
(2)
General policy. An employee who is absent from duty shall report the
reason as soon as possible and in no case later that 12:00 noon on the
first day of such absence. All unauthorized and unreported absences
shall be considered absence without leave, and deduction of pay shall
be made for the period of such absence. Such absence may serve as
the grounds for disciplinary action and/or may be considered to be
abandonment of position.
A.
General policy. An employee shall be entitled to a leave of absence
during the time of compulsory service in the armed forces of the
commonwealth or during his annual tour of duty of not exceeding 17
days as a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of
the United States and shall receive his regular compensation as an
employee for the period of the leave.
A.
Notification. Each employee is responsible for notifying his department
head of the date he is leaving for military service and provide written
proof from military or selective service officials to the Town
Administrator indicating date of departure and length of service
required.
B.
Effect on and use of benefits.
Sick and vacation leave will continue to accrue during the period of
military leave.
(1)
The period of military leave shall be included in the employee's
time of continuous service.
(2)
If military duty exceeds 17 days, an employee may credit all or part
of his vacation entitlement to the period of military leave.
(3)
C.
General policy. Upon the request of an employee upon the death of such
employee's spouse, the Town Administrator shall grant bereavement
leave with pay for up to two weeks immediately following such death.
A.
§ 200-14 ADAMS CODE § 200-17
200:214
§ 200-18. Personal days.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
§ 200-19. Health, life and accidental death group insurance.
Coverage: All permanent employees who work 20 hours or more per week.
The department head, upon request of an employee, shall grant
up to three consecutive days of bereavement leave without loss of
pay upon the death of such employee's immediate family, which
shall include parents, parents of spouse, sisters and brothers of
spouse, grandparents, children, brothers and sisters of employee
or any other person who resides with the employee as a member of
the immediate household. The Town Administrator may limit such
leave to less than three days or refuse to grant any such leave if
such employee cannot demonstrate need for as many as three days'
leave.
(1)
The Town Administrator may grant bereavement leave to attend
the funeral service of a close friend or other relative.
(2)
At the discretion of the Town Administrator, bereavement leave
with pay may be extended to a maximum of two weeks.
(3)
General policy. Permanent full-time employees shall be granted one day
for each three months of employment by the Town. Personal days shall
be credited on the first day of each calendar quarter. An employee shall
accrue one personal day each quarter only if said employee has worked
at least 46 days during the preceding quarter (Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays are construed to have been worked for this section). Personal
days must be used in the calendar year in which they are granted.
Personal leave is to be used for personal reasons and cannot be
used to extend vacation or holiday periods except in an emergency.
The employee's department head must be given at least 48 hours
prior to the requested personal leave day or at the discretion of the
department head.
(1)
(2) Personal leave shall be charged in one-hour increments.
A.
General policy. The Town shall, pursuant to MGL c. 32B, provide
contributory group health, life and accidental death insurance to any
eligible employee, after a waiting period of 60 days, who works a
regular schedule of 20 hours or more per week. The premium cost of
group insurance is paid on a 75/25 basis by the Town and participating
employees. Participation in the group insurance plan is optional.
A.
Leave of absence. Employees on an approved leave of absence in
excess of 30 days (see leave of absence policy, § 200-14) may continue
coverage, provided that they pay the full (100%) premium cost.
Employees must give proper notice to the Treasurer's office of all
B.
§ 200-17 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-19
200:215
approved leaves of absence so that the full premium cost can be billed
directly to the employee for the period of the leave in excess of 30 days.
Termination. The Town's health insurance policy, in accordance with
the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA), is
discontinued on termination. However, conversion to an individual
health plan or automatic transfer to another group plan is available.
The Town will notify the health insurance carrier of the termination,
and automatic billing will be made to the terminated employee's home
address.
C.
Survivor coverage. Upon the death of an employee, if there is one
survivor, the person will automatically be transferred to an individual
policy. If there is more than one survivor, coverage will be provided
under a family membership. The Town does not share the cost of this
coverage.
D.
Retirement.
Health insurance. The options of employees that are qualified to
retire are dependent on the age of the employee, his eligibility
under Social Security and the type of insurance plan the employee
has upon retirement. Employees should contact the Chairman of
the Retirement Board six months before retirement or before they
or their spouse reach age 65 for an explanation of the employee's
health insurance options. [Amended 3-29-2000]
(1)
Life insurance. Upon the employee's retirement, the accidental
death and dismemberment insurance is discontinued.
(2)
E.
Change in membership status.
An eligible employee or retiree who is covered under a family plan
may change to an individual and/or OME plan anytime during the
year.
(1)
An eligible employee who is covered under an individual plan may
change to a family plan anytime during the year only if there is a
change in the number of his dependents. If there is no change in
the number of dependents, he may change only during the open
period of enrollment.
(2)
An eligible employee or retiree who is covered may change to a
different carrier only during the open period of enrollment. This is
normally held during the month of May each year.
(3)
An eligible employee who is not currently covered may elect to
be covered by an individual plan at any time during the year. If
the employee desires to be covered by a family plan, the employee
shall pay the entire cost difference between the family plan and
the individual plan until the employee is eligible to convert under
Subsection F(2) above.
(4)
F.
§ 200-19 ADAMS CODE § 200-19
200:216
§ 200-20. Employment-related accident benefit (workers'
compensation).
Coverage: All employees.
A retiree must be using Town health insurance benefits at the
time of retirement to elect to be covered under any circumstances.
[Amended 11-24-1998]
(5)
A retiree who was using Town health insurance benefits at the
time of retirement may elect to be covered under that same or
lesser type of plan, but only during the open period of enrollment.
[Amended 11-24-1998]
(6)
General policy.
All Town employees have a right to an equitable and timely review
of employment-related injuries or illness and determination of
benefits available under workers' compensation. Benefit levels
shall be consistent with the provision of MGL c. 41 and 152
(including § 69).
(1)
Any accident which occurs on the job must be reported
immediately to the immediate supervisor or other appropriate level
employee. All accidents will be investigated to determine cause so
that contributing factors can be corrected.
(2)
A.
Reporting accidents. It is the responsibility of each employee to report
all work-related accidents immediately to the supervisor or other
appropriate level person, regardless of how insignificant the injury may
seem. If an employee is injured seriously, the immediate supervisor
is to be contacted immediately to ensure proper medical attention is
provided and the necessary reports are filed.
A “First Report of Injury” and “Supervisor's Accident Report” must
be completed and signed by the department head or designee for
each accident. The original and two copies of the “First Report
of Injury” are to be sent to the Town Administrator's office as
soon as possible to comply with the requirement that the Industrial
Accident Board be notified within five days. A “Supervisor's
Accident Report” must be sent within a week of the accident.
(1)
If medical attention is needed, the department head is to release
the employee immediately from work to attend either his physician
or an appropriate medical provider, depending upon the extent of
injury and circumstance.
(2)
The department head is responsible for investigating each
accident, identifying the specific cause of the accident and taking
necessary corrective actions.
(3)
B.
§ 200-19 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-20
200:217
Benefits; workers' compensation. Workers' compensation benefits,
consistent with the provisions of the MGL c. 152 (including § 69), shall
be provided all employees.
At the department head's discretion and subject to the availability
of light work, employees will be assigned suitable modified duty as
long as they are unable to perform regular job duties due to injuries
or illness.
(1)
The Town Administrator's office shall file all accident reports with
the insurance carrier. The insurance carrier is responsible for
determining if an accident is employment related.
(2)
Employees should not pay for any medical services or prescriptions
while determination as to work relation is pending or after a
determination that an accident is work related has been made. All
bills should be turned over to the supervisor or should be billed
directly to the Town. Bills will be reviewed by the insurance carrier
for applicability to the accident and level of charge.
(3)
Employees unable to work for five or more days will receive
disability payments. If the employee has available sick time, it may
be used to supplement disability payments up to the employee's
normal salary.
(4)
For reporting purposes, time lost from work shall be charged to
sick leave until the employee has lost five days, at which time all
time lost to disability, including the first five days, shall be charged
to disability time. If the employee is out less than five days, the total
time lost is charged to sick leave.
(5)
Employees out for more than five days will receive, in addition to
their regular compensation (if sick leave time is available), checks
from the insurance carrier for the portion of their salary covered
by workers' compensation. These checks must be endorsed and
returned to the Town.
(6)
Employees who are in disagreement with any findings by the
insurance carrier should contact their supervisor or the Town
Administrator's office. If the employee is still dissatisfied with the
response, under the provisions of MGL c. 152, an appeal may be
made to the Industrial Accident Board.
(7)
C.
Medical reports. It is the responsibility of the department head to
obtain regular reports which include the extent of disability, expected
duration of disability and other information that may be required. In
cases involving absence of two weeks or longer, up-to-date information
from the attending physician may be required at least twice a month.
It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that medical
reports are provided as requested by the department head or Town
Administrator.
(1)
D.
§ 200-20 ADAMS CODE § 200-20
200:218
§ 200-21. Travel allowances and vehicle use. [Amended 5-24-2000]
Coverage: All employees.
At the discretion of the department head, with the concurrence
of the Town, examination by an independent physician appointed
by the Town Administrator may be required. The expense of such
examination would be borne by the Town.
(2)
Any employee out more than two weeks must have a certificate
from the attending physician before returning to work.
(3)
Use of Town vehicles. Employees shall not utilize Town-owned vehicles
for personal reasons (commuting, shopping, etc.) except for incidental
uses (stopping for lunch, etc.).
A.
Use of personal vehicles. All employees required to use a personal
vehicle in the course of Town business will be compensated at a rate
of $0.26 per mile in addition to any tolls or parking fees as required.
At the discretion of the Town, a monthly allowance may be paid in lieu
of actual mileage. When using automated toll systems, employees may
submit a traveling expense voucher without receipts.
B.
Reimbursement for meals:
Employees will be reimbursed for the actual cost of meals plus tax
and gratuity with the following limits:
(a) Breakfast: up to $5.
(b) Mid-day meal: up to $10.
(c) Evening meal: up to $17.50.
(d) Total average daily reimbursement: not to exceed $30.
(1)
Employees will only be required to submit receipts for each meal
in excess of $10. If any employee is required to remain out of Town
overnight, the daily rate will apply. Meals served in conjunction
with scheduled meetings may exceed above limits but require
receipt and meeting notice, with stated meal prices. Meals will only
be reimbursed if the employee is out of Town during the normal
meal period.
(2)
C.
Reimbursement for lodging.
Employees will be reimbursed for lodging only if the meeting site
is over 65 miles from Town, using the official mileage chart, and
if the meeting and total travel time will exceed 10 hours. Number
of overnight stays will not exceed the number of scheduled days of
the meeting.
(1)
Employees will be required to submit receipts for all lodging.
Employees must receive prior permission from their department
(2)
D.
§ 200-20 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-21
200:219
§ 200-22. Credit union.
Coverage: All employees.
heads and/or the Town Administrator for an exception to the
mileage, travel time, and number of nights restriction. If a double
room is occupied, the employee will only be reimbursed for 1/2 of
the double room rate if the room is shared with another attendee
or the single room rate if not shared.
Advance payment.
An employee may receive up to 70% advance payment of lodging
and daily meal allowance if the employee is scheduled to be out of
Town for five days or more. Requests for advance payment must be
made, in writing, to the Town Accountant at least 10 days prior to
the start of the business trip.
(1)
In order to receive advance payment, employees must have written
confirmation of lodging. All employees must submit required
receipts within 10 days of returning to Town.
(2)
E.
Definitions. The term “employee,” as used in this section, shall mean all
employees; appointed officials; elected officials; board, committee, and
commission members; and other persons acting on behalf of the Town
of Adams.
F.
Reimbursement for missed employment.
If, in the course of official Town business, a nonemployee of the
Town is required to be away from his/her normal employment
and loses compensation because of said absence, the Town will
reimburse said person at the following rates:
(a) Four hours or less: $15 per day.
(b) More than four hours: $30 per day.
(1)
The reimbursement must be approved in advance by the respective
board or commission or approved by the Town Administrator if
insufficient time is available for formal board or commission
approval.
(2)
G.
Determination. Questions relating to this policy will be addressed to the
Town Accountant. Final determination of discrepancies will be made by
the Board of Selectmen.
H.
General policy. Any employee may be eligible for membership in the
Adams Municipal Employees Federal Credit Union in accordance with
the current eligibility requirements of the existing program.
Participation in the credit union is optional.
A.
§ 200-21 ADAMS CODE § 200-23
200:220
§ 200-23. Pension.
Coverage: All employees.
§ 200-24. Training.
Coverage: All employees.
General policy.
Any employee may be eligible for membership in the Adams
Contributory Retirement System in accordance with MGL c. 32 and
the rules and regulations as established by the Adams Retirement
Board.
(1)
Employees shall make every effort to inform the Town three months
prior to their expected date of retirement. Any questions
concerning pensions shall be directed to the Adams Retirement
System.
(2)
A.
General policy. It shall be the policy of the Town to foster and promote
programs of training of employees for the purpose of improving the
quality of employees' performance in the service of the Town.
A.
Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the Town Administrator
to:
(1) Establish standards for training programs;
(2) See that training is carried out as approved;
Provide assistance to department heads in developing and
conducting training to meet the specific needs of their departments
and in developing and utilizing other techniques for increasing
employee efficiency;
(3)
Develop supervisory and management training and other types
of training and employee development programs common to all
departments;
(4)
Provide assistance to department heads in establishing potential
for growth and identifying training needs; and
(5)
Keep a record of all approved training courses and programs and
a record of employees who successfully complete such courses and
programs.
(6)
B.
Identifying training needs.
Annually the supervisor and employee should discuss areas of
interest to the employee and areas where training is either
desirable for performance in his present job or would be helpful to
develop additional skills for growth into other positions in the Town
(1)
C.
§ 200-23 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-24
200:221
§ 200-25. Employee tuition refund.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
service. The supervisor should forward a written report of training
needs through the department head to the Town Administrator.
Department heads should, through contact with the Town
Administrator's office and the public community, keep themselves
appraised of training programs that may be of help or interest
both to themselves and to their employees and should nominate
employees for appropriate training courses to the Town
Administrator's office.
(2)
General policy. The Town shall reimburse permanent full- and part-time
employees full tuition costs (including lab fees) up to a maximum of two
college level courses per fiscal year, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
The course must relate to the employee's present job directly or
must be necessary to complete a degree related to the employee's
present job;
(1)
The employee has the approval of his department head and the
Town Administrator before beginning the course;
(2)
The course is taken from a fully accredited institution or trade
school;
(3)
Intended courses of study are unattainable from state or federal
government sponsored programs. Veterans seeking tuition
reimbursement must provide sufficient proof that alternate
financing is not otherwise available. If equivalent training is offered
through state-sponsored training, the employee will be expected to
utilize that opportunity first; and
(4)
The employee receives a passing grade of “C” or 70 or “P” or
better; for graduate level, a passing grade of “B” or better will be
required.
(5)
A.
Reimbursement.
Refunds of tuition payments will be made in the order in which they
are received.
(1)
Within 30 days of completion of the course, the employee shall
furnish the Town Administrator the requisite documentation
showing satisfactory completion of the courses. This evidence shall
be subject to verification prior to reimbursement and shall include
tuition receipt, a certified transcript of grades and any other
documentation as deemed appropriate by the Town Administrator.
(2)
B.
§ 200-24 ADAMS CODE § 200-25
200:222
§ 200-26. Conduct of employees.
Coverage: All employees.
The employee shall disclose any other tuition aid received from
government or other sources prior to receiving reimbursement
from the Town.
(3)
In the event the employee is discharged or resigns from the Town
before completion of the course, a refund shall not be paid.
(4)
In the event the employee is laid off from Town service prior to
completing the course, the Town shall reimburse the employee,
provided that the employee's course work is in progress prior to
the layoff and the course is satisfactorily completed in accordance
with the above requirements.
(5)
Scheduling. Employees are strongly encouraged to take courses that
will not interfere with their job responsibilities or their normal working
hours. The department head or Town Administrator may deny approval
for reimbursement of a course if time off from the employee's regular
working hours would be required.
C.
General policy. Town employees are prohibited from engaging in any
conduct which could reflect unfavorably upon Town service. Town
employees must avoid any action which might result in or create the
impression of using public office for private gain, giving preferential
treatment to any person, or losing complete impartiality in conducting
Town business. Employees are expected to keep in mind they are public
employees and are to conduct themselves accordingly in a manner
which will in no way discredit the Town government, public officials or
fellow employees.
A.
Conflict of interest. No employee shall accept, or agree to accept, either
directly or indirectly, any favor, gift, loan, fee, service or other item of
value, in any form whatsoever, from any organization or individual if
it is intended or gives the appearance of rewarding or influencing the
employee in carrying out his appointed duties.
No employee shall grant, in the discharge of his appointed duties,
any improper favor, service, or item of value to any organization
or individual if it is intended to give or gives the appearance of
rewarding or influencing said organization or individual.
(1)
No Town employee shall transact any business in his official
capacity with any business entity of which he is an officer, director,
agent, or member or in which he owns a controlling interest.
(2)
No Town employee shall have personal investments in any
enterprise which will create a substantial conflict between his
private interest and the public interest.
(3)
B.
§ 200-25 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-26
200:223
This rule is not intended to prevent an employee from accepting an
award or recognition for meritorious or outstanding achievement
for community or government service.
(4)
Final determination of any such conflict or prohibition shall rest
with the Town Administrator.
(5)
Outside employment. Upon proper notification to and at the discretion
of the Town Administrator, an employee may engage in outside
employment. However, no employee may engage in additional
employment which in any manner interferes with the proper and
effective performance of the duties of his position or results in a conflict
of interest or if it is reasonable to anticipate that such employment
may subject the Town to public criticism or embarrassment. If the
Town Administrator determines that such outside employment is
disadvantageous to the Town, upon notification in writing by the Town
Administrator, it shall be terminated.
Preference of Town employment. Any employee who engages in
employment outside of his regular working hours shall be subject
to call to perform his regular Town duties first.
(1)
Injury and illness. The Town shall in no respect be liable for nor
grant sick leave or disability leave in case of injury to an employee
while engaged in outside employment, nor in the case of
occupational illness attributed to the outside employment.
(2)
C.
Privileged information. Many Town employees deal with plans and
programs of significant public interest. Employees shall not use this
privileged information to their own financial advantage or to provide
friends and acquaintances with financial advantages or with
information which could be used for financial advantage. If an employee
finds that he has an outside financial interest which could be affected by
Town plans or activities he shall immediately report the situation to his
superior. Each employee is charged with the responsibility of ensuring
that he releases only information that should be made available to the
general public. Violation of privileged information or use for private
gain can be just cause for discharge of the employee as determined by
the Town Administrator.
D.
Town property. Employees shall not, directly or indirectly, use or allow
the use of Town property of any kind for other than official activities.
An employee who has been provided Town equipment, such as
tools, vehicles, materials, uniforms, etc., is expected to exercise
reasonable care in the use and preservation of such equipment and
to observe all safety precautions while carrying out the assigned
work. Personal use of Town vehicles, materials, supplies, tools or
other Town property is not permitted. Violations may result in
discharge, prosecution, or both, or other disciplinary action.
(1)
E.
§ 200-26 ADAMS CODE § 200-26
200:224
§ 200-27. Safety.
Coverage: All employees.
All operators of Town vehicles and equipment must hold a valid
and appropriate Massachusetts operator's license. Employees are
required to and are subject to a records check prior to employment.
Suspension or revocation of an employee's operator's license may
necessitate the demotion or discharge of an employee assigned to
the operation of Town vehicles or equipment.
(2)
Mail and telephone use. Employees should not use Town telephone
facilities for personal calls when the placing of such calls would
interfere with the employee's duties, would incur additional financial
liability by the Town, or would interfere with the use of the facilities for
official business. Any such use should be urgent, infrequent and of short
duration. When using Town telephones for toll calls, employees shall,
whenever practicable, charge said calls to the called party, their home
telephone number, a calling card or a third party.
Town employees are expected to use their home address to receive
personal mail.
(1)
Use of Town stationery or postage for personal mail is not
permitted.
(2)
F.
General policy.
The Town will provide and maintain safe working conditions and
follow operating practices that will safeguard all employees and
result in safe working conditions and efficient operations.
(1)
The Town shall inform every employee of all materials the
employee may be exposed to as a result of employment with the
Town which are covered under the Massachusetts Right to Know
legislation and the rights of the employee under that act. The Town
shall also inform the employee of his/her rights and responsibilities
under the workers' compensation laws of the commonwealth.
(2)
A.
Safety equipment.
All employees who are furnished safety equipment and/or clothing
by the Town will be required to wear such safety equipment at all
times while doing the work for which the equipment is furnished.
Safety gloves, aprons, hard hats, goggles, face shields, vests, ear
protection, etc., provided by the Town are designed for the
protection of all employees and must be used. There will be no
exceptions.
(1)
Safety equipment furnished by the Town and damaged or worn out
in use will be replaced, provided that the worn-out or damaged
(2)
B.
§ 200-26 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-27
200:225
equipment is turned in when new equipment is issued and also
provided that there is not evidence of abuse.
Duties and responsibilities of supervisors. Each supervisor has the
full authority and total responsibility for maintaining safe working
conditions within his jurisdiction, whether it be in the field, in the shop,
or in the office. Personnel problems and hazards vary from department
to department, and it is expected that all supervisors will work at all
times to control injuries. The safety record of the personnel assigned
to him/her should be considered during the evaluation process for both
the foreman and superintendent.
C.
Duties and responsibilities of supervisor and foreman. Each supervisor
or foreman shall:
Assume full responsibility for safe working areas for his employees
while they are under his jurisdiction;
(1)
Ensure that all management policies herein are fully implemented
for maximum efficiency of each job;
(2)
Take the initiative in recommending correction of deficiencies
noted in facilitates, work procedures, employee failure to use
safety clothing or equipment, employee job knowledge or attitudes
that adversely affect loss control effort;
(3)
Be firm in the enforcement of work policies by being impartial in
taking disciplinary action against those who fail to conform and by
being prompt in giving recognition to those who perform well. This
will help to ensure impartial, positive enforcement. The following
enforcement of the safety policy and safe work procedures will be
used:
First offense: written warning, to be issued no later than the
next working day the employee is at work. The employee is to
obtain the safety clothing or equipment in question and return
to work.
(a)
Second offense: written warning, to be issued no later than the
next working day the employee is at work. The employee is to
obtain the safety clothing or equipment in question and return
to work after a three-day suspension without pay.
(b)
(c) Third offense: written termination.
(4)
Ensure that each employee is fully trained for the job he is assigned
to do and ensure that he is familiar with published division work
rules and certifies in writing that he understands compliance as
being mandatory;
(5)
Assure the need, availability, and utilization of appropriate
protective clothing and equipment when performing hazardous
operations;
(6)
D.
§ 200-27 ADAMS CODE § 200-27
200:226
§ 200-28. Personnel records.
Coverage: All employees.
Act upon safety suggestions, continuously demonstrate concern
over entire safety program, and set a good example by working
safely himself;
(7)
Observe working conditions and field practices to prevent
development of possible safety hazards;
(8)
Investigate thoroughly the causes of all accidents and close calls
(near accidents) and take appropriate corrective action; and
(9)
Make sure all accidents are promptly reported regardless of the
extent of injury or property damage.
(10)
Duties and responsibilities of employees. Each employee shall:
Observe established safety rules, operating procedures, and safe
work practices in the performance of his work;
(1)
Use personal protective equipment when directed to do so by a
supervisor or foreman;
(2)
Identify and report to appropriate management any unsafe areas or
conditions or other safety problems;
(3)
(4) Be continually aware of the need for safety;
Report all accidents promptly to the supervisor or foreman, no
matter how slight, utilizing the form provided by the Town; and
(5)
Inform the supervisor or foreman of any medical expenses incurred
as a result of injuries.
(6)
E.
General policy. The Town Administrator shall be responsible for
establishing and maintaining such personnel records and reports as
may be required by law and necessary to effectively carry out the
provisions of these rules and regulations. All employees shall comply
with and assist in furnishing records, reports and information as may
be requested by the Town Administrator.
A.
Content of records.
The Town Administrator shall maintain in an employee's personnel
records only information that is relevant to accomplishing
personnel administrative purposes and shall maintain an individual
personnel file for each employee which may include but not be
limited to the following:
(a) The employment application;
(b) A copy of all background investigation reports;
(1)
B.
§ 200-27 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-28
200:227
A report of all personnel actions reflecting each original
appointment, reinstatement, promotion, demotion,
reassignment, transfer, separation, layoff or suspension; and
(c)
Results of all tests and examinations taken to demonstrate
qualifications, history of employment and any correspondence
directly related to the employee's past employment record, a
copy of the employee's military service record, reclassification,
change in the employee's rate of compensation or position
title, leave of absence with pay, leave of absence without pay,
commendations, record of disciplinary action, training records,
performance evaluations, and any other records that may be
pertinent to the employee's employment record.
(d)
All findings from a medical examination are to be treated as
confidential and maintained on separate forms or files
(2)
Changes to records. Department heads should notify employees of
the importance of keeping their personnel records current. The Town
Administrator should be notified immediately in writing of any changes
in an employee's personnel information. Final responsibility for
providing correct information and timely changes rests with the
employee. The Town Administrator or the Town shall not be held liable
when incorrect withholdings, wrong beneficiaries or loss of employee
benefits results from failure of an employee to keep personnel records
current.
C.
Access to records. Any employee, upon request to his department
head, may see any of his personnel records on file with the Town
Administrator's office.
Any employee who knowingly and willfully removes or copies any
portion of a personnel file or permits any person to have access
to confidential information contained in an employee's personnel
file, except as may be authorized by the Town Administrator, will be
subject to disciplinary action.
(1)
Personnel records are not public records and as such are not open
to public inspection.
(2)
D.
Unauthorized alteration. No unauthorized employee may destroy, alter,
deface, mutilate or otherwise dispose of personnel records.
E.
Release of information. Employees may authorize the Town
Administrator to release personal and payroll information to banks,
lending institutions, insurance firms, etc., for the purpose of a home,
automobile, appliance or other purpose. Such authorization shall be
made in writing to the Town Administrator.
F.
Personnel forms. Personnel forms developed by the Town
Administrator's office are to be used to ensure accurate and uniform
maintenance of personnel.
G.
§ 200-28 ADAMS CODE § 200-29
200:228
§ 200-29. Progressive disciplinary process.
Coverage: All employees.
General policy. It is the responsibility of all employees to observe the
regulations necessary for the proper operation of the Town and to
perform the essential functions of the position for which they were
employed. The Town may impose any of the following disciplinary
actions when appropriate: oral reprimand, written reprimand,
suspension, disciplinary probation, or discharge. The severity of the
disciplinary action shall be in accordance with the severity of the
situation. The Town shall also make reasonable accommodations in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
A.
Reasons for disciplinary action. Disciplinary action may be imposed
upon an employee for failure to fulfill his responsibilities as an
employee, including but not limited to any of the following:
Incompetence or inefficiency in the performance of the essential
functions of an employee's position;
(1)
(2) Inability to perform one or more essential functions of the position;
(3) Fraud in securing appointment;
Insubordination or disobedience in carrying out reasonable
directions given by a proper supervisor;
(4)
Consumption and/or possession of alcoholic beverages while on
duty;
(5)
(6) Use and/or possession of illegal narcotics or drugs while on duty;
(7) Abuse of legal drugs while on duty;
(8) Absence without leave;
(9) Abuse of sick leave;
(10)Conviction of felony;
(11)Misuse or unauthorized use of Town property;
(12)Disclosure of confidential information; or
Reporting for duty while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics
or drugs.
(13)
B.
Oral or written reprimand.
At his discretion, a department head who notes unsatisfactory
job performance, noncompliance with department regulations or
display of improper conduct may issue an oral or written reprimand
and an offer of assistance on the part of the department head
in correcting the unsatisfactory situation. Oral warnings shall be
(1)
C.
§ 200-29 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-29
200:229
§ 200-30. Grievance procedure.
Coverage: All employees.
presented with a maximum regard for minimizing embarrassment
to the employee before other employees or the public.
Oral and written reprimands shall be entered into the employee's
personnel file with the employee's acknowledgment.
(2)
Disciplinary probation.
If the written warning fails to correct the situation, the employee
may serve a maximum 90 days' disciplinary probation at the
discretion of the department head and Town Administrator. The
employee will receive a written notice stating the reasons for the
disciplinary action and effective date of such action.
(1)
When the employee's disciplinary probation expires, the
department head will notify the Town Administrator in writing that:
The employee's performance and behavior were satisfactory
and that he will retain the employee in his position; or
(a)
The employee's performance and behavior have remained
unsatisfactory and he recommends either suspending or
discharging the employee.
(b)
(2)
D.
Suspension. At the discretion of the department head and Town
Administrator, an unsatisfactory employee may be suspended without
pay for a period or periods that will not exceed a total of 30 days in
any twelve-month period. Such suspension may be in lieu of disciplinary
probation or at the expiration of the disciplinary probation, depending
upon the situation. The employee will receive a written notice stating
reasons for the suspension period and the effective date. At the end
of the suspension period and a reasonable observation period, the
department head will inform the Town Administrator either of the
employee's improved behavior/performance and his recommended
retention or of the continued unsatisfactory situation and his
recommended discharge of the employee.
E.
Discharge. An employee may be discharged either because he is
unsatisfactory on the job or for violation of Town regulations. The
employee will receive a written notice stating reasons for the discharge
and the effective date.
F.
General policy. All employees, either personally or through a
representative, have a right to have grievances and concerns regarding
their employment heard in a fair, equitable and timely manner. It is
understood that issues not having to do directly and primarily with
day-to-day working life of the employee and relationships with his
supervisor as well as the increase or decrease of general wage rates
A.
§ 200-29 ADAMS CODE § 200-30
200:230
§ 200-31. Layoff procedure.
Coverage: All employees.
or salaries, or any other matter specifically mentioned in these rules as
not being subject to a grievance, shall not be considered the subject of
a grievance. An employee who submits a grievance or concern shall be
entitled to a prompt response which includes an explanation, in writing,
of the reason for the answer. When a grievance or concern is found
justified, the employee can expect that necessary actions will be taken
to resolve the problem. The decision to air a grievance shall not result
in any penalty to the employee regardless of the final decision.
Procedure. All grievances shall be handled in accordance with the
grievance procedure set forth herein. The procedure shall be as follows:
Step 1. Any employee with any questions, concerns, or grievances
about his employment or working conditions should first talk to
his immediate supervisor. The supervisor and employee are
encouraged to work together to resolve the problem at this level.
(1)
Step 2. If the employee is not satisfied with the response during
informal discussions, the employee may present his case, in
writing, to the department head. Within five working days, or such
longer period as the parties agree upon, the department head
shall meet with the employee to discuss the case and provide the
employee with a written decision.
(2)
Step 3. If the employee is still not satisfied, he may within seven
working days submit the grievance, in writing, to the Town
Administrator. The Town Administrator shall render a decision, in
writing, within five working days, or such longer period as the
parties agree upon.
(3)
Step 4. If the employee is still not satisfied, he may within seven
working days submit the grievance, in writing, to the Board of
Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall render a decision within
14 working days. The decision of the Board of Selectmen shall be
final.
(4)
B.
General policy. The Town reserves the right to determine the necessity
of layoffs.
A.
Criteria.
When layoffs are necessary, the Town shall be the exclusive judge
as to which employees as well as when they are to be terminated,
based on, but not limited to, the following criteria:
(a) Prior experience directly or indirectly related to the position;
(b) Education and formal training;
(1)
B.
§ 200-30 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-31
200:231
§ 200-32. Physical fitness program.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
§ 200-33. Smoking. [Amended 4-6-2005]
Coverage: All employees.
(c) Aptitude or familiarity with required duties of the position;
(d) Prior attendance record;
(e) Performance history;
(f) Required licenses and certificates; and
Length of service where the factors in Subsection B(1)(a)
through (f) are, in the exclusive opinion of the Town, equal.
(g)
(2) An employee may not grieve a decision regarding layoffs.
Recall. If a vacancy occurs within a two-year period following the
date an employee was laid off, the Town Administrator shall notify all
employees laid off within that period of the vacancy. If one or more
employees notify the Town Administrator, in writing, that he/they desire
to be employed in that position, the Town shall utilize the above criteria
to determine the qualification of the former employee for the existing
position.
C.
General policy. The Town will provide up to $125 per year towards
each employee's voluntary participation in a year-long planned physical
fitness program to be arranged by the Town. A prerequisite to the
employee's approved participation in said activity will be a physical
examination conducted by the employee's personal physician at the
expense of the employee. Physical examination reports are to be
considered confidential and necessary to the planning of a complete
and proper physical fitness program designed to suit each individual's
fitness needs.
A.
General policy.
The Town is dedicated to providing a healthy, comfortable and
productive work environment for its employees. This goal can be
achieved only through on-going efforts to protect nonsmokers and
to help employees adjust to restrictions on smoking. All employees
who smoke are strongly encouraged to discontinue smoking. The
Town will fund and administer a program to help those employees
voluntarily attempt to discontinue smoking.
(1)
In accordance with Chapter 270, § 22, of the Massachusetts
General Laws, smoking is prohibited throughout all Town facilities.
(2)
A.
§ 200-31 ADAMS CODE § 200-33
200:232
§ 200-34. Drug-free workplace.
Coverage: All employees.
Prohibited areas. It is emphasized that smoking will not be tolerated in
the following areas:
Conference Rooms. There will be no smoking before, during or
after public meetings, whether the meeting is held in a designated
conference room or not. It is noted that if the meeting continues for
an extended period of time, the moderator or chairman will recess
the meeting for a short break.
(1)
(2) Elevators. Smoking is prohibited in all elevators.
(3) Rest rooms. Smoking is prohibited in all rest rooms.
Hazardous areas. Smoking is prohibited in all hazardous areas (i.e.,
storage of flammable materials, boiler rooms, generator rooms,
etc.).
(4)
(5) Hallways. Smoking is prohibited in all hallways.
Common work and public areas of Town buildings. Smoking is
prohibited in all areas of Town buildings.
(6)
Private offices. Smoking is prohibited in all private offices in Town
buildings.
(7)
(8) Vehicles. Smoking is prohibited in all Town vehicles.
Break areas. Smoking is prohibited in all break areas within Town
buildings.
(9)
B.
Enforcement. The success of this policy will depend upon the
thoughtfulness, consideration and cooperation of all Town employees.
All employees share in the responsibility for adhering to and enforcing
this policy. Any questions concerning compliance should be brought to
the attention of the appropriate supervisor and, if necessary, referred
to the Town Administrator for a final decision. The Town will take
appropriate corrective measures or disciplinary action as per these
rules and regulations. In all cases the rights of a nonsmoker to protect
his health will take precedence over another employee's desire to
smoke.
C.
General policy. The Town is dedicated to providing a healthy,
comfortable and productive work environment for its employees. This
goal can be achieved only through ongoing efforts to provide a drugfree
workplace. Employees are thus prohibited from manufacturing,
distributing, dispensing, possessing or using illegal drugs or abusing
prescription drugs within the workplace.
A.
§ 200-33 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-34
200:233
§ 200-35. Sick leave bank.
Coverage: All permanent employees.
Notification of conviction. All employees must notify the Town
Administrator within 24 hours of any conviction of drug statutes.
Appropriate personnel action will be taken in accordance with § 200-29
of these rules and regulations.
B.
Enforcement. All employees share in the responsibility for adhering to
and enforcing this policy. Any questions concerning compliance should
be brought to the attention of the appropriate supervisor and, if
necessary, to the Town Administrator for a final decision.
C.
Employee assistance program. An employee assistance program is
available to all employees seeking assistance through: Employee
Support & Training, Inc., 165 Tor Court, P.O. Box 2071, Pittsfield, MA
01202.
D.
General policy. Permanent full- and part-time employees who have
depleted all of their accumulated sick leave benefits due to an extended
illness or injury may be eligible to receive sick leave days (hereinafter
referred to as “benefit days”) from the sick leave bank (hereinafter
referred to as the “bank”) under the terms and conditions of this
section.
A.
Membership. Any permanent full- or part-time employee who earns sick
leave under § 200-10 of these regulations may elect to be a member
of the bank. Employees must make the election in writing to the Town
Accountant's office within 30 days of the adoption of this section or
upon initial employment. Employees who do not choose to become
members during their initial eligibility period may make an election
during the month of January in subsequent years but are prohibited
from applying for benefit days during the first year of membership.
Employees who are members of the bank may elect, during the month
of January, to leave the bank but subsequently forfeit all rights to
receive benefit days as well as the return of contributed sick days
from the bank. Members shall contribute two sick days to the bank
upon initial membership and annually on January 1 thereafter. New
employees shall contribute two sick days upon successful completion
of probation. Membership in the bank shall not affect the employee's
eligibility for sick leave buy back or other sick leave incentive
programs, exclusive of sick days previously donated to the bank.
B.
Benefits. Any member who has exhausted his/her accumulated sick
leave shall be eligible to request up to 10 benefit days from the bank
on account of any one illness or injury upon submitting a written
application therefor to the Town Administrator accompanied by a
statement of the applicant's physician testifying to the illness or injury.
C.
§ 200-34 ADAMS CODE § 200-35
200:234
§ 200-36. Employees with disabilities, medical handicaps or lifethreatening
illnesses such as cancer or AIDS policy. [Added
7-6-1994]
Coverage: All employees.
Benefit days may be granted for any number of days, but in no
event shall the Town Administrator grant more than 10 benefit
days per application. Any addition to the number of benefit days
previously granted shall require a new application.
(1)
In no case will any benefit days be granted until the employee has
been in a nonpay status for five workdays per event. An event shall
mean a different illness or the recurrence of the same illness within
a period of no less than four months apart.
(2)
Unused benefit days from the bank shall be returned to the bank
upon the employee's return to work or termination of employment.
(3)
Applications shall be processed and considered in the order of
receipt. In the event that the approval of one or more applications
for benefit days would result in the depletion of the bank, the Town
Administrator shall assign the benefit days remaining as equitably
as possible among those members whose applications are then
pending.
(4)
Criteria. In determining the granting of benefit days, the following
criteria shall be applied:
(1) Employee's past usage (documentable abuse) of sick leave.
Employee must have been hospitalized as a result of current illness
or injury.
(2)
Employee must be unable to perform his/her normal job, confirmed
by written doctor's statement, for a minimum of three weeks from
the initial onset of the illness or injury.
(3)
Employee must use at least five days of accumulated sick leave for
each separate event.
(4)
D.
General policy (taken from the Berkshire County Chapter American
Red Cross, AIDS Workplace Education Program Policy and Procedure
Guidelines).
We at the Town of Adams understand that most employees with
disabilities, medical handicaps, or life-threatening illnesses such as
cancer or AIDS benefit greatly from the normal routines of daily
life.
(1)
We understand that an employee's sense of self-esteem, worth, and
good health are often enhanced by working at his or her regular
job, despite a diagnosis.
(2)
A.
§ 200-35 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-36
200:235
§ 200-37. Sexual harassment policy. [Added 7-6-1994]
Coverage: All employees.
As long as you, our employee, are able to meet approved standards
and job performance as set down in your job description, and
as long as medical information indicates that your condition or
handicap does not endanger you or other employees, all of our
managers and supervisors will see to it that you are treated fairly
and consistently with and by other employees.
(3)
In light of these issues we still remind all employees, supervisors,
and managers that:
The health status of an employee is a private and confidential
issue. Every reasonable step must be taken to protect the
confidentiality of medical status and medical records.
(a)
Our Town Administrator is the first source for information or
answers to questions employees may have.
(b)
We will make every effort to accommodate our employees
because of the nature of their illness.
(c)
We will not give special consideration to employees who feel
threatened by another employee's condition, other than
through our normal procedures.
(d)
Working provides a therapeutic benefit for many persons
diagnosed with handicaps or life-threatening illnesses.
Continued employment of valued, productive employees helps
the Town as well.
(e)
In some cases we may request a physician's statement that a
specific medical condition does not pose a threat to our work
force. We also reserve the right to ask an employee to be
examined by one of our approved physicians should we deem it
necessary.
(f)
We are an equal opportunity employer. We do not discriminate
against any employee based on his or her handicap or
perceived handicap under law.
(g)
(4)
General policy (taken from “Preventing Sexual Harassment in the
Workplace, a Model Sexual Harassment Policy, Figure 321-A”).
It is Town policy that all employees have a right to work in an
environment free of discrimination, which encompasses freedom
from sexual harassment. The Town strongly disapproves of sexual
harassment of its employees in any form and states that all
employees at all levels must avoid offensive or inappropriate sexual
and/or sexually harassing behavior at work and will be held
(1)
A.
§ 200-36 ADAMS CODE § 200-37
200:236
responsible for ensuring that the workplace is free from sexual
harassment.
Specifically, the Town prohibits the following:
(a) Unwelcome sexual advances.
Requests for sexual favors, whether or not accompanied by
promises or threats with regard to the employment
relationship.
(b)
Other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature made to
any employee that may threaten or insinuate either explicitly
or implicitly that any employee's submission to or rejection
of sexual advances will in any way influence any personnel
decision regarding that person's employment, evaluation,
wages, advancement, assigned duties, shifts or any other
condition of employment or career development.
(c)
Any verbal or physical conduct that has the purpose or effect
of substantially interfering with the employee's ability to do his
or her job.
(d)
Any verbal or physical conduct that has the purpose or effect
of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working
environment.
(e)
(2)
Such conduct may result in disciplinary action up to and including
dismissal.
(3)
Other sexually harassing conduct in the workplace, whether
physical or verbal, committed by supervisors or nonsupervisory
personnel is also prohibited. This behavior includes but is not
limited to commentary about an individual's body, sexually
degrading words to describe an individual, offensive comments,
off-color language or jokes, innuendoes, and sexually suggestive
objects, books, magazines, photographs, cartoons or pictures.
(4)
Employees who have complaints of sexual harassment by anyone
at work, including any supervisors, co-employees, or visitors, are
urged to report such conduct to Town officials so that the Town may
investigate and resolve the problem. Employees may bring such
matters to the direct attention of their supervisor or to the Town
Administrator. If the complaint involves the employee's supervisor
or someone in the direct line of supervision, or if the employee for
some reason is uncomfortable in dealing with his or her immediate
supervisor, the employee may go to another supervisor or directly
to the Town Administrator.
(5)
The Town will endeavor to investigate all complaints as
expeditiously and as professionally as possible. Where
investigation confirms the allegations, appropriate corrective
(6)
§ 200-37 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS § 200-37
200:237
Chapter 201
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 22.
Sewers — See Ch. 93.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 109.
Zoning — See Ch. 125.
action will be taken. The Town will make every attempt to maintain
the information provided to it in the complaint and investigation
process as confidentially as possible.
There will be no retaliation against employees for reporting sexual
harassment or assisting the Town in the investigation of a
complaint. However, if after investigating any complaint of
harassment or unlawful discrimination the Town learns that the
complaint is not bona fide or that an employee has provided false
information regarding the complaint, disciplinary action may be
taken against the individual who provided the false information.
(7)
§ 200-37 ADAMS CODE § 200-37
201:238
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 201-1. Purpose.
The purpose of establishment of subdivision control procedures in Adams
is to secure for the Town all of the benefits and protection authorized by
the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, inclusive.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify and make clear the requirements
and procedures to be followed and the responsibilities to be discharged in
operations under the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 201-2. Authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Bard of the Town of Adams by
MGL c. 40, § 81Q, said Board hereby adopts this chapter governing the
subdivision of land in order to guide its orderly development consistent with
the purposes of the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 201-3. Applicability.
§ 201-4. Definitions.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The level of flooding having a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as designated on
Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) maps, or, in the absence of such
designation, to be based upon the best available information regarding flood
hazards, including floodplain delineations on the Adams Zoning Map or any
other available United States Geological Survey (USGS), Soil Conservation
Service (SCS), or Corps of Engineers studies.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Adams.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that
generated by 50 dwelling units or more or which serves property either
used or zoned for commerce or industry.
LANE — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by 12 or
fewer dwelling units, which has no abutting property either used or zoned
for commerce or industry and which is not capable of extension.
MINOR STREET — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that
generated by fewer than 50 dwelling units, which has no abutting property
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the
Subdivision Control Law of any land within the Town or proceed with
the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction of
ways or the installation of municipal services therein unless and until a
definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved
by the Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
A.
No person shall erect more than one dwelling on a lot except as
provided herein. (§ 201-25).
B.
§ 201-1 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-4
201:239
either used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable of
extension.
SUBDIVISION —
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots and shall include
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdivision of the land or territory subdivided; provided,
however, that the division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall
not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the
Subdivision Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within
the tract so divided has frontage on a public way or a way which the
Clerk of the Town of Adams certifies is maintained and used as a public
way, or a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or a way in existence
on November 12, 1963, having, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide
for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of
the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of
municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be
erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is
then required by Chapter 125, Zoning, of the Town Code for erection of
a building on such lot.
A.
Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or
changing the size and shape of lots in such manner as not to leave
any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division
of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing on
November 12, 1963, into separate lots, on each of which one of such
buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a subdivision.
B.
§ 201-4 ADAMS CODE § 201-4
201:240
ARTICLE II
Plan Procedures
§ 201-5. General requirements.
§ 201-6. Plans which do not require approval.
Only those plans which constitute subdivisions as that term is defined
in § 201-4 require the approval of the Planning Board. However, all
plans, whether subdivisions within the meaning of the law or not, must
have either approval as a subdivision or endorsement that they do
not require approval before they will be accepted for recording at the
Registry of Deeds or registration at the Land Court.
A.
Plans intended for review at any meeting of the Planning Board must
be forwarded to the office of the Town Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m.
two working days prior to the Planning Board meeting. The day of
the next regular Board meeting shall be considered to be the date of
submission for all plans, except that the date of mailing shall be the
date of submission for definitive plans sent by registered mail to the
Planning Board, care of the Town Clerk.
B.
Submission. Any applicant who wishes to record in the Registry of
Deeds or to file with the Land Court a plan of land which is believed not
to require approval under the Subdivision Control Law may apply to the
Planning Board for endorsement that such approval is not required. The
applicant shall submit the plan (plus evidence that a subdivision is not
required), two prints (to be retained by Planning Board) and a complete
Form A (see Appendix) to the Planning Board and shall file, by delivery
or registered mail, a copy of Form A with the Town Clerk. If the Board
determines that the plan does not show a subdivision, it shall endorse
the plan “Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required.”
The Board will return the original of the plan to the applicant notifying
both him and the Town Clerk of its action.
A.
Required information. Such plans shall show all of the following:
Any existing structures on the land shown on the plan and
dimensions of proposed yards.
(1)
Any existing structures on any remaining adjoining land owned by
the applicant and dimensions of yards.
(2)
(3) Remaining frontage of any adjoining land in the same ownership.
Present owner of the land shown on the plan and all abutting
owners.
(4)
Location of any easement or way, public or private, across the land,
with a designation as to the use of the same.
(5)
B.
§ 201-5 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-6
201:241
§ 201-7. Presubmission review.
Prior to investing in extensive professional design efforts for subdivision
plans, it will often prove useful to review the proposed development of a
parcel of land with the Planning Board in order that general approaches,
possible use of cluster development, and potential problems can be freely
explored. Pencil sketches, which need not be professionally prepared, will
assist the discussion and might show some but not all of the information
shown on a preliminary plan. In some cases, this presubmission review may
eliminate need for such a preliminary plan.
§ 201-8. Preliminary plan.
Time limit. If the Board fails to either act upon a plan submitted under
this section or to notify the Town Clerk and the person submitting the
plan of its action within 21 days after its submission, it shall be deemed
to have determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is
not required. The Board must then so endorse the plan, or the Town
Clerk may issue a certificate to the same effect.
C.
Ways in existence. Existing ways will normally be determined by the
Board to provide adequate access to qualify a plan as not constituting a
subdivision only when the layout, design, and construction of such ways
meet the standards of this chapter for ways within a subdivision.
D.
General. A preliminary plan of a subdivision may be submitted by
the applicant to the Planning Board and to the Board of Health for
discussion and approval, modification, or disapproval by each Board.
The submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the subdivider,
the Planning Board, the Board of Health, other municipal agencies, and
owners of property abutting the subdivision to discuss and clarify the
problems of such subdivision before costly engineering drawings for a
definitive plan are prepared. Also, during discussion of the preliminary
plan, the financial responsibilities pertaining to performance
guarantees for the proposed subdivision [see § 201-9E(4)] can be
explained and preliminary calculations worked out. Though the
submission of a preliminary plan is not mandatory, it is strongly
recommended that a preliminary plan be filed in each case except those
where presubmission review had adequately clarified all issues.
A.
Contents. The preliminary plan shall be drawn on tracing paper or cloth
at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, unless the extent of the area being
subdivided and amount of information being conveyed necessitates
some larger scale of up to one inch equals 100 feet.
A preliminary plan shall have contents as defined below:
The subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date, scale,
legend and title “Preliminary Plan”;
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 201-6 ADAMS CODE § 201-8
201:242
The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name
of the designer, engineer or surveyor;
(b)
The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent
local tax list;
(c)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements
and any public areas within the subdivision in a general
manner;
(d)
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, in a general manner;
(e)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with
approximate areas and dimensions;
(f)
The names, approximate locations and widths of adjacent
streets; and
(g)
(h) The topography of the land in a general manner.
In addition, to promote better understanding, it is requested that
the following be submitted:
A drawing at a scale of one inch equals 600 feet showing the
outline of the tract being subdivided, streets in the vicinity
of the subdivision sufficient to locate the subdivision on Town
base maps, and streets and reserved open spaces proposed
within the subdivision.
(a)
In the case of a subdivision covering less than all of the land
owned by the subdivider in the area of the subdivision, a
plan showing in a general manner the proposed overall
development of all of said land.
(b)
Preliminary findings, in a general way, of the environmental
impact analysis if required by § 201-9D.
(c)
(2)
Application procedure. The applicant shall submit to the Planning
Board seven copies of the preliminary plan (applicant retains original),
plus an original completed preliminary plan application and Form B
(see Appendix). The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail
a notice with the Town Clerk of submission to the Planning Board of
application for preliminary plan approval, accompanied by a copy of
the completed Form B. The Planning Board shall distribute copies of
the preliminary plan to the Director of Public Works, the Adams Fire
District Chief, the Adams Sewer Commission, the Zoning Agent, the
Conservation Commission and the Board of Selectmen. The applicant
shall submit a copy of the plan to the Board of Health for its comments
and suggestions.
C.
Approval or disapproval of preliminary plan. Within 45 days after
submission of a preliminary plan, the Planning Board shall approve
D.
§ 201-8 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-8
201:243
§ 201-9. Definitive plan.
such plan with or without modifications suggested by it or agreed upon
by the person submitting the plan, or the Board shall disapprove such
preliminary plan and, in the case of disapproval, shall state its reasons
therefor.
Relation of preliminary plan to definitive plan and zoning provisions.
Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of a
subdivision, and a preliminary plan may not be recorded in the Registry
of Deeds. Provided that a definitive plan is duly submitted within seven
months from the date of submission of the preliminary plan, the
subdivision rules and regulations in effect at the time of submission
of the preliminary plan shall govern the definitive plan, and if the
definitive plan is ultimately approved, the zoning provisions in effect
at the time of submission of the preliminary plan shall govern the land
shown for five years from the date of endorsement of the subdivision
plan (MGL c. 40A, § 6).
E.
Application procedure.
Any person who desires approval of a definitive plan of a
subdivision shall:
Submit to the Planning Board the following:
Eight contact prints of the definitive plan, dark line on
white background. (See Subsection B of this section for
definitive plan contents.) The original definitive plan
drawing will only be needed if and when actual signing of
the plan takes place.
[1]
A drawing at a scale of one inch equals 600 feet showing
the outline of the tract being subdivided, streets in the
vicinity of the subdivision sufficient to locate the
subdivision on Town base maps, and streets and reserved
open spaces proposed within the subdivision.
[2]
Three prints of street plans and profiles of every proposed
street and three prints of street cross sections. (See
Subsection C of this section for street plan, profile and
cross section contents.)
[3]
An environmental analysis, if required by the Planning
Board for a proposed subdivision which would create
frontage potentially allowing 30 or more lots. (See
Subsection D of this section for contents of environmental
analysis.)
[4]
Two copies of properly executed application Form C (see
Appendix).
[5]
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 201-8 ADAMS CODE § 201-9
201:244
Evidence of the applicant's title to the proposed
subdivision site.
[6]
If requested by the Board, drainage calculations, traverse
notes, language of any easements, covenants or
restrictions applying to or proposed for the area being
subdivided, rights and easements obtained for utilities or
drainage outside of the subdivision, and description of
erosion controls to be used.
[7]
File with the Town Clerk by delivery or registered mail a notice
of submission to the Planning Board of the definitive plan, plus
a copy of the completed application Form C.
(b)
(c) File with the Board of Health a copy of the definitive plan.
If necessary in order to determine compliance with the
requirements or intent of this chapter, the Board may require
further engineering or environmental analyses to be prepared at
the expense of the applicant, employing professionals approved by
the Board.
(2)
All expenses for advertising, engineering, professional planning
review, inspection plans, construction, recording, and filing of
documents and all other expenses in connection with a subdivision
shall be borne by the applicant (developer) and said bills paid
before final security is released.
(3)
Definitive plan contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a
registered civil engineer and registered land surveyor and shall be
legibly drawn in black India ink upon tracing cloth or polyester film.
Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. The plan shall
be at the scale as the Board may accept to show details clearly and
adequately. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The definitive plan shall
contain the following:
Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, legend, date, and
scale.
(1)
Name and address of record owner and of subdivider and stamp
and signature of registered land surveyor and any other
professionals engaged in the design.
(2)
Location and names of all abutters as they appear in the most
recent local tax list, designation of zoning district, and designation
of subdivision districts [see § 201-10A(1) and (2)].
(3)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, paths, lots,
easements, and public or common areas within the subdivision.
(The proposed names of proposed streets shall be shown in pencil
until they have been approved by the Planning Board.)
(4)
B.
§ 201-9 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-9
201:245
Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction, and
length of every street and way line, easements, lot line and
boundary line and to establish those lines on the ground. If any part
of the subdivision is within 500 feet of a Massachusetts Coordinate
System Survey Monument, the subdivision shall be tied to said
system.
(5)
Road center-line stationing, referenced to the street plans and
profiles.
(6)
On a separate sheet but at the same scale as the definitive plan,
topography at two-foot contour intervals, with graphic drainage
analysis, including distinction between upland and wetland,
indication of annual high-water mark, and location of existing
structures, including fences and walls.
(7)
Lot numbers, shown enclosed in a circle, and street numbers,
shown enclosed in a square.
(8)
Location of all permanent monuments, properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed.
(9)
Location, names and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
(10)
(11)Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, and wetlands.
Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the Town
Clerk's certification, as defined in MGL c. 41, § 81V. See Appendix.
(12)
The existing and proposed location of the base flood elevation
(see definition) if encountered within, or within 100 feet of, the
subdivision.
(13)
Street plans, profiles and cross sections.
For every street there shall be a separate plan at one inch equals
40 feet and a profile at one inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one
inch equals four feet vertical showing the following data:
Exterior lines of the way, with sufficient data to determine their
location, direction and length.
(a)
Existing center-line profile to be shown as a fine full line for
proposed streets and for intersecting streets for at least 100
feet each side of the intersection of street center lines. When
required by the Board, the existing topography on the right
side lines of proposed streets shall be shown as dashed black
line and left side lines as black dots. Elevations shall be based
on USGS bench marks if such exist within 1,000 feet of the
subdivision.
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 201-9 ADAMS CODE § 201-9
201:246
Proposed center-line profile, to be a heavy full line, with
elevations shown every 50 feet (25 feet on vertical curves).
(c)
(d) Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds and wetlands.
All drainage facilities to be shown on the plan and profiles,
showing pipe sizes, invert elevations, and slopes.
(e)
Location and size of existing and proposed water mains,
hydrants, and main gate valves.
(f)
Location of existing and proposed cable utilities and their
appurtenances.
(g)
Location of the following, unless waived by the Board: existing
and proposed street paving, sidewalks, streetlighting, curbs
and gutters.
(h)
Typical street cross sections shall be supplied for each class of
street within the subdivision, and for each subdivision district [see
§ 201-10A(1) and (2)], drawn at one inch equals four feet, showing
all elements within the street right-of-way, and typical cross
sections of any altered drainage courses or off-street paths.
(2)
Environmental analysis. Any subdivision creating frontage potentially
allowing 30 or more lots shall be based upon an environmental analysis
if required by the Planning Board, and, in addition, the Planning Board
may require for subdivisions of fewer than 30 lots that certain of the
following be submitted where such information is necessary to evaluate
the plan because of special circumstances of the location or proposal.
Environmental analyses shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team
to include a land surveyor, civil engineer, and architect or landscape
architect, unless otherwise agreed to by the Planning Board. The
following documentation is required for each such analysis. Drawings
shall be at uniform scale on sheets not larger than 42 inches by 60
inches.
Site analysis, showing the following:
(a) Location and boundaries of the site.
(b) Topography as required under Subsection B(7).
Vegetative cover analyses, including identification of general
cover type (wooded, cropland, fresh wetland, etc.), location of
all major tree groupings, plus other outstanding trees or other
botanical features, and important wildlife habitats.
(c)
Approximate groundwater level and location and results of soil
percolation or other subsurface tests.
(d)
Visual analysis, including analysis of scenic vistas, and
locations of visual prominence.
(e)
(1)
D.
§ 201-9 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-9
201:247
Site proposals, showing the following:
Boundaries of the site, proposed lot lines, proposed streets and
ways, and proposed parking areas if designated for eight or
more cars, reproduced as a clear acetate or mylar overlay.
(a)
(b) Proposed land uses.
Proposed grading plan and indication of areas of retained and
proposed vegetation.
(c)
Proposed water, sewerage, and drainage systems, in a general
manner.
(d)
(e) Location and uses of any proposed structures.
(2)
A narrative shall also be submitted, documenting the following with
reference to the above environmental analysis maps as germane:
(a) Impact upon surface water quality and level.
(b) Impact upon groundwater quality and level.
Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features, and scenic or historic environs.
(c)
Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed erosion
control efforts to support proposed development without
danger of erosion, silting, or other instability.
(d)
Relationship to the requirements of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A
(the Wetlands Protection Act).
(e)
(3)
Plan processing.
Board of Health review. The Board of Health shall report to the
Planning Board in writing its approval or disapproval of the
definitive plan submitted to it. If the Board of Health disapproves
said plan, it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the
lots shown in such plan cannot be used for building sites without
injury to the public health and include the reasons therefor in such
report and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the
adjustment thereof. Approval of the plan by the Planning Board
shall then only be given on condition that the lots or land as to
which specific findings were made shall not be built upon without
prior consent of the Board of Health. The Board shall endorse
on the plan the lots or land to which said conditions apply. If a
municipal sewerage system will service the proposed subdivision,
the failure of the Board of Health to make its report within 45 days
after the plan is filed with its office shall be deemed approval by
that Board.
(1)
Review by other Town agencies. The Planning Board will distribute
copies of the definitive plan to the Director of Public Works, the
(2)
E.
§ 201-9 ADAMS CODE § 201-9
201:248
Adams Fire District, the Adams Sewer Commission, the Zoning
Agent, the Conservation Commission, and the Board of Selectmen
for their comments and suggestions. The Planning Board will
distribute copies of the street profiles to the Director of Public
Works and the Adams Fire District.
Public hearing. Before approval, modification and approval, or
disapproval of the definitive plan is given, a public hearing shall
be held by the Planning Board. Notice of the hearing time, place,
and subject matter, sufficient for identification, shall be given by
the Planning Board by advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Adams once in each of two successive
weeks, the first publication being not less than 14 days before the
day of such hearing, and by mailing a copy of such advertisement
to the applicant and to all owners of land abutting the land included
on such plan as appearing on the most recent local tax list.
(3)
Performance guarantee. Before the Planning Board endorses its
approval of a definitive plan, the developer shall agree to complete
without cost to the Town all improvements required by this chapter
and shall provide security that he will do so, either by covenanting
not to sell or build upon any lots until completion of the
improvements (which covenant must be referred to on the plan
and registered or recorded with it; see Form F), or by posting
bond or other security which the Town can utilize in the event
that the improvements are not completed within two years (see
Forms E-1 and E-2), or by some combination of these. The Board
may grant partial release from such security for partial completion
of improvements, provided that the completed portion provides a
reasonable system for circulation and utilities pending completion
of the rest. The Board may release the developer from the covenant
upon receipt of an agreement executed by the applicant and by the
holder of a first mortgage on the premises providing for retention
of funds and their availability to the Town upon default (see MGL
c. 41, § 81U, Paragraph 11). Full security shall not be released
until the integrity of road pavement and drainage has been verified
following a full winter of use, until trees and other vegetation have
been established, until either fee to the streets has been conveyed
to the Town (§ 201-22E) or other provisions for their continued
maintenance have been accepted by the Board, and until the record
plans have been received.
(4)
Approval, modification or disapproval. The action of the Board in
respect to such definitive plan shall be by vote. Copies of said vote
shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and a copy sent by
delivery or registered mail to the applicant. If the Board modifies
or disapproves such plan, it shall state in its vote the reasons for its
action.
(a) Criteria for action by the Board shall be the following:
(5)
§ 201-9 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-9
201:249
[1] Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions.
Determination that development at this location does not
entail unwarranted hazard to safety, health or convenience
of future residents of the development or to others
because of possible natural disasters, traffic hazard, or
environmental degradation.
[2]
[3] Conformity with the design standards of Article III.
Determination, based upon the environmental analysis
when submitted, that the subdivision as designed will not
cause substantial and irreversible damage to the
environment, which damage could be avoided or
ameliorated through an alternative development plan.
[4]
[5] Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements.
Approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing
of the definitive plan by the signatures of a majority of the
Board, but not until the statutory twenty-day appeal period has
elapsed following the filing of the certificate of the action of
the Board with the Town Clerk and the Clerk has notified the
Board that no appeal has been filed.
(b)
Following endorsement of the plan by the Board, the applicant
shall provide the Board with a reproducible copy and two
contact prints of the definitive plan and of the street plan
and profiles; a copy of the definitive plan as recorded, noting
book, page number, and date of recording; and a copy of final
covenants and restrictions for its files. The Board shall supply
the applicant with a completed Form D.
(c)
Rescission. Failure of the developer to record the definitive plan at the
Registry of Deeds within six months of its endorsement, or to comply
with the construction schedule of the performance agreement (Form
E, Covenant, or Form F, Performance Bond), shall constitute sufficient
reason for Planning Board consideration of rescission of such approval,
in accordance with the requirements of MGL c. 41, § 81W.
F.
§ 201-9 ADAMS CODE § 201-9
201:250
ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 201-10. General requirements.
Districts. For the purposes of the design standards (Article III), the
construction specifications (Article IV), and the typical street cross
sections, the Town of Adams is hereby divided into two districts
designated “mountain” and “plain.” Land having average slope of
greater than 10% shall be considered mountain and of 10% or less
plain.
A.
Design guides. The subdivision shall conform, insofar as practical, to
any elements in a Town development policy which the Planning Board
may adopt, provided that such elements are given public hearing in the
same manner as prescribed for amendments to subdivision regulations
and made available along with copies of the subdivision regulations.
The subdivision shall be designed and improvements made by the
developer consistent with the requirements of Articles III and IV.
Design and construction shall:
Reduce, to the extent reasonably possible, the following:
(a) Volume of cut and fill.
(b) Area over which existing vegetation is disturbed.
(c) Number of mature trees removed.
(d) Extent of waterways altered or relocated.
Visual prominence of man-made elements not necessary for
safety or orientation.
(e)
(1)
Increase, to the extent reasonably possible, the following:
Use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets providing
house frontages.
(a)
(b) Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape.
(c) Vistas and water views from public ways.
(2)
B.
Cross section. Grading, location of pavements, utilities, and other
improvements shall be designed and located as indicated on the typical
street cross sections (see Appendix for sample).
C.
Flood hazard avoidance. Any subdivision located in any part within any
flood hazard district established under Chapter 125, Zoning, of the
Town Code shall comply with the following:
Subdivision design shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood-prone area, through use of
(1)
D.
§ 201-10 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-10
201:251
§ 201-11. Streets and paths.
clustering, open space reservation, street profile design, and
drainage design.
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(2)
Drainage systems shall be designed in consideration of possible
flooding to the base flood elevation.
(3)
Each lot shall have a means of vehicular egress over surfaces no
lower than the base flood elevation.
(4)
Location and alignment.
All streets and paths in the subdivision shall be designed so that,
in the opinion of the Board, they will provide safe pedestrian and
vehicular travel.
(1)
Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper
projection of streets and paths or for access to adjoining property
which is not yet subdivided.
(2)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted except where, in the opinion of the Board,
such strips are in the public interest.
(3)
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet should be
avoided.
(4)
Street configuration shall be designed, together with reserved
open space, to minimize the number of lots having frontage
exclusively on collector streets.
(5)
The minimum center-line radii of curved streets shall be not less
than the following:
Mountain Plain
Lane 50 feet 75 feet
Minor Street 100 feet 150 feet
Collector Street 250 feet 350 feet
(6)
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than
60°.
(7)
(8) Any group of 20 or more lots shall provide for two means of egress.
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded or cut back
to provide for a radius at the edge of the traveled way of not less
(9)
A.
§ 201-10 ADAMS CODE § 201-11
201:252
than 30 feet at intersections with a collector street and 20 feet for
intersections involving only minor streets or lanes.
Street intersections on arterial streets (major inter-town streets)
shall be spaced not less than 400 feet apart.
(10)
Pathways or sidewalks connecting existing trails, paths, or
sidewalks should be preserved or created wherever reasonable,
not necessarily following the streets, and should be developed
in other locations where indicated by traffic, access to public or
recreational facilities, or other reasons. When located within the
street right-of-way, sidewalks shall be located at or near the outside
of the layout but varied in horizontal location so as to minimize
disturbance of natural features of the land and vegetation.
(11)
Width.
The minimum width of street rights-of-way shall equal 40 feet for
lanes and 50 feet for minor and collector streets, except that the
width of minor streets may be reduced to not less than the width of
the traveled way plus 18 feet in cases where extension of the minor
street is precluded.
(1)
The minimum width of rights-of-way for off-street paths, where
proposed, shall be eight feet.
(2)
B.
Grade.
Grades of streets shall be not less than 0.5%. Except for short
intervals, grades shall be not more than the following:
Mountain Plain
Lane 14% 12%
Minor Street 12% 10%
Collector Street 8% 6%
(1)
On any street where the grade exceeds 6% on the approach to an
intersection, a leveling area with a slope of not more than 4% shall
be provided for a distance of not less than 50 feet measured from
the nearest exterior line of the intersecting street.
(2)
Vertical curves are required whenever the algebraic difference in
grade between center-line tangents is 2.0% or more.
(3)
Street center-line profile shall at no point be less than three feet
above the grade of adjacent wetlands or marsh.
(4)
C.
Sight distances. Forward stopping sight distances shall not be less than
the following:
D.
§ 201-11 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-11
201:253
§ 201-12. Easements.
§ 201-13. Stormwater management.
Mountain Plain
Lane 100 feet 125 feet
Minor Street 150 feet 225 feet
Collector Street 300 feet 400 feet
Dead-end streets.
Dead-end streets shall not be allowed except for lanes unless, in the
opinion of the Board, they are necessitated by topography or other
site conditions.
(1)
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with either a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter or at least 100 feet
and a property line diameter of at least 115 feet or an alternative
configuration accommodating the turning of a vehicle with thirtyfoot
wheelbase.
(2)
E.
Superelevation. On collector streets where appropriate, curves may be
superelevated at a maximum rate of 0.06 foot per foot for a design
speed of 30 miles per hour.
F.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary and shall normally be 20 feet wide.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, the Board may require that there be provided a
stormwater or drainage easement of a minimum width of 20 feet to
conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream and to provide for construction or other necessary
purposes.
B.
Drainage easements outside of the area of the subdivision, but
occasioned by it, may be required of the subdivider.
C.
Slope easements shall be provided where cut or fill slopes cannot be
contained within the street right-of-way.
D.
Storm drainage, culverts, and related facilities shall be designed to
permit the unimpeded flow of all natural watercourses, to ensure
adequate drainage of all low points along streets, to control erosion,
and to intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained. To the maximum
extent feasible, stormwater shall be recharged rather than piped to
surface water. Peak stream flows at the boundaries of the development
shall be not more than 10% higher following development than prior to
development.
A.
§ 201-11 ADAMS CODE § 201-13
201:254
§ 201-14. Water supply.
§ 201-15. Sewage disposal system.
§ 201-16. Other requirements.
Storm sewers, retention basins, and leaching basins shall be based on a
twenty-year frequency storm, and culverts shall be based on a fifty-year
frequency storm. Design shall employ backflow valves or other devices
as necessary to avoid damage from reverse circulation of floodwaters.
B.
Design shall be based upon either the Rational Method or Manning
Formula. Water velocities shall be between two and 10 feet per second.
The coefficient of runoff used shall be not less than 0.45 for subdivided
areas. All developable land tributary to facilities being designed shall
be assumed to be subdivided, except within the mountain district of
this chapter and the floodplain district of Chapter 125, Zoning, of the
Town Code. Leaching basins or a catch basin to manhole system of
drainage is required, with no storm sewers of less than twelve-inch
inside diameter and with catch basins at all low points and sags, near
the corners of the roadway at intersecting streets, and at intervals of
not more than 350 feet on continuous grades. The Board may require
test borings at leaching basin locations where percolation is in doubt.
C.
Provisions shall be made for water supply to each lot and for fire
protection. When available, the water supply shall be from the Adams
Fire District system, in which event system design shall be as specified
by the District, evidenced by certification from the District that it
approves the design and will permit connection.
A.
Where connection to the public system is not feasible, a subdivision
plan shall be approved only upon presentation of evidence satisfactory
to the Board, upon advice of the Board of Health, that adequate and
suitable groundwater is available and upon evidence satisfactory to the
Board, upon advice of the Fire Chief, that adequate provisions for fire
fighting have been made.
B.
When the subdivision abuts the existing sewerage system of the Town,
connection shall be made. When the subdivision abuts a proposed
sewer extension for which an appropriation has been authorized by
Town Meeting action, the subdivision shall be sewered so that
connection can be made as such extension progresses. Where gravity
connection is not feasible, a lift station shall be located and installed in
accordance with the requirements of the Sewer Commission.
A.
Individual or private sewerage systems will be permitted only under
conditions other than the above.
B.
Open spaces. Before approval of a plan, the Board may require that
an appropriate area be reserved for a possible park or parks and
by appropriate endorsement on the plan require that no building be
A.
§ 201-13 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-16
201:255
erected upon such reserved area for a period of three years without
the Board's approval. Such reservation shall be made where particular
natural features, abutting public land, or the potential neighborhood
need for recreation space make later public acquisition appear
desirable, but in no event shall required reserved areas exceed 5% of
the total area of the subdivision, unless so required by zoning or other
regulations.
Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown in the design
and during construction to retain in a natural state all natural features
and similar community assets which will add attractiveness and value
to the subdivision. Such features may include trees of four-inch caliper,
wetlands (as defined in MGL c. 131, § 40), watercourses, land within
200 feet of a river, pond, or stream, slopes greater than 15%, points
having the highest ground elevation within 500 feet, other scenic
points, and locations with historic associations.
B.
Undergound wiring. All wiring, cables, and other appurtenances of
electrical power, telephone, and fire alarm systems shall be placed
underground within the limits of the street right-of-way, except where
such underground installation would, in the judgment of the Planning
Board, cause undue hardship by reason of topography, subsoil
conditions, or other site peculiarities or by reason of the existing
development pattern.
C.
§ 201-16 ADAMS CODE § 201-16
201:256
ARTICLE IV
Construction Specifications
§ 201-17. Improvements required.
The following improvements, to be constructed consistent with good
building practice, shall be made by the developer without cost to the Town.
§ 201-18. Preparation and surfacing of roadway.
Stumps, brush, roots, bolders, trees, and like material shall be removed
as necessary to provide for paving, shoulders, and utilities, but,
wherever feasible, existing vegetation shall be protected.
A.
All materials not suitable for the foundation shall be removed from
an area three feet wider than the paved width and to a depth of at
least 16 inches below finished grade. In that area, peat, silt, loam or
similar yielding material shall be removed to leave a firm foundation.
No loam suitable for reuse shall be removed from the subdivision
unless adequate loam will remain or is otherwise assured to provide
all disturbed areas within the subdivision with a loam depth of at least
six inches, and also there is assurance that all streets from which loam
is being removed will be brought to subgrade with approved materials
within six months.
B.
No slopes resulting from grading of streets shall exceed one foot
vertical to three feet horizontal in fill, one foot vertical to two feet
horizontal in cut, or one foot to 3/4 foot in ledge. Slope easements or
retaining walls shall be employed where slopes cannot be contained
within street side lines. Land between the outside of the layout and
the street pavement, and driveway entrances, shall be so graded as
to prevent surface water on the street from draining onto private land
except at designated ponding areas (see cross section).
C.
Traveled ways shall be provided with a foundation consisting of at
least 12 inches or more as required by the Director of Public Works
compacted in six-inch lifts (layers) of good binding gravel satisfactory
to the Director of Public Works, clean, free of organic matter, and
containing no stones over three inches in diameter. The material shall
be thoroughly watered (if necessary) and rolled true to line and grade
to conform to the typical street cross section and the street profiles.
Any depressions that occur, either during or after rolling, must be filled
with additional gravel and rolled until the surface is true and even.
D.
The wearing surface of roadways and driveways within the right-of-way
shall be a two-course Type I-1 bituminous concrete pavement, applied
with a three-inch (after compaction) base course and a one-inch (after
compaction) finish course, after the roadway has been subjected to
traffic for a time specified by the Director of Public Works.
E.
F. Traveled way width.
§ 201-17 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-18
201:257
§ 201-19. Berms
Molded bituminous berms or paved gutters shall be installed wherever
pavement grade exceeds 6% or elsewhere where required by the Board to
control drainage. Berms, where used, shall be placed directly on the base
course.
§ 201-20. Paths
§ 201-21. Utilities.
The traveled way width, exclusive of curbing, shall be as follows:
With Parking Without Parking**
Mountain Plain Mountain Plain
Lane 16 feet 22 feet 14 feet 20 feet
Minor Street 20 feet 26 feet 16 feet 22 feet
Collector
Street
24 feet 30 feet 20 feet 28 feet
** All dwellings set back 75 feet or more from the right-of-way, or
parking bays provided at each dwelling.
(1)
The traveled way shall be located as shown on the approved cross
section.
(2)
Sidewalks and footpaths required under § 201-11A(11) shall be
constructed four feet in width and bicycle paths six feet in width.
A.
Surfacing of paths and sidewalks shall continue the material of
connecting paths or, where such do not exist, shall be either threeinch
dense-type I-1 bituminous concrete pavement laid in two one-andone-
half-inch courses on six-inch gravel foundation or other material
specifically approved by the Board.
B.
Water systems.
When connection to the Adams Fire District system is possible, a
complete water system shall be installed, including mains, gates,
valves, and hydrants, consistent with the specifications and pipe
size requirement of the Adams Fire District and as shown on the
approved street plans.
(1)
Before making connection to the Adams Fire District water system,
the developer shall agree to comply with all appropriate
regulations of the Adams Fire District.
(2)
A.
B. Sewage disposal.
§ 201-18 ADAMS CODE § 201-21
201:258
§ 201-22. Other requirements.
Common sanitary sewers within the subdivision shall be installed
under the supervision of and in accordance with the requirements
of the Adams Sewer Commission.
(1)
Design and installation of such individual or private sewerage
systems shall be under the supervision of the Board of Health in
strict compliance with Title V of the State Environmental Code.
(2)
Stormwater management system. A complete stormwater management
system shall be installed as shown on the street plans and profiles and
as follows:
Piping shall be concrete unless asphalt-protected 16-gauge
corrugated metal is approved by the Board. Piping with less than
18 inches of cover shall be of reinforced concrete.
(1)
Catch basins and manholes as shown for typical street cross
sections shall be at least six feet deep and four feet in diameter
(inside measurements), constructed of concrete blocks with least
two three-inch weepholes with galvanized one-fourth-inch wire
mesh covers and 1/4 yard of crushed stone drainage per weephole.
Leaching basins shall be backfilled for at least one foot around
all sides with one-and-one-half-inch washed stone, topped with pea
stone, and shall be cross-connected with twelve-inch drainpipe.
(2)
Open brooks or tributary ditches which are to be altered shall be
shaped to a cross section and gradient and provided with stream
bottom hardening and riprap if necessary, all acceptable to the
Board.
(3)
Subdrain. At the option of the Director of Public Works, a six- or
eight-inch perforated metal pipe shall be installed in a two-foot by
four-foot deep trench with a six-inch bed of one-half-inch crushed
stone covered by 3 1/2 feet of crushed stone and connected to the
storm drain system
(4)
C.
Cable utilities; streetlights. All cable utilities shall be installed.
Installation of streetlights may be required by the Planning Board as
necessary for the safety of the inhabitants of the neighborhood.
D.
Boundary markers. Boundary markers shall be installed at all street
intersections, at all points of change in direction or curvature of streets
and at other points where, in the opinion of the Board, permanent
bounds are necessary, but in any event not spaced further than 500 feet
apart. Such monuments shall be granite, not less than 30 inches long
and five inches square, with dressed top and a one-half-inch drill hole
in the center, and shall be set to finish grade, or a drill hole and pin in
ledge.
A.
§ 201-21 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-22
201:259
No permanent boundary marker shall be installed until all
construction which would destroy or disturb its location is
completed.
(1)
Elevation markers. A permanent bench mark shall be set on a
granite monument at each point where the street meets the base
flood elevation.
(2)
Street signs. Street signs of a design and material acceptable to the
Director of Public Works shall be installed for each street at each
intersection.
B.
Planting.
Every effort shall be made to preserve and protect existing
vegetation.
(1)
The subdivider may be required to plant trees where necessary,
in view of existing vegetation, to assure amenity for the future
residents of the proposed subdivision. Before the trees are planted,
a plan showing their proposed location and species, based on
avoidance of problems from pests, disease, or root intrusion, shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for approval. Up to one tree of
two-inch caliper each 40 feet of street side line may be required.
Trees to be retained shall not have grade changed over their root
areas more than 12 inches.
(2)
All unpaved areas within the street layout shall be stabilized with
retained vegetation, topsoil and plot grass, well rooted low-growing
plantings, bark, or other organic materials acceptable to the Board.
(3)
C.
Cleaning up. Before sale of a lot, the subdivider shall clean up any
debris thereon caused by street construction and installation of
utilities.
D.
Fee (title) to ways. The following shall be observed unless waived by
the Planning Board for subdivisions where the public interest is served
by retention of private ways and means of assuring such retention have
been agreed upon. The subdivider shall retain title to the fee of each
street or path in the subdivision until conveyed to the Town or for three
years, whichever is the lesser. Notation that this is to be done shall be
placed upon the definitive plan.
E.
Record plans.
Upon completion of construction, and before release of the
performance guarantee, the subdivider shall have prepared and
shall submit record plans, which shall indicate the actual location
of the following:
(a) Street lines.
(b) Edge of traveled way and path locations.
(1)
F.
§ 201-22 ADAMS CODE § 201-22
201:260
(c) All permanent monuments.
Location and grades of inverts of utilities and drainage
required to be installed by the developer.
(d)
Location and grade of any other underground utilities, such as
electricity and telephone.
(e)
The accuracy of such record plan shall be certified by a registered
professional land surveyor.
(2)
Certification. A professional civil engineer retained by the developer
shall certify that all construction was executed in conformance with
the subdivision regulations and with all requirements agreed upon as a
condition to plan approval.
G.
§ 201-22 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-22
201:261

ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 201-23. Schedule of work.
§ 201-24. Waiver.
Strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter may be waived
when, in the judgment of the Board, such action is in the public interest and
not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 201-25. One residential structure per lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for dwelling purposes
shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in
a subdivision or elsewhere within the Town without the consent of the
Planning Board. Consent shall be granted only for structures in compliance
with zoning restrictions and only upon the Board finding that adequate
ways servicing such site for each building have been provided in the same
manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
§ 201-26. Statutory requirements.
For matters not covered by this chapter, reference is made to MGL c. 41,
§§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive.
The work connected with the items mentioned in Article IV shall
proceed in the following order, each item to be accomplished so as not
to interfere with previous work:
(1) The roadway shall be brought to subgrade.
Water, gas lines, cable utilities, and drains shall be placed with
related equipment. All service connections shall be installed to
the lot lines unless jacking across the street is feasible without
breaking or weakening road pavement.
(2)
(3) Base gravel shall be placed.
(4) Surfacing shall be placed with sidewalks and curbs.
(5) Monuments and street signs shall be placed.
A.
The work shall proceed as above with exceptions only by order of the
Planning Board.
B.
Inspections shall be arranged for by the developer as outlined on Form
H, Inspection Form.
C.
§ 201-23 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 201-26
201:263
Chapter 202
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 121.
Appendix
Chapter A500
ACCEPTANCES OF GENERAL LAWS
§ A500-1. List of acceptances.
The following are laws of the commonwealth accepted by the Town:
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Adoption of code
concerning truant
children
Acts 1873, c. 262 April 14, 1879 Bk. 1, Pg. 49,
Art. 12
Ballots, printing
and distributing
Acts 1890, c. 386 February 14,
1891
Bk. 1, Pg. 490,
Art. 2
Assessors of taxes,
election and term
Public Statutes c.
27, § 65; amended
by Acts 1883, c. 203
and amended by 3
other acts
March 28,
1892 (took
effect 1893)
Bk. 1, Pg. 538,
Art. 23
Plumbing and
drainage of
buildings, rules and
regulations for
Acts 1893, c. 477 March 26,
1894
Bk. 2, Pg. 13,
Art. 13
Eight-hour day for
certain Town
employees
Revised Laws c. 106,
§ 20
April 12, 1902 Bk. 2, Pg. 257,
Art. 14
Public playgrounds,
provide and
maintain
Acts 1908, c. 513 April 5, 1909 Bk. 2, Pg. 417,
Art. 13
Relating to
watering of public
streets
Revised Laws c. 25,
§ 22 and
amendments
April 4, 1910 Bk. 2, Pg. 444,
Art. 11
Compensation for
injuries sustained
by certain public
employees
Acts 1913, c. 807 March 2, 1914 Bk. 2, Pg. 583,
Art. 6
§ 201-26 ADAMS CODE § A500-1
202:264
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Promotion of call
men in Fire
Department
Acts 1913, c. 487 March 2, 1914 Bk. 2, Pg. 584,
Art. 7
Eight-hour day for
Town employees
Acts 1909, c. 514,
§ 42 as affected by
Acts 1911, c. 494
March 2, 1914 Bk. 2, Pg. 584,
Art. 8
Licensing of motor
vehicles carrying
passengers for hire
Acts 1916, c. 293 September 6,
1919
Bk. 3, Pg. 209,
Art. 2
Regulating and
controlling certain
sports and games
on Sunday
Acts 1920, c. 240 May 20, 1920 Bk. 3, Pg. 241,
Art. 2
Boxing laws MGL c. 147 §§ 32 to
47
April 26, 1924 Bk. 3, Pg. 391,
Art. 10
Sunday sports MGL c. 136, §§ 21 to
25
March 4, 1929 Bk. 4, Pg. 62
Town Moderator,
election and duties
of
MGL c. 39, § 14 March 1931 Bk. 4, Pg. 149,
Art. 28
Paying wages and
salaries to Town
militia
Acts and Resolves
1930, c. 157
March 14,
1931
Bk. 4. Pg. 156,
Art. 17
Taking of furbearing
mammals
by use of trapssuspended
MGL c. 131, § 105C March 1935 Bk. 4, Pg. 332,
Art. 20
Town Accountant,
appointment, and
office of Auditor
abolished
MGL c. 41, § 55 March 16,
1935
Bk. 4, Pg. 338,
Art. 18
An act establishing
in the Town of
Adams
representative town
government by
limited town
meetings
Acts 1935, c. 235 March 2, 1936 Bk. 4, Pg. 363
Cemetery
Commission to
manage cemeteries
MGL c. 114, §§ 22 to
25, as amended by
Acts 1934, c. 85
June 29, 1937 Bk. 4, Pg. 453,
Art. 1
§ A500-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § A500-1
202:265
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Sexton,
appointment
MGL c. 41, § 4A March 26,
1938
Bk. 5, Pg. 38,
Art. 32
Permanent police
force under civil
service
MGL c. 31, § 48 April 1, 1939 Bk. 5, Pg. 139,
Art. 48
Chairman of Board
of Cemetery
Commissioners, to
be Town Meeting
member at large
Acts 1939, c. 202 March 4, 1940 Bk. 5, Pg. 169
Nomination of
candidates for Town
officers by Town
caucus
MGL c. 53, § 121 March 30,
1940
Bk. 5, Pg. 192,
Art. 41
Police Department,
members excused
from duty without
loss of pay
MGL c. 147, §§ 16B
and 17
March 22,
1941
Bk. 5, Pg. 306,
Art. 26
Janitors of schools,
inclusion within
classified civil
service
MGL c. 31, § 4 March 22,
1941
Bk. 5, Pg. 306,
Art. 27
Permitting certain
places of business
to keep open on
Sunday
MGL c. 136, §§ 7 and
8 as amended
March 22,
1941
Bk. 5, Pg. 306,
Art. 31
Reserve police
force,
establishment and
appointments
thereto subject to
civil service
MGL c. 147, §§ 13A
and 13C
October 14,
1941
Bk. 5, Pg. 327,
Art. 15
An act authorizing
the Town of Adams
to reduce the
number of Town
Meeting members
required for doing
business in said
Town
Acts 1941, c. 560 March 2, 1942 Bk. 5, Pg. 353
Town Constables,
appointment by
Board of Selectmen
MGL c. 41 March 1946 Bk. 6, Pg. 44,
Art. 38
§ A500-1 ADAMS CODE § A500-1
202:266
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Board of Park
Commissioners,
election
MGL c. 45, § 14 March 17,
1947
Bk. 6, Pg. 145,
Art. 46
Increase pension
allowances certain
retired Town
employees
Acts 1947, c. 615 March 15,
1948
Bk. 6, Pg. 230,
Art. 31
Increase pension or
retirement
allowances former
Town employees
Acts 1948, c. 588 March 7, 1949 Bk. 6, Pg. 296
Town Wire
Inspector, salary
and appointment by
Board of Selectmen
Acts 1949, c. 529 March 20,
1950
Bk. 6, Pg. 405,
Art. 39
Provide permanent
tenure for I. Audrey
Louison, the
present Town Clerk
MGL c. 41, § 19B March 5, 1951 Bk. 6, Pg. 498
Providing certain
increases in
retirement pensions
Acts 1951, c. 781 March 17,
1952
Bk. 6, Pg. 587,
Art. 35
Police force: fiveday
week
Acts 1951, c. 346 March 17,
1952
Bk. 6, Pg. 589,
Art. 46
Relating to
assessment for
construction,
maintenance and
repair of domestic
sewers installed in
streets not
presently
containing such
sewers
MGL c. 83 March 17,
1952
Bk. 6, Pg. 589,
Art. 48
Personnel Board,
appointment and
classification and
pay plan for certain
positions
Acts 1948, c. 351 March 15,
1954
Bk. 7, Pg. 152,
Art. 39
Civil service sec. MGL c. 31, § 49A March 7, 1955 Bk. 7, Pg. 279
§ A500-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § A500-1
202:267
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Contribute to
payment of
premiums on group
life insurance
policies for certain
Town employees
MGL c. 40, § 5, cl.
44
March 21,
1955
Bk. 7, Pg. 301,
Art. 39
Authorizing Town to
provide insurance
for certain persons
in service of Town
and their
dependents
MGL c. 32B March 5, 1956 Bk. 7, Pg. 398
Provide unlimited
tenure for Joseph T.
Satko, present
Town Accountant
Acts 1937, c. 5, §§ 1
and 2
March 4, 1957 Bk. 8, Pg. 38
Snow removal from
private ways
MGL c. 40, § 6C March 4, 1957 Bk. 8, Pg. 39
Bicycle registration
and operation
MGL c. 85, § 11A March 18,
1957
Bk. 8, Pg. 99,
Art. 67
Stabilization fund
established
MGL c. 40, § 5B March 17,
1958
Bk. 8, Pg. 223,
Art. 17
Planning Board
established
MGL c. 41, § 81A March 17,
1958
Bk. 8, Pg. 231,
Art. 51
Providing for
establishment of a
regional school
district by the City
of North Adams and
the Towns of
Adams,
Williamstown,
Clarksburg, Florida,
Savoy, Monroe,
Heath and
Charlemont
Act of General
Court, 1958
November 3,
1959
Bk. 8, Pg. 479
Dancing school
licenses
Acts 1939, c. 253;
MGL c. 140, § 185H
November 14,
1960
Bk. 9, Pg. 278,
Art. 11
Purchasing
uniforms for Police
Department
MGL c. 40, § 6B March 20,
1961
Bk. 9, Pg. 363,
Art. 29
§ A500-1 ADAMS CODE § A500-1
202:268
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Inspector of Gas
Piping and Gas
Appliances,
appointment and
term by legislature
MGL c. 143, § 30
enacted in 1960
March 20,
1961
Bk. 9, Pg. 383,
Art. 2
Urban renewal
program needed
MGL c. 12K, § 26XX March 1962 Bk. 10, Pg. 29,
Art. 38
Redevelopment
authority needed
MGL c. 121, § 26QQ March 1962 Bk. 10, Pg. 29,
Art. 39
Subdivision Control
Law
MGL c. 41 §§ 81K to
81GG
March 1963 Bk. 10, Pg.
238, Art. 33
Permit purchase of
certain items of
footwear and
clothing
Acts 1964, c. 90,
amending MGL c. 40
March 22,
1965
Bk. 11, Pg.
109, Art. 82
Establishment of
regional school
district together
with Town of
Cheshire
MGL c. 71, §§ 16 to
16I
March 7, 1966 Bk. 11, Pg. 178
Membership in
Berkshire County
Planning District
MGL c. 40B March 28,
1966
Bk. 11, Pg.
231, Art. 54
Chief of Police,
compensation for
holiday service
Acts 1965, c. 786 March 28,
1966
Bk. 11, Pg.
232, Art. 57
Authority of Board
of Selectmen to
issue winter
seasonal liquor
licenses
MGL c. 138, § 17 March 28,
1966
Bk. 11, Pg.
233, Art. 61
Council on Aging MGL c. 40, § 8B July 25, 1966 Bk. 11, Pg.
256, Art. 2
Common sewers,
rules and
regulations for use
MGL c. 83, § 10 October 31,
1967
Bk. 11, Pg.
434, Art. 5
Housing Authority
established
MGL c. 121, § 26K
as amended
March 25,
1968
Bk. 12, Pg.
114, Art. 45
Industrial
development
financing authority
established
Acts 1967, c. 772 March 25,
1968
Bk. 12, Pg.
115, Art. 46
§ A500-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § A500-1
202:269
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Permit Board of
Selectmen to
establish certain
traffic regulations
relative to clearing
of streets during
snow plowing
operations
MGL c. 40, § 22D December 8,
1969
Bk. 12, Pg.
123, Art. 1
Traffic regulations MGL c. 90, § 18A May 27, 1970 Bk. 12, Pg.
111, Art. 4
Parking regulations MGL c. 90, § 20C June 4, 1973 Bk. 13, Pg.
512, Art. 8
Transfer of railroad
bridge at Grove
Street to
commonwealth
Acts 1971, c. 634 June 4, 1973 Bk. 13, Pg.
512, Art. 7
Advanced vacation
pay
MGL c. 44, § 65 June 10, 1974 Bk. 14, Pg.
141, Art. 2
Insurance MGL c. 32B, § 7A January 3,
1978
Bk. 15, Pg.
104, Art. 4
Insurance MGL c. 32B, § 9E January 3,
1978
Bk. 15, Pg.
105, Art. 5
Educational
incentive, Police
Department
MGL c. 41, § 108L September 10,
1979
Bk. 15, Pg.
407, Art. 48
Selectmen -
Administrator form
of government
Acts 1983, c. 31 May 2, 1983 Bk. 16, Pg. 94,
Q. 1
Establishment of
Department of
Public Works
Acts 1983, c. 34 May 2, 1983 Bk. 16, Pg. 94,
Q. 2
To advertise Adams MGL c. 40, § 6A September 10,
1984
Bk. 16, Pg.
275, Art. 4
Equal education
grant, professional
development grant,
minimum teacher
salaries
Acts 1985, c. 188,
§§ 12, 13 and 16
October 7,
1985
Bk. 16, Pg.
392, Arts. 1, 2
and 3
Property tax
reduction (low
income/elderly)
MGL c. 59, § 5, cl.
17C
May 27, 1986 Bk. 16, Pg.
474, Art. 49
§ A500-1 ADAMS CODE § A500-1
202:270
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Equal education
opportunity grant
Acts 1985, c. 188 May 27, 1986 Bk. 16, Pg.
474, Art. 46
Improving public
schools of the
commonwealth
Acts 1985, c. 188,
§ 12
May 26, 1987 Bk. 16, Pg.
658, Art. 45
Establishment of
Town scholarship
fund
Acts 1986, c. 194 May 26, 1987 Bk. 16, Pg.
659, Art. 46
Regulating the
payment of certain
taxes in certain
districts
Acts 1985, c. 59,
§ 57A
May 26, 1987 Bk. 16, Pg.
659, Art. 47
Granting or
renewing certain
licenses and
permits
MGL c. 40, § 57 as
amended by Acts
1985, c. 640
May 26, 1987 Bk. 16, Pg.
659, Art. 48
Improving public
schools of the
commonwealth
Acts 1985, c. 188,
§ 12
May 31, 1988 Bk. 17, Pg. 59,
Art. 40
Payment of
property taxes
MGL c. 59, § 57B as
amended by Acts
1987, c. 402
May 31, 1988 Bk. 17, Pg. 60,
Art. 41
Enhancing the
teaching profession
and recognizing
educational
achievement
MGL c. 71, § 40 as
amended by Acts
1987, c. 727, § 10
October 3,
1988
Bk. 17, Pg.
107, Art. 8
Improving public
schools of the
commonwealth
Acts 1985, c. 188,
§ 12
May 30, 1989 Bk. 17, Pg.
181, Art. 47
Payment of public
employees by direct
bank credit
MGL c. 41, § 41B as
amended
May 30, 1989 Bk. 17, Pg.
181, Art. 48
Workmen's
compensation of
certain elected and
appointed officials
MGL c. 152, § 69 as
amended
May 30, 1989 Bk. 17, Pg.
181, Art. 50
Establishing a
stabilization fund by
regional school
districts
Acts 1988, c. 225,
adding MGL c. 71,
§ 16G 1/2
May 30, 1989 Bk. 17, Pg.
181, Art. 51
§ A500-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § A500-1
202:271
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Changes in
assessment dates
for new growth
Acts 1989, c. 653,
§ 40
Feb. 20, 1990 Bk. 17, Pg.
232, Art. 2
Compensation of
certain local
retirement system
officials
MGL c. 32, § 20(4)(d
1/2) and (h)
May 29, 1990 Bk. 17, Pg.
309, Art. 19
Elderly tax
exemptions
MGL c. 59, § 5 (17C
1/2)
May 29, 1990 Bk. 17, Pg.
309, Art. 20
Retirement system
calculation
Acts 1987, c. 697,
§ 64
May 28, 1991 Bk. 17, Pg.
442, Art. 20
Retirement, service
after age 70
Acts 1987, c. 697,
§ 107
May 28, 1991 Bk. 17, Pg.
442, Art. 21
Enhanced 911
emergency
telephone service
Acts 1990, c. 291 May 28, 1991 Bk. 17, Pg.
443, Art. 22
Added credible
service after age 70
MGL c. 32, § 90G 3/
4, as amended by § 3
of c. 254, Acts 1990
May 26, 1992 Bk. 17, Pg.
531, Art. 20
Noncriminal
disposition of bylaw
violations
MGL c. 40, § 21D May 26, 1992 Bk. 17, Pg.
531, Art. 21
Town officers to
establish fees
MGL c. 40, § 22F May 26, 1992 Bk. 17, Pg.
532, Art. 22
Benefits to parttime
elected
officials
Acts 1993, c. 58 September 2,
1992
Bk. 17, Pg.
562, Art. 4
Elderly property tax
exemption
MGL c. 59, § 5 (41C) May 30, 1995 Bk. 18, Pg.
257, Art. 23
Busing of school
age children
Acts 1987, c. 767 May 30, 1995 Bk. 18, Pg.
257, Art. 24
Retirement Board
compensation
MGL c. 32, § 20(6) June 10, 1996 Bk. 18, Pg.
357, Art. 22
Establishment of
various revolving
funds
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 May 27, 1997 Bk. 18, Pg.
474, Art. 20
Employee disability,
dental, vision care
without mandatory
contributions
MGL c. 32B, § 15(a)
as amended by Acts
1996
May 27, 1997 Bk. 18, Pg.
478, Art. 28
§ A500-1 ADAMS CODE § A500-1
202:272
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Creditable
retirement service
for military duty
MGL c. 32, § 4(1)(h)
as amended by Acts
1996
May 26, 1998 Bk. 19, Pg. 54,
Art. 24
Annual cost of
living adjustments
for retirees
MGL c. 32, § 103 as
amended by Acts
1997
May 26, 1998 Bk. 19, Pg. 54,
Art. 25
Bylaws and
ordinances relative
to the regulation of
dogs
MGL c. 140, § 147A
as amended
June 28, 1999 Bk. 19, Pg.
170, Art. 2
Excise rate of 4% of
rent for each
occupancy
MGL c. 64G, § 3A May 22, 2000 Bk. 19, Pg.
373, Art. 26
Allows for senior
citizens to volunteer
to reduce tax bill
Acts 1999, c. 127,
§ 59
May 22, 2000 Bk. 19, Pg.
373, Art. 28
Allows for 3% cost
of living increase
for retirees
Acts 1999, c. 127,
§ 51
Oct. 10, 2000 Bk. 19, Pg.
401, Art. 15
Credible service for
veterans
Acts 2002, c. 116,
§ 6
Nov. 18, 2002 Bk. 19, Pg.
729, Art. 13
Permit common
victualers licensed
to sell wine and
malt beverages to
also sell liqueurs
and cordials
Acts of 1993, c. 481 June 21, 2005 Bk. 20, Pg.
280, Art. 32
Mutual aid
agreements
MGL c. 40, § 4A; c.
48, § 59A; c. 40, § 8G
June 26, 2006 Bk. 20, Pg.
352, Art. 30
Hazardous waste
agreements
MGL c. 59, § 59A
(see also Ch. 32 of
Town Code)
June 18, 2007 Bk. 20, Pg.
451, Art. 29
Medicare for
retirees
MGL c. 32B, § 18 June 18, 2007 Bk. 20, Pg.
451, Art. 30
Application for
Greylock Glen
MGL c. 43D, as
amended, pursuant
to § 11 of Chapter
205 of the Acts of
2006
June 18, 2007 Bk. 20, Pg.
452, Art. 31
§ A500-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § A500-1
202:273
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Intermittent or
reserve police
members
MGL c. 31, § 60A September 3,
2008
Selectmen's
minutes for
September 3,
2008
Automatic
amusement devices
license
MGL c. 140, § 177A-
(4)
June 16, 2009 Bk. 21, Pg.
246, Art. 27
Commercial above
and underground
storage tank license
MGL c. 148 June 16, 2009 Bk. 21, Pg.
246, Art. 28
Economic
opportunity area
(EOA)
MGL c. 23A, § 3A-3H June 16, 2009 Bk. 21, Pg.
246, Art. 29
Expedited
permitting
MGL c. 43D, § 11;
Chapter 205 of the
Acts of 2006
June 16, 2009 Bk. 21, Pg.
247, Art. 30
Establishment of
various revolving
funds
MGL c. 44, § 53D June 24, 2010 Bk. 21, Pg.
311, Art. 22
Local room
occupancy tax of
2%
MGL c. 64G, § 3A April 26, 2011 Bk. 21, Pg.
376, Art. 3
Local meals excise
tax
MGL c. 64L, § 2A June 27, 2011 Bk. 21, Pg.
430, Art. 24
Adams Retirement
Board cost of living
adjustment base
MGL c. 188; § 19 of
the Acts of 2010
June 26, 2012 Bk. 21, Pg.
509, Art. 25
Increase minimum
retirement
allowance
Acts of 2011, c. 176 October 29,
2012
Bk. 21, Pg.
525, Art. 2
Surviving spouse
benefits of disability
retirees
Acts of 2012, c. 139 October 29,
2012
Bk. 21, Pg.
525, Art. 3
Establishment of
Compensated
Absence Fund
MGL c. 40, § 13D June 17, 2013 Bk. 22, Pg. 56,
Art. 14
Renfrew Park Removal of Article
97 Protection
March 24,
2014
Bk. 22, Pg. 90,
Art. 6
Initiate the process
to aggregate
electrical load
resolution
MGL c. 164, § 134 April 30, 2015 Bk. 22, Pg.
196, Art. 3
§ A500-1 ADAMS CODE § A500-1
202:274
Subject Reference Date
Where
Located
Establishment of
Other Post
Employee Benefit
(OPEB) Trust Fund
MGL c. 32B, § 20 June 23, 2015 Bk. 22, Pg.
264, Art. 23
Local room
occupancy tax from
2% to 6%
MGL c. 64G, § 3A June 23, 2015 Bk. 22, Pg.
264, Art. 24
Establishment of
Economic
Development Fund
MGL c. 44, § 53 June 23, 2015 Bk. 22, Pg.
264, Art. 25
Imposition of local
sales tax upon the
sale of restaurant
meals of 0.75%
MGL c. 64L, § 2 June 23, 2015 Bk. 22, Pg.
264, Art. 26
Sale of alcoholic
beverages between
10 a.m. and noon on
Sundays
MGL c. 138, § 33B June 20, 2016 Bk. 22, Pg.
347, Art. 23
Rescind Acceptance
of Civil Service Law
MGL c. 31 June 19, 2017 Bk. 22, Pg.
438, Art. 23
Establishment of
various revolving
funds
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/
2, amended by the
Acts of 2016
March 5, 2018 Bk. 22, Pg.
464, Art. 1
Establishment of
expenditure limits
on various revolving
funds
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/
2, amended by § 86
of Chapter 218 of
the Acts of 2016
March 5, 2018 Bk. 22, Pg.
465, Art. 2
Local acceptance of
parking meter
funds
MGL c. 40, § 22C,
Chapter 218 of the
Acts of 2016
March 5, 2018 Bk. 22, Pg.
471, Art. 6
Establishment of
speed limit of 25
miles per hour
MGL c. 90, § 17C March 5, 2018 Bk. 22, Pg.
471, Art. 7
Impose local excise
tax on sale of
marijuana
MGL c. 64N, § 3 June 18, 2018 Bk. 22, Pg.
529, Art. 23
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ A500-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § DL-1
202:275
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Board of
Selectmen
4-6-2005 Smoking amendment Ch. 200
ATM Art. 24 6-21-2005 Animals amendment Ch. 14
ATM Art. 25 6-21-2005 Delinquent taxpayers
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
ATM Art. 26 6-21-2005 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 76
ATM Art. 27 6-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 121
ATM Art. 28 6-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 121
ATM Art. 32 6-21-2005 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A500
ATM Art. 30 6-26-2006 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A500
ATM Art. 24 6-18-2007 Administration
amendment
Ch. 4
ATM Art. 25 6-18-2007 Right to farm Ch. 89
ATM Art. 29 6-18-2007 Contaminated
properties; General
Law acceptance
Ch. 32; Ch. A500
ATM Art. 30 6-18-2007 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A500
ATM Art. 31 6-18-2007 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A500
ATM Art. 26 6-16-2008 Sewers amendment Ch. 93
ATM Art. 29 6-16-2008 Property
maintenance:
abandoned and
foreclosing
properties
Ch. 87, Art. II
Board of
Selectmen
9-3-2008 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A500
ATM Art. 25 6-16-2009 Public consumption
of marihuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol
Ch. 11
ATM Art. 26 6-16-2009 Personnel
amendment
Ch. 80
§ DL-1 ADAMS CODE § DL-1
202:276
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 23 6-24-2010 Pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers
Ch. 12
STM Art. 8 3-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 125
ATM Art. 28 6-23-2015 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 22
ATM Art. 24 6-20-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 22
ATM Art. 25 6-20-2016 Plastic bag reduction Ch. 102
ATM Art. 19 6-19-2017 Ice Cream Truck
Vendor's Permit
Ch. 60
STM Art. 1 3-5-2018 Revolving Funds Ch. 50
STM Art. 3 3-5-2018 Licenses and
Permits: Delinquent
Taxpayers
Amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
STM Art. 4 3-5-2018 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 105
STM Art. 5 3-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 125
ATM Art. 19 6-18-2018 Revolving Funds
Amendment
Ch. 50
§ DL-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS § DL-1
202:277

ZONING
125 Attachment 2
Town of Adams
Intensity of Use Schedule
R-1 R-2(g) R-3(g) R-4(g) B-1(a) B-2 B-3 IP(h) I OS
For principal use (for apartments see § 125-12)
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 43,560 21,780(d) 12,000(d) 10,000(d) 0 10,000 10,000 43,560 20,000 2 acres
Minimum lot width (ft.) 175 125 100 75 0 80 80 175 100 200
Minimum lot frontage (ft.) 150 100 90 75 0 65 65 150 85 50
Minimum front yard (ft.)(i) 40 30 30 20 0 30 30 20 20 50
Minimum side yards (ft. each) 40 20 20 10 (b) 15 (b) 20(e) 10(e) 50
Minimum rear yards (ft.) 60 30 25 10 (b) 15 25 20(e) 10(e) 50
Minimum open space (see definition) 70% 70% 50% 50% 0% 25%(c) 20%(c) 25%(c) 25% 85%
Maximum building height (ft.) 30 30 30 30 40 30 30 40 40(f) 15
For accessory use (j) (other than signs)
Minimum distance from street line (ft.) 40 25 20 20 0 30 10 20 20 50
Minimum distance from side lot line (ft) 30 20 20 10 (b) (b) (b) 10 10 20
Minimum distance from rear lot line (ft) 30 20 20 10 (b) (b) (b) 10 10 20
Minimum distance from principal building (ft.) 20 10 10 5 10 10 10 10 10 20
Maximum lot coverage 25% 25% 30% 35% 100% 50% 50% 50% 60% 10%
NOTES:
a. Residential uses shall conform to the requirements of the R-4 District, except in buildings with dwelling units only above street level stores or other permitted business use.
b. When abutting a residence district, 20 feet. None required elsewhere provided that access to the rear of the structure and space for any required off-street loading or parking can be gained
by other means. No yard shall be less than 10 feet wide if provided.
c. For hotels, motels and motor inns, 500 square feet per sleeping room.
d. Except twice this area for two-family dwelling.
e. None required when abutting a railroad right-of-way of at least 20 feet in width or public flood control taking.
f. Except specialized equipment up to 125 feet under special permit when accessory to a permitted use.
g. Lots without Town sewer in Zones R-2, R-3 and R-4 must conform to the following:
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 43,560
Minimum lot width (ft.) 175
Minimum lot frontage (ft.) 150
Other dimensional requirements are listed in each district
h. Minimum tract size for development as an industrial park shall be 10 acres.
i. Provided that any front yard need only be the average of the depths of the front yards on the abutting lots, considering the front yards of abutting vacant lots as having the minimum
permitted. Abutting lots must be located on the same street and on the same side of the street to which the reduction applies, regardless of intersecting streets.
j. Special permits may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the installation of structures accessory to permitted residential uses for the reduction of dimensional requirements up to
1/2 what is required for all yards except the front yard, if at a minimum the following are provided: vegetative screening and/or plantings to be in place for visual protection from the
abutters; fencing to be provided if vegetation is not possible; no excessive noise to be generated; no overhead enclosures for swimming pools; and reduction does not substantially increase
neighborhood density.
125 Attachment 2:1 11 - 15 - 2004

ZONING
125 Attachment 1
Town of Adams
Use Regulation Schedule
[Amended 3-24-2014 STM by Art. 8; 3-5-2018 STM by Art. 5]
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 IP I OS SPR
Residential Uses
One-family detached dwelling YES YES YES YES NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Conversion of one-family to two-family dwelling YES YES YES YES SP SP NO NO NO NO NO
Conversion of one-family to more than two-family
dwelling SP SP SP SP SP SP NO NO NO NO YES
New two-family dwelling SP SP SP YES NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Apartments/multifamily dwellings NO2 SP SP SP SP SP NO NO NO NO YES
Boarding, lodging or tourist homes SP SP SP SP SP SP YES NO NO NO YES
Bed-and-breakfast YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO YES
Hotel, motel or motor inn SP SP SP SP SP YES YES SP SP NO YES
Mobile home parks1 SP NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO YES
Campgrounds1 SP NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO YES
Mobile homes, except within mobile home parks or
campgrounds1 SP NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO YES
Community Service Uses
Religious uses YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Educational uses exempt from prohibition by MGL
c. 40A, § 3
YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Other nursery schools NO SP SP SP YES SP NO NO NO NO YES
Other educational purposes SP SP SP SP YES YES YES SP YES SP YES
Municipal use not elsewhere more specifically
covered YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Public utility - essential facility YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Public utility - service/maintenance building or yard NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP YES NO YES
Cemetery SP SP SP SP NO SP SP NO SP SP YES
Club or lodge, except one whose chief activity is
customarily carried on as a business NO NO SP SP YES YES YES NO NO SP YES
125 Attachment 1:1 09 - 01 - 2018
ADAMS CODE
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 IP I OS SPR
Animal hospital or dog kennel, provided that lot area
is not less than two acres and no structure is placed
within 150 feet of a street or lot lines
SP NO NO NO SP SP NO NO SP NO YES
Airport SP NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Heliport SP SP NO NO NO NO SP SP SP NO YES
Correctional institution SP NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Hospital, sanitarium, nursing, rest or convalescent
home, orphanage or other philanthropic or charitable
institution
SP SP SP SP SP SP NO NO NO NO YES
Sewage treatment plant when accessory to residential
development SP NO NO NO NO NO NO SP SP NO YES
Open Uses
Farms and greenhouses over 5 acres YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO
Other farms with livestock SP SP SP SP NO NO SP NO YES SP NO
Other farms without livestock YES YES YES SP NO SP SP NO YES SP NO
Wildlife areas or reservations; private boating,
skating or swimming for residents of the
neighborhood, with active use areas not less than 50
feet from lot lines other than water lines
YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Public or private court games or standard golf
courses; public or private boating, skiing
snowmobiling, skating or swimming other than the
above, with no facilities located within required
yards or within 10 feet of a lot line other than water
lines
YES YES YES YES YES YES SP SP YES SP YES
Riding school or private stable, provided that lot area
is not less than 2 acres and no structure is placed
within 150 feet of a lot line
SP SP NO NO NO NO SP NO SP SP YES
Golf driving range or "Par 3" courses SP SP NO NO NO SP SP NO SP NO YES
Drive-in theaters, cart tracks, miniature golf and
similar commercial outdoor recreation NO NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP NO YES
Commercial picnic or outing area YES YES NO NO YES YES SP NO YES SP YES
Seasonal sale of Christmas trees and wreaths YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES SP NO
125 Attachment 1:2 09 - 01 - 2018
ZONING
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 IP I OS SPR
Supervised camping SP SP SP NO NO NO NO NO NO SP YES
Planned unit resort development SP SP NO NO NO NO SP NO NO SP NO
Livestock not accessory to farm SP SP SP SP NO NO SP NO YES NO NO
Sale of agricultural or floricultural goods not
contained within a structure SP NO NO NO SP SP SP NO SP SP NO
Sale of durable goods not contained within a
structure NO NO NO NO SP SP SP NO SP NO YES
Reservation, wildlife preserve, or other conservation
use
YES YES SP SP SP YES YES YES YES YES NO
Commercial camping or ski grounds, commercial
golf course or riding academy SP SP NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP YES
Tag sale and so-called flea markets if authorized by
Board of Selectmen and no longer than 4 consecutive
days twice per year
YES YES YES YES YES YES YES SP YES NO NO
Zoo - animals for exhibit SP NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP SP YES
Soil removal (see § 125-25) SP SP NO NO NO NO SP NO SP NO YES
Business Uses
Offices for up to 2 professionals NO NO SP SP YES YES NO YES YES NO YES
Professional building with 3 or more offices NO NO NO SP YES YES NO YES YES NO YES
Insurance and real estate offices NO NO NO SP YES YES NO SP YES NO YES
Banks and other monetary institutions NO NO NO SP YES YES NO YES YES NO YES
Offices other than above NO NO NO SP SP SP NO YES SP NO YES
Funeral home NO NO NO SP SP SP NO NO SP NO YES
Restaurant NO NO NO NO SP SP YES SP SP NO YES
Restaurant, drive-in NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP SP NO YES
Restaurant, take-out NO NO NO NO SP SP SP SP SP NO YES
Gift shops; sporting goods sale or lease SP SP SP SP YES YES SP NO NO NO YES
Motor vehicle sales, service, rental and storage NO NO NO NO NO SP4 NO SP SP4 NO YES
Building tradesman and contractors NO NO NO NO NO YES NO SP YES NO YES
Commercial indoor amusements NO NO NO NO SP SP SP SP YES NO YES
Fuel storage and distribution NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Feed, ice and building materials establishments NO NO NO NO NO YES NO SP YES NO YES
Commercial greenhouses YES NO NO NO NO YES YES NO YES NO YES
125 Attachment 1:3 09 - 01 - 2018
ADAMS CODE
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 IP I OS SPR
Laundry, laundromat under 4,000 square feet NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP SP NO YES
Stone mason's yard NO NO NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO YES
Business non-industrial uses not otherwise provided
for in this table NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP SP NO YES
Mercantile and general retail sales not otherwise
provided for in this table NO NO NO NO YES YES NO SP SP NO YES
24-hour stores NO NO NO NO SP SP NO NO NO NO YES
Building containing dwelling units above street level
stores or other permitted business use NO NO NO NO YES SP SP NO NO NO YES
Caterer other than home occupation NO NO NO NO YES YES NO SP YES NO YES
Medical or dental laboratory NO NO NO NO SP YES NO YES YES NO YES
Durable goods repair other than motor vehicle NO NO NO NO SP YES NO YES YES NO YES
Commercial parking lot or parking garage NO NO NO NO SP SP NO SP NO NO YES
Accessory retail NO NO NO NO YES YES YES YES YES NO YES
Adult uses as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A, as
amended3 NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Bakery NO NO NO SP YES SP SP NO NO NO YES
Beauty and tanning salon NO NO NO SP YES SP SP NO NO NO YES
Hairdressing salon and barbershop NO NO NO SP YES SP SP NO NO NO YES
Body piercing and tattooing NO NO NO SP YES SP SP NO NO NO YES
Health club NO NO NO SP YES SP SP NO SP NO YES
Dance and music studio NO NO NO NO SP SP SP NO SP NO YES
Artist studio NO NO NO SP YES SP SP NO SP NO YES
Commercial-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems SP NO NO NO SP SP SP SP YES NO YES
Licensed marijuana establishments8,9 NO NO NO NO NO SP NO SP YES NO YES
Industrial Uses
Junkyards; dump NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Manufacturing, processing or research, conducted
such that the performance criteria of § 125-14 are
conformed to
NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP YES NO YES
Light manufacturing NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES YES NO YES
Freight or transportation terminal facilities NO NO NO NO NO SP NO SP SP NO YES
125 Attachment 1:4 09 - 01 - 2018
ZONING
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 IP I OS SPR
Bulk storage; warehousing NO NO NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO YES
Laundry or dry-cleaning plant over 4,000 square feet NO NO NO NO NO SP NO NO SP NO YES
Commercial radio transmission NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES SP NO YES
Quarrying NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Radioactive waste storage and disposal NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO SP NO YES
Other Principal Uses
Parking of motor vehicles to service a permitted use SP SP SP SP YES YES YES YES YES NO YES
Planned development5 SP SP NO NO NO NO SP SP NO NO YES
Temporary structures and uses not conforming to this
chapter SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP NO YES
Accessory Uses
Garage and parking accessory to permitted use YES YES YES YES SP SP YES YES SP NO YES
Parking 2 or more light commercial vehicles or 1 or
more heavy commercial vehicles, accessory to
residential use
SP6 SP6 NO NO SP YES YES NO YES NO YES
Accessory to nonresidential use NO NO NO NO SP YES YES SP YES NO YES
Parking and storage of agricultural machinery used
on the premises YES YES YES YES YES YES YES SP YES NO NO
Signs, subject to § 125-15 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES
Manufacturing accessory to retailing employing not
more than 4 persons; major portion of produce sold
on premises
NO NO NO NO YES YES YES YES YES NO YES
Same but employing 5 to 10 persons NO NO NO NO SP SP NO YES YES NO YES
Scientific uses, subject to § 125-27 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP YES SP NO YES
Home occupation in existing dwelling, subject to
§ 125-21 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO NO
Retail sale of produce raised on the premises YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO NO
Storage of camper7 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO NO
Stable, provided not more than 2 horses on 1 acre of
land, no structure less then 50 feet from property line YES YES SP SP NO SP YES NO SP SP YES
Other customary accessory uses YES YES YES YES SP SP SP SP SP SP NO
On-site ground-mounted solar energy systems YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Building-integrated solar energy systems YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
125 Attachment 1:5 09 - 01 - 2018
ADAMS CODE
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 IP I OS SPR
Prohibited Uses
Any building or use not expressly permitted by this
chapter NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Any building or use, whether or not otherwise
permitted, which may create a hazard to safety or
health by reason of materials or processes employed
NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
NOTES:
1 See § 125-22.
2 Except SP in a cluster development complying with the requirements of § 125-23.
3 No adult use is permitted within 200 feet of a residential use or residential district, church, school, library, park, playground or other adult use. There
shall be no exterior display of services, entertainment, goods or paraphernalia provided by an adult use.
4 There shall be no parking of autos for sale within a required front yard. Car wash must provide space for 15 cars to queue off street.
5 See § 125-24.
6 But none in excess of the number parked on March 22, 1971.
7 Provided that it is not placed within a required front yard except for loading and unloading.
8 Licensed marijuana retailers may be allowed in the B-2 District only if granted a special permit. No other licensed marijuana establishment is
permitted in B-2.
9 Marijuana independent testing laboratories may be allowed in the IP District only if granted a special permit. No other licensed marijuana
establishment is permitted in IP.
125 Attachment 1:6 09 - 01 - 2018